ELEMENTS OF PHYSIOLOGY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

Elements of Physiology; BY JO. FRED. BLUMENBACH, M.D.

PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN ORDINARY AT GOETTINGEN, MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY
OF SCIENCES AT GOETTINGEN, AND OF SEVERAL OTHER SOCIETIES IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF
EUROPE.

Translated from the Original Latin, AND INTERSPERSED WITH OCCASIONAL NOTES.

BY CHARLES CALDWELL.

TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, BY THE TRANSLATOR, An APPENDIX, EXHIBITING A BRIEF AND
COMPENDIOUS VIEW OF THE EXISTING DISCOVERIES Relative to the Subject of ANIMAL
ELECTRICITY.

VOLUME I.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET.

M.DCC.XCV.

TO THE PROFESSORS OF THE VARIOUS BRANCHES OF MEDICAL SCIENCE IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN,
LONG have you been my fathers and lo^^ my attentive preceptors, in the
interesting science of medicine. You justly hold on me, therefore, a twofold
claim for the twofold duty of a pupil and a son. In respectful acknowledgement
of this undeniable claim, I now step forward and thus publicly solicit your
acceptance of the first fruits of that medical education, which you yourselves
were pleased to patronize and direct with such ability and care.

Avowedly to solicit an extension of your immediate patronage and protection to
the following translation, would be to offer you an indignity little short of
actual insult. Such a solicitation would falsely represent you as men unwilling
to become the spontaneous guardians and friends of silent, unassuming truth and
merit, but standing with open arms for the reception even of intrusive error
itself, when ushered to your notice by a brazen front and a blanditious tongue.

The original work of Professor Blumenbach has been already sanctioned by the
applauding voice of the learned and the ingenious in almost every part of the
globe to which physical science has hitherto found its way. On the solitary
basis of its own intrinsic merit let my translation also stand; or if, indeed,
it be destitute of such basis, with disgrace let it sink into that sea of
oblivion which so justly awaits its final reception.

From you, Gentlemen, it is secure of at least, a patient, and, I flatter
myself, an impartial examination. Should the execution of the work fortunately
meet with your approbation and applause, you will be its ^uspicious announcers
to the medical public: but should it appear to you faulty and even wholly
unworthy of further attention or regard, you will not, I am sure, lose sight of
that favorite maxim of the humane and generous bosom, " primum peccatum
veniandum est."

Impressed with the most profound sentiments of esteem and gratitude for your
favors of a public nature, as well as for your attentive acts of private
friendship, I have the honor to be,

Your sincere Friend, And Pupil, THE TRANSLATOR.
PHILADELPHIA, February 11, 1795.
Preface by the Translator.
WHAT a fashionable letter of introduction is to its bearer, a fashionable
preface is to the literary performance which it openly announces to the world.
The former procures, for the most part, admission, and, at least, a dinner; the
latter most commonly an attentive perusal. For their future continuance,
however, in favor and esteem, both the visitant and the volume must depend on
something more substantial, and of more unequivocal utility, than either the
light etiquette of a letter, or the specious proposals of a recommendatory
preface.

The reader is requested to view the present prefatory address as a mere
peace offering, made by the translator to ancient and inveterate custom, and
not as a solemn appeal to the public designed to enhance either the merit of
the following performance, or the uprightness of the motives which led to its
execution. For with regard to the merit of the work, I flatter myself that no
character of literature and talents will ever resign his right of judging for
himself; and as to the motives by which I was induced to engage in its
translation, they are indeed at present nothing better than absolute
non-entities, and will in no way effect its utility to man.

The want of a new and complete system of physiology has been long and very
sensibly experienced and regretted by all medical students on this side the
Atlantic. As to myself, I am sure I was led most devoutly to regret such a
want, throughout every stage of my medical studies. In order to acquire a
knowledge of the improvements which had lately taken place in this important
branch of physical science, I was obliged to range with an infinitude of labor
and attention, through daily accumulating volumes, which it was sometimes
extremely difficult to procure. This difficulty was augmented even to
impossibility itself with those unfortunately living out of the sphere of
public libraries.

The mutilated abridgment of Haller's physiology, published in the English
language, is (to use a common mode of expression) certainly nothing more than a
bare apology for a system. It is imperfect, erroneous, and, in many places, to
me wholly unintelligible. In some parts, therefore, it no doubt inculcates
truth, in others implants the seeds of error, and in other places again leaves
the young mind at liberty to indulge itself in all the wildness and revelry of
conjecture.

For these deficiencies and faults. I am sure that at least some compensation
is made, and some degree of remedy provided in the following sheets, which I am
about to usher forth to the world. But on this subject let decision be awarded,
and judgment pronounced, by the candid and intelligent reader, and not by

His obedient humble Servant, THE TRANSLATOR.

CONTENTS.
VOLUME I.
SECTION. I. Of the living Human Body in general 1 SECT. II. Of the Fluids of
the Human Body in general, and of the Blood in particular 3 SECT. III. Of the
Solids of the Human Body in general, but particularly of the Cellular Membrane
18 SECT. IV. Of the Vital Energies in general, but particularly of
Contractility 31 SECT. V. Of Sound Health, and of the Nature of Man 39 SECT.
VI. Of the Motion of the Blood in general 48 SECT. VII. Of the Arteries 54
SECT. VIII. Of the Veins which carry Blood. 62 SECT. IX. Of the Heart 66 SECT.
X. Of the Powers by which the Blood is kept in Motion 83 SECT. XI. Of
Respiration and its Primary Use 97 SECT. XII. Of Voice and Speech 110 SECT.
XIII. Of Animal Heat 119 SECT. XIV. Of Cutaneous Perspiration. 126 SECT. XV. Of
the Sensorium and Nerves 142 SECT. XVI. Of the Functions of the Nervous System
in general 154 SECT. XVII. Of the External Senses in general, but particularly
of the Touch 162 SECT. XVIII. Of the Taste 166 SECT. XIX. Of Smelling 169 SECT.
XX. Of Hearing 173 SECT. XXI. Of Vision 178 SECT. XXII. Of the Internal Senses
and other Faculties of the Mind 195 SECT. XXIII. Of those Actions of the Body
which are subject to the power of the Will 201 SECT. XXIV. Of Muscular Motion.
207 SECT. XXV. Of Sleep. 22^
VOLUME II.
SECT. XXVI. Of Food, and the Appetite for it 2 SECT. XXVII. Of Mastication and
Deglutition 8 SECT. XXVIII. Of Digestion 16 SECT. XXX. Of the Bile 28 SECT.
XXXI. Of the Function of the Spleen 45 SECT. XXXII. Of the Function of the
Omentum 50 SECT. XXXIII. Of the Function of the Intestines 55 SECT. XXXIV. Of
the Functions of the Absorbent System. 65 SECT. XXXV. Of Sanguification 78
SECT. XXXVI. Of Nutrition 83 SECT. XXXVII. Of Secretion 90 SECT. XXXVIII. Of
the Urine 102 SECT. XXXIX. Of the Discrimination of the Sexes in general 110
SECT. XL. Of the Genital Function of the Male Sex. 114 SECT. XLI. Of the
Genital Function of the Female Sex in general 133 SECT. XLII. Of Menstruation
141 SECT. XLIII. Of the Milk 146 SECT. XLIV. Of Conception and Pregnancy 154
SECT. XLV. Of the Nisus Formativus, or Formative Effort. 174 SECT. XLVI. Of
Parturition, and its Consequences 184 SECT. XLVII. Of the Differences by which
the Human Subject is characterised before and after Birth 191 SECT. XLVIII. Of
the Increase, Maturity, and Decline of Man 200 APPENDIX. 213
ELEMENTS OF PHYSIOLOGY.
SECTION I. OF THE LIVING HUMAN BODY IN GENERAL.
1.
IN the living human body, the healthy functions of which constitute the
exclusive object of the science of Physiology, there occur three things worthy
of our immediate attention and regard In an ancient volume commonly ranked
among the writings of Hippocrates, Epidemic. VI. Sect. 8. 19, we find the
following remarkable clause: Quae continent corpora, aut intus continentur, aut
in nobis cum impetu moventur contemplanda sunt. This celebrated clause
furnished Abr. Kaau Boerhaave with the first hints and suggestions on the
subject of his inestimable work entitled, Impetum faciens dictum Hippocrati per
corpus consentiens. L. B. 1745-8.
; namely,

The Solids, or parts containing;

The Fluids, or parts contained within the solids;

And lastly, the Vital Energies, which in the consideration of the science of
physiology, constitute the most interesting and important object of our regard.
It is in consequence of these energies that the solids are rendered alive to
the impulse of the fluids, endued with a power to propel the same, and also to
perform a variety of other motions. It must however be observed, that these
energies are not incommunicably excluded even from some of the fluids
themselves: on the whole, they appear to constitute the essence or supreme
characteristic of an organized body.

2.
But although these three objects have been with propriety considered as
distinct from each other, and may therefore be separately enumerated on the
present occasion, they are notwithstanding in the living body, which is alone
the exclusive subject of physiology, so intimately connected together, that it
is scarcely possible to form even a conception of one without at the same time
embracing the others.

The most pure and limpid fluids of our body abound with animal earth: on the
other hand, though our solids may appear to us completely destitute of liquid
matter, yet, besides the circumstance of their originating from the fluids as
their matrix or primary source, they contain in their composition an evident
quantity of moisture* lastly, if we be not deceived, it is certainly true that
there exists scarcely a fibril in the living body which does not possess, in a
higher or lower degree, a vital energy inherent in itself.

3.
We now proceed to treat of each of those three objects separately and in
order: and fir st of the fluids; as constituting by far the greatest, and what
may be emphatically called the firstborn part of our bodies.

SECT. II. OF THE FLUIDS OF THE HUMAN BODY IN GENERAL, AND OF THE BLOOD IN
PARTICULAR.
4.
All the different fluids of our body, may with propriety be thrown into three
leading classes.

These are, I. The Crude or unassimilised fluid, consisting chiefly of the
chyle contained in the primae viae, and destined for conversion into blood; to
which may also be added, that fluid received by absorption from the external
superficies of the body, and conveyed to the same receptacle with the former.

II. The blood itself;

And Lastly, the secreted fluid, or that formed from the volume of blood by the
animal process, called secretion: the fluids prepared by this process are
destined, some of them, to be retained in our body, to serve further purposes
in the animal economy; and others, to be eliminated from our system, as wholly
excrementitious.

5.
Of the first and third of those classes we will speak on a future occasion,
when we come to treat of chylification, and of secretion, together with the
other functions to which those fluids are respectively related. Let us now
proceed to the consideration of the blood, that most important, that primary,
and truly vital liquid, which may with the greatest propriety be called, the
living fountain of all the other fluids; as being that into which the crude
fluid is converted; and from which all the secreted fluids derive their origin;
and which (a few parts of the body excepted, such as the epidermis, the tunica
arachnoidea, the amnion, the vitreous substance, or enamel, of the teeth,
and^.) fl^ws uniformly through every even the most minute and fine span parts
of the inexplicable texture of our system.

6.
The blood is a liquid sui generis, of a well known color, more or less
intense: it is glutinous and warm to the touch: the formation of this liquid
has hitherto been ranked among the arcana of nature, as it has never been
successfully imitated by any process of art.

7.
This vital liquid when recently drawn from a living subject, and received into
a vessel, exhibits in a very obvious manner the following remarkable phenomena:

In the first place, while it is yet warm, a subtle halitus ascends from it,
which being collected in a receiver, forms small pellucid globules, similar in
appearance to drops of dew; it is of an aqueous nature, resembling not a little
common fountain water, except that it emits a peculiar nidorous smell, (still
more considerable in the blood of carnivorous animals) and which may be aptly
called the animal odor; such, for example, as arises from fresh urine, or from
the thoracic and abdominal cavities of a dead subject recently opened. Of this
aqueous liquor a considerable quantity remains in a state of mixture with the
other constituent parts of the blood, which shall be hereafter mentioned.

8.
In the mean while, as the blood contained in the vessel suffers a gradual
reduction of temperature, it begins to separate into two parts. A coagulum is
first formed, from the superficies and sides of which, there presently exsudes
a liquor of an intermediate shade between pale yellow, and evanescent red,
which they call the serum of the blood; in proportion as this liquor
accumulates by exsu^ation, a corresponding diminution is observable in the
volume of the coagulum itself; the coagulum thus reduced in size has been
distinguished by the name of crassamentum, as also by those of the liver, and
placenta of the blood, from a resemblance, in point of color and frangibility
of texture supposed to exist between it and ^ese two bo^^s; it has been
likewise called the island, from the circumstance of its being held in a
^n^tant or ^ing state in the surrounding serum.

9.
This crassamentum itself, by a delicate treatment, such as gentle agitation or
frequent ablutions in water, may be again separated into two constituent parts,
viz. the cruor, which imparts the red color to the whole mass of blood, and
which by ablution is carried off from the lymph, the other and more substantial
part, and which, therefore, is called the basis of the crassamentum; that the
cruor retains for this basis a much stronger affinity than the serum possesses,
is sufficiently obvious from this circumstance, that the cruor and basis cannot
be disparted unless by the interposition of a certain degree of force. The
lymph itself being robbed of the cruor, becomes more and more pale until it
finally assumes the appearance of a white and considerably tenaceous coagulum.

10.
Such then appears to be the four principal constituent parts of the blood, --
viz. the watery halitus; the serum; the cruor, or red globules; and the
coagulable lymph; which several parts, as long as they retain their native
degree of viral temperature, continue in a state of the most equable mixture,
constituting an uniform and homogeneous fluid.

It will now be proper to enter into a more minute consideration of those three
portions of the blood which stand last in the above enumeration: As to the
aqueous exhalation which we have mentioned, it does not appear of sufficient
importance to claim any further attention; indeed as it is also discovered in
other parts of the body, it cannot be considered as proper to the blood alone,
any more than the air which this vital fluid contains, and on which we will
state a few observations in a subsequent part of this section.

11.
The serum is a liquid of such a gelatinous nature as to impart to the whole
mass of the blood the chief part of its viscosity or gluey consistence: it very
much resembles, in all its properties, the albumen or white of eggs; when
subjected to the action of a temperature equal to the 150th degree on the scale
of Fahrenheit's thermometer, it passes into a coagulum, white and easily broken
down, analogous to the white of eggs in a boiled state; it also suffers a
similar change, according to the experiments of the celebrated Moscati, if it
be mixed with a quantity of quick lime, though in this case the coagulation
proceeds much more slowly, and is not completed till after the twentieth hour.
But if the serum be dried with a gentle heat, and left wholly undisturbed, it
is converted into a firm pellucid mass, similar in its external appearance to
gum arabic, which in a gradual manner, like the dried white of eggs, cracks and
forms over its surface numerous sulci or fissures running in a somewhat spiral
direction, and exhibiting a very singular appearance.

12.
Besides those other properties of the serum already mentioned, there is one
highly worthy our consideration, to which my attention was first called by the
experiments of the illustrious Priestley Philos. Transact. vol. LXVI. P. I.
page 244, seq.
; but my belief of which has since been fully confirmed by repeated
observations of my own, viz. the facility with which the air, surrounding a
vessel filled with blood, is able to act through the medium of the serum or the
crassamentum, though deeply covered by ^ormer, in such a manner as to produce a
very remarkable change in the color of the latter, whereas, on the other hand,
the same action of the air would be very much impeded, if not entirely
prevented, if instead of the serum, the crassamentum were covered with any
foreign liquid, such as water, or oil, etc. or even with any other fluid of the
human body itself, as the saliva or urine.

13.
The cruor constitutes another very striking and important part of the blood,
and is a source of many singularities, whether we consider the color and
figure of its particles, or the elementary parts into which it is resolved when
subjected to the action of and intense heat. It appears to deserve a place
among the most elaborate juices of the body, as it seldom appears in the tender
foetus previously to the fourth week after conception, nor in the nascent young
of gallinaceous fowls till the fortieth hour of incubation. After profuse
hemorrhages it likewise appears to be replaced by the powers of the system,
with much more difficulty than the other constituent portions of the blood.

14.
It consists of globules, first observed by Leeuwenhoek. In blood recently
drawn they are always present, of a constant, uniform figure, and of an equable
magnitude; which circumstances, added to the further consideration, that in no
other fluid (milk alone excepted, the particles of which are somewhat
analogous), are similar bodies to be met with, leave not a shadow of doubt, but
that those globules form a part very obviously and essentially different from
the other constituent portions of the blood, though at the same time the
formation of those globular bodies themselves appears in reality to be much
more simple than some celebrated characters would induce us to believe. For to
pass over in silence the complexity of the sixfold form fictitiously bestowed
on them by Leeuwenhoek, neither the annular figure attributed to them by the
illustrious de la Torre, nor the form of vesicles enclosing an opaque nucleous,
such as Hewson apprehended he discovered in them, have appeared to me to be
well founded Philos. Trans. Vol. LXIII. P. II. p. 303. seq. tab. XII.
. In my observations, indeed, I have been able to detect nothing more than
bodies of a simple spherical appearance, and, if I am not deceived, of a solid
gelatinous confidence. I have not, indeed, absolutely denied the lenticular
figure bestowed on them by some observers: I dare not, however, venture to
assert, that I have been so fortunate as to observe it.

It has been a subject of controversy whether or not they can alter their
figure when it becomes necessary for them to pass through a vessel of a very
narrow diameter. I am inclined to believe, in conformity to the opinion of that
accurate observer Reichel that under the above circumstances, they do actually
change their spherical for an oval figure, and again resume their former
globular shape, when they advance into vessels sufficiently capacious; though I
must confess, I never had the happiness to be a spectator of this interesting
phenomenon.

This spherical figure of the globules is never perceived unless in the blood
circulating in the vessels of a living animal, or in that which is recently
drawn; they lose all regularity of form in process of time, and appear to
dissolve, as it were, and again unite with each other into one uniform
shapeless mass.

15.
Physiologists differ in determining the size of the globules of the blood.
Hales reckons them equal in diameter to the ^/^.th part of an inch. Senac
estimates their diameter at about the ^/^.th part of the same measure, while
others again entertain different opinions.

16.
Their color is red, and therefore the beautiful crimson cast of the whole
mass of blood appears to be evidently derived from them. The intensity of this
color changes with a multiplicity of varying circumstances; it is more pale in
animals which are too sparingly nourished, or in such as have suffered profuse
hemorrhages. The blood contained in the arteries is more florid, together with
that which has been subjected to the action of atmospheric, but more
especially, that which has been exposed to dephlogisticated air; while venous
blood is more obscure, as well as that which has been acted on by fixed or
inflammable air.

17.
Upon the whole, the causes, which augment the quantity of the red globules in
general, and also heighten the intensity of their color, are sufficiently
evident: but to discover from what secret source their disposition to this
crimson dye is originally derived, is a matter of Herculean difficulty indeed.
Haller ascribed it to the presence of crocus martis, because the blood abounds
more with iron than the bones, or other parts of the body, although the
quantity contained, even in the blood itself, is very small; and although
authors differ astonishingly in their attempts to ascertain it. Thus, for
instance, Menghinus estimated its relative proportion to the whole mass of the
blood, to be as 1 to 110; whereas, the illustrious Rhades calculated it to be
only as 1 to 427; and again, in some future experiments, to be no more than as
1 to 503, etc.

On the present subject it seems proper to make the following observation; viz.
that no iron can be discovered in the cruor of the blood unless it be
previously calcined; whereas, on the other hand, when it was dried with a
gentle heat, and reduced to the most impalpable powder, I could not observe a
single particle of it attracted by the magnet, whether the experiment was made
in water, or in that most fluid of all vehicles, quicksilver.

18.
We now come to the consideration of that constituent part of the mass of
blood, which stands last in our order of enumeration, viz. the Lymph; which is
by some called the basis of the crassamentum, by others, the mucous or
glutinous part, and by others, the fibrous portion of the blood.

This, in former times, was very erroneously confounded with the serum, from
which it is notwithstanding very widely different, in all its essential
properties. When the lymph is exposed to the action of air, especially of such
as is of a low temperature, it is immediately coagulated; but by the admixture
of quicklime, (which has been already said ( 11.) to have the power of
coagulating serum), it is preserved in a fluid state; or, even though it be
already coagulated, yet, by the addition of this substance, it is again
immediately resolved.

19.
We have already touched on the methods, by which this part of the blood may be
separated from the cruor ( 9.). It is also by other artificial methods, such as
whipping or agitating the blood with small twigs, induced to assume the
appearance of a membrane, which has been named after Ruysch its celebrated
discoverer.

The similitude which prevails between the membrane thus formed by art, and
certain remarkable phenomena in diseases, especially in those of an
inflammatory nature, reduces it to a certainty, that such phenomena are to be
entirely referred to the coagulation of the lymph, of which we are now treating.

It may be proper on the present occasion to mention a few of those numerous
phenomena alluded to, which evidently derive their origin from this property of
the lymph; thus we may instance in particular, the pleuritic crust, which is
formed on the surface of the crassamentum of blood received into a vessel and
suffered to remain sometime at rest; the membrane-like appearances which
usually transude from, and completely invest the surfaces of the several
viscera when in a state of inflammation; and also the membrana caduca of
Hunter, which exsudes from the cavity of the uterus, when impregnated, and
still under the gentle glow of the venereal orgasm. From the same source
originates likewise, that production of cellular membrane by which we see
frequently the lungs connected to the pleura in cases of peripneumony; as also
the preternatural portions of the same substance often found in the cavity of
the abdomen after profuse hemorrhages; and finally, to no other source can we
rationally refer those membrane-like productions, which, in that singular
species of disease, vulgarly denominated Lithopoedion, firmly attach to the
contiguous viscera such parts as are irritated to inflammation by the too long
retention of the calculus or stone in the abdominal cavity. It seems to be also
an opinion founded at least on probability, that polypi, and such like
preternatural coagulated excrescences, owe their existence to the same cause.

20.
Those phenomena just enumerated, together with a variety of others which every
where occur, demonstrate, in a most striking manner, the superior importance of
this lymphatic portion, in which the vital principle of the blood appears
immediately to reside, if indeed the blood possess any such principle, an
opinion which I think both ingenious and highly probable.

21.
Besides those general portions of the blood already enumerated, we have on a
former occasion observed that this fluid contains also, in a state of mixture,
other elementary principles. ( 10.)

What I principally advert to at present is air, which is commonly believed to
constitute 1/11 part of the whole mass of blood, but which in the blood of a
living and healthy subject does not exist in a free and perfectly elastic
state, but is so intimately united and involved, and so permanently fixed, as
to be with difficulty extricated and restored to its native aeriform state.
Indeed I have learned from actual experiments, that even a very small quantity
of the most pure air injected through an artificial opening into the jugular
vein of a dog, has excited symptoms of a very formidable nature, such as
palpitations of the heart, drowsiness, convulsions, and, when the quantity was
slightly increased, even death itself quickly succeeded.

22.
The elementary parts of the blood thus concisely treated of, differ very
widely in the proportion they bear to each other in different subjects,
according to the complex ratio of age, nourishment, and other circumstances of
importance, which regard the sound health of each individual.

23.
Neither has any thing more certain or decisive been advanced with respect to
the proportion which the whole volume of blood bears to the entire bulk of the
body. Haller was of opinion, that in an adult it amounts to 30 or 36 pounds by
weight; while the calculations of others have been widely different.

SECT. III. OF THE SOLIDS OF THE HUMAN BODY IN GENERAL, BUT PARTICULARLY OF THE
CELLULAR MEMBRANE.
24.
THE solids of the body are originally derived from the fluids themselves; thus
in the first rudiments of the embryo, while yet in a gelatinous state, the
solids, each in its own appropriate situation, begin in a very gradual manner
to assume their proper form and texture, infinitely different from each other
in point of cohesion, from the most tender and almost pultaceous consistence,
such as the medullary substance of the brain, to the most firm and durable, as
the vitreous cortex, or enamel of the teeth.

25.
In all the solids of the body an earthy basis of a calcareous nature abounds
more or less, not indeed in a simple state, but united to the phosphoric and
saccharine acids, the former of which exists in by far the largest proportion.
Their cohesion depends not only on the peculiarity of their texture, but is
also much promoted, as well by the quantity of air contained in them in a fixed
state "The properties and powers of air have not yet been ultimately developed.
It is, however, in the mean time certain, that this substance constitutes, at
least, a part of the gluten or cement by which all the more compact bodies in
nature are consolidated and bound together. Thus the dissolution of metals,
bones, stones, shells, and salts, is uniformly attended with an extrication of
air." See Haller de corp. hum. functionib. Vol. III. page 271.
, (which is ascertained by the experiments of the illustrious Hales to be more
abundant as the parts are more solid); as also by the substance called animal
glue, which is procured in large quantities from the solid parts of animal
bodies, and is in general use in some of the mechanical arts. The origin of
this tenacious substance may be very easily explained and comprehended from
what has been already said respecting the viscosity or gluey nature of the
blood.

The elementary substance of iron, to which has been attributed the important
office of increasing the powers of cohesion in the different parts of the human
body, scarcely deserves to be taken into consideration at all, as I have found
its quantity to be so very minute as not to exist in a greater proportion than
one fifth part of a grain to two pounds even of the bones, the hardest and most
coherent parts of the animal system.

26.
A great portion of the solids of our body very evidently exhibits a fibrous
texture, composed of small filaments running more or less parallel to each
other. These filaments or fibers may be evidently enough perceived in the
bones, especially the bones of a foetus, in the muscular flesh, in tendons,
ligaments, aponeuroses, and some membranes, as the dura matter, etc.

27.
In various other parts of the animal body, the texture is so widely different
from that of which we have just spoken, that in them it is scarcely possible to
trace the appearance of a single fiber; their structure is indeed of a very
singular and specific nature, distinguished in Greek by the name parenchyma.
This parenchymatous substance is almost exclusively confined to some of the
secreting viscera of the system; thus it exists in the kidneys, in the liver,
etc. though assuming a somewhat different and peculiar appearance in each.

28.
Through all those varieties of composition and texture, whether of a fibrous
or parenchymatous appearance, there is interwoven, in common, more or less of a
certain web like substance, which is called cellular membrane, and which
deserves a place among the primary, the most important and essential,
constituent parts of our system.

29.
For, in the first place, there are several of the solid parts of the human
body, which appear to consist of little else than cellular membrane, in a
constipated or compacted state; of this description are most of the membranes
and cartilages; which, by long maceration, may be again resolved into a
cellular web, of more or less laxity. It is, again, so intimately and minutely
interwoven in the composition of other parts, as to serve the important
purposes of a receptacle and basis to the other portions of substance which
assist in their formation. Thus, for instance, the hardest bones made their
first appearance in the tenderer state of cartilage, which, as already
observed, is nothing more than condensed cellular membrane: this cellular
membrane, yet in a lax condition, became afterward distended, and at length
completely saturated, as it were, by the constant accession of osseous matter,
till it finally assumed the nature and appearance of perfect bone. Indeed it
would appear, that none of the solids of our body exist, without containing
more or less of this web-like substance in their composition, if we except the
enamel of the teeth, in which I was not able to discover the smallest portion
of cellular substance, even when the enamel was subjected to the action of one
of the stronger acids.

30.
This cellular substance, which serves the great purpose of a boundary, or
partition wall, to adjacent parts, is especially interwoven in, as well as
spread between, muscles and membranes. To other parts, again, particularly to
vessels and nerves, it answers as a bed or basis of support. Finally, it
constitutes one common and general bond of union, which connects the
neighboring individual parts to each other, and establishes between the whole
an extensive medium of communication.

31.
From what has been already said, two conclusions naturally present themselves.

First, in as much as it appears, that the cellular membrane certainly
constitutes the groundwork of the structure of the whole body, if we figure to
ourselves the entire removal of every other substance which enters into, and
assists in completing, the composition of the system, the cellular membrane,
still remaining in its proper situation, unmolested and alone, will
nevertheless preserve and exhibit the complete figure of the whole and every
part of the body.

Secondly, as by means of this cellular foundation, a certain connection and
medium of communication are formed, between all the parts of the body, however
widely different from each other they may be, in nature, or remote, in
situation; the knowledge of this fact serves an important end, not only in
deciding controversies which respect the continuation of membranes, but also in
explaining many phenomena of diseases which daily present themselves.

32.
As the cellular membrane appears thus to afford origin and foundation to most
of the solid parts of the body, so it appears itself to owe its own existence
to the lymphatic part of the blood, of which we have already spoken. I am
induced to entertain this opinion from having seen the lymph, after transuding
from the lungs of pleuritic patients, converted by the powers of the animal
economy into real cellular substance, which afterward assuming the appearance
of more compacted membranes, oftentimes attaches those viscera to the
surrounding pleura.

33.
What has been already advanced on the subject, may be sufficient to show the
general nature, and establish the importance, of the cellular membrane. We will
now proceed to consider some of its varieties.

And, in the first place, its firmness is not always uniform.

For, in general, other circumstances being alike, the cellular membrane of the
human body is very tender indeed, when compared with that of other animals. If
I am not deceived, this very softness and pliancy of the cellular substance in
the human system, deserves to be ranked among the leading prerogatives of man;
because, in consequence of it, his susceptibility of impressions from the more
refined and subtle stimuli is greatly increased, as well as his capacity to
perform motions and various functions, with facility and perfection.

But with regard to the more lax or firm texture of the cellular membrane, even
among mankind themselves, a very great variety occurs, depending on age, sex,
mode of life, climate, etc.

Finally, the condition of this membrane as to density and firmness, is
various, as it is found existing in different parts of the same body: thus, it
is more lax on the eyelids and prepuce, more compact and firm about the ears,
etc.

34.
We now proceed to consider another use or office of the cellular membrane,
besides that which we have already said it performs to the body in general, (
29, 30); namely, that by means of its numerous small cells, it affords
convenient temporary receptacles for fluids of different kinds.

That fluid, which those minute cells are more particularly destined to
receive, is a fine halitus of a serous nature, or a very subtle water, by which
almost all parts of the body are moistened, and lubricated, and which this
cellular web appears to absorb, after the manner of a sponge If it be
admissible to designate by the name of vessels, those minute interstices of the
cellular membrane, by which it absorbs fluids after the manner of a sponge, I
readily acquiesce in the opinion of William Hunter, (see Medic. Obs. and
Inquiries, vol. ii. p. 27. seq.) that this web-like expansion, now under
immediate consideration, is composed of a congeries of vessels, in like manner
with the other parts of the body. But if he entertained a belief, that this
membrane consists of small cylindrical veins, which anatomists commonly mean to
represent by the term vessels, I must acknowledge, that microscopical
observations, conducted with the utmost degree of minuteness, and the most
cautious circumspection, have not been sufficient to furnish me with any
unequivocal testimony that such vessels actually exist, but have rather induced
me to embrace a contrary opinion.
.

35.
But, besides this, the cellular membrane, in certain parts of the body, serves
as a reservoir to humors of a different and somewhat specific nature. Thus,
that portion of it which constitutes the vitreous substance of the eye, is
charged with a fluid of the same name:

That which forms the meddullary membrane of the bones (commonly, though
improperly, called the internal periosteum) contains the medulla: and,

Finally, A large portion interwoven through the soft parts of the body,
furnishes a convenient receptacle for the other portions of oily substance.

36.
And here indeed a threefold variety presents itself to our consideration:

There are, in the first place, certain parts of the body, the cellular
substance of which, though of a very soft and extremely flaccid nature, is
notwithstanding, never filled with fat in a healthy subject; such, for instance
is that which lines the eyelids, and that spread on the genital organs of the
male, etc. But further, in numerous parts throughout the body, there are not
unfrequently found irregular and transient collections of fat, which appear to
reside in the same kind of cells, which at other times act as reservoirs to the
attenuated serous fluid already mentioned.

But finally, in certain parts of the body, and, unless I am deceived, in cells
of a peculiar nature, and given description, fat is found constantly enclosed,
designed to subserve stated, uniform, and specific uses in the animal economy,
such, for example, is that which, in the female system, forms the mons veneris,
which appears to me to constitute a very peculiar and completely circumscribed
protuberance This circumstance I had an opportunity of ascertaining in a much
more satisfactory manner in the dead body of a female ape. After having for
some time subjected the corpse to the action of cold, I was able, by removing
the skin, to expose entire the circumscribed globe of fat situated beneath the
pubes.
.

37.
On the subject of the fat itself we will now proceed to make a few
observations, the being so very proper a place for entering on the
consideration of it.

It is an oil, not unlike the unctuous oils of vegetables; bland, inodorous,
and lighter than water, consisting of phlogiston, united to phlegm by means of
an acid of a peculiar nature.

38.
It is formed at so late a period in the foetus, that scarcely an indubitable
vestage of it can be discovered earlier than the fifth month after conception.

Its consistence is various in different parts of the body. That for instance
which lines the inside of the orbit of the eye, is more fluid, whilst that on
the contrary which surrounds the kidneys approaches to the firmness and
appearance of suet.

39.
A controversy has existed with respect to the secretion of the substance,
namely, whether it is performed by a peculiar set of glandular bodies,
agreeably to the opinion of William Hunter, or whether it merely transudes, by
simple diapedesis, through the patulous mouths of arteries? The latter of these
opinions, besides other arguments which might be advanced in its favor,
appears the most probable from hence, that not unfrequently preternatural
collections of fat have been discovered in other parts than those commonly
occupied by this substance: this circumstance can be much more aptly and
rationally explained by attributing such unusual collections of fat to an
errorloci, arising from a morbid state or disposition of the vessels, than by
referring it to an unnatural and recently formed system of glands: thus for
example, in the very ball of the eye itself, fat has been sometimes found; and
a substance of a nature like suet, usually fills up the cavity from which a
testicle has been extracted; indeed there scarcely exists a cavity in the body
in which steatomatous collections have not made their appearance.

But to conclude; those small glands to which certain celebrated characters
have been solicitous to attribute the secretion of fat, appear as yet to be in
reality nothing more than mere creatures of analogy.

But however this may be determined, it is in the mean time very certain, that
both the secretion and absorption of this substance can be performed with the
utmost dispatch.

40.
The uses of the fat are numerous. It lubricates the solids, and thus
facilitates motion. It obviates and prevents a morbid excess of sensibility. It
acts as a defense against cold: and, finally, by its uniform distention of the
skin, contributes to comeliness and beauty. Not to mention the peculiar uses of
the fatty matter constantly bestowed on certain parts of the body, as the
medulla of the bones, etc.

This substance appears, however, to contribute scarcely any thing to the
nourishment of the human species That bloodless insects, however, derive a
principal part of their nourishment from the fatty substance with which their
bodies are plentifully supplied, is a conjecture of naturalists founded at
least on probability.
, when in the enjoyment of entire health.

SECT. IV. OF THE VITAL ENERGIES IN GENERAL, BUT PARTICULARLY OF CONTRACTILITY.
41.
WE enter now on the consideration of a difficult subject, namely, the living
solid, and shall attempt a full account of the vital energies, by which the
different parts of our body appear to be animated and fitted, as well to
receive the impulse of stimuli, as to perform the various motions which are
necessary in the economy of the living system.

42.
But with respect to the living solid, it will first be necessary to ascertain
its exact limits, and to define it with precision and accuracy; whence it will
evidently appear, that it is not our intention, on the present occasion, to
treat either of those properties, which the human body possesses in common with
numerous other bodies in nature, such as elasticity (the powers of which,
however, are notwithstanding exhibited in various motions and functions of the
animal economy), nor yet of those which reside exclusively in the mind; though we
flatter ourselves no one will deny the powerful influence of these latter over
the energies possessed by the living solid itself, considered as a material
body. We will confine ourselves solely to the consideration of those energies
which reside in our body as a system of organized matter, and which appear to
be related to each other in the following order.

43.
The first and most universal species of those vital energies, and which may
indeed be regarded as an inferior degree of the others, or rather as the
threshold leading to them, is simple contractility, i. e. a propensity in a
part to contract itself. As this property appears in reality to reside in every
part of the cellular membrane, it must be equally extensive with that membrane
itself, and therefore may be said to pervade almost the whole body. Hence this
may be called, with perhaps sufficient propriety, the vis cellulosa.

44.
Another of the vital energies is, the irritability of Haller, which resides in
muscular fibers only, and may therefore be called the vis muscularis. It
manifests itself by a very singular, oscillatory and tremulous motion, easily
distinguished from simple contraction, by its being more readily excited to
action on the application of any acrid stimulus.

45.
The third is sensibility, which resides solely in the nervous medulla,
communicating with the sensorium, called therefore vis nervea; when any part
endowed with this property is acted on by irritating stimuli, an impression is
immediately made on the sensorium.

46.
The three foregoing may be, with propriety, considered as common or general
vital energies; because they exist, more or less, in almost all, or at least in
a great many, parts of the body, which the ancients called therefore similares,
i. e. parts of a similar nature.

47.
But besides the foregoing, there exists also a fourth energy worthy of our
consideration, namely, the vita propria, or specific life; under which
denomination I mean to arrange such powers as belong to certain particular
parts of the body, destined for the performance of peculiar functions, and
which cannot with any propriety be referred to either of the classes of common
energies, formerly mentioned.

Inferring synthetically, or a priori, as it is termed, it is not repugnant to
sound induction to conclude, that parts differing from all others in texture,
in arrangement, and in peculiarity of function, must also be furnished by
nature with peculiar properties and powers, adapted to the performance of such
specific ^tion.

But reasoning analytically, or a posteriori, we are likewise taught by
accurate observations made on nature herself, that there are certain parts of
the body, particularly some of the viscera, which perform motions so very
singular, as cannot by any means be supposed to arise from either one or other
of the common energies, of which we have already spoken, but must be referred
to a vita propria, or specific energies of their own.

Instances of such sigularity of action we have in the motions of the iris; the
erection of the papilla in the breasts of females; the motions of the fimbria;
of the fallopian tubes; the action of the placenta; the action of the uterus in
parturition; the descent of the testes in the male foetus; and, if I am not
deceived, in a great part, if not in the whole of the process of secretion.

48.
The fifth and last energy which claims our attention is, the nisus formativus,
or formative propensity, which should be considered as the efficient cause of
the whole process of generation (taken in so extensive a latitude (...) to
include both nutrition and re-productio^ as modifications of itself). In
consequence of this propensity, the matter of the animal system, whether
appropriated to generation or nutrition, being lodged in the places destined
for its reception, and having acquired sufficient assimilation and maturity,
assumes forthwith its due arrangement and figure, and enters into the
composition of those parts which are afterward furnished and enlivened either
with the whole or part of the energies we have already enumerated, viz.
contractility, irritability, sensibility, or finally specific life.

49.
Of this nisus formativus, or formative propensity, more will be said when we
come to treat of the process of generation.

Irritability will be more fully considered when on the subject of muscular
motion.

The subject of sensibility will be again resumed when we come to consider the
action of the nervous system.

Of the vita propria, or specific life, we will every where treat, when the
subject under consideration may render it proper.

But with respect to contractility the present is a very suitable place to
offer on it a few additional and particular observations.

50.
I have already said the this energy pervades almost the whole body, at least,
that its extent is commensurate with the extent of the cellular membrane.

In the first place, therefore, it resides in all such parts as consist of
compared cellular substance, of which the different membranes of the body serve
as examples. That these possess contractility will not be denied by any one who
reflects on the constriction of the dartos tunic, or who calls to mind the
spasms of the skin, or of the peritoneum, which alone appears sometimes to
incar^^ ^e and strangle the intestines in cases of (...).

Further, It also exists in such viscera as are composed chiefly of this kind
of membrane; of this description are the lungs, the external superficies of
which is highly contractile, as I have lately learned from frequently
puncturing and irritating them in a living state; but I have not found them
possessed of any real irritability, as has been lately asserted by Varnier.

Even the bones themselves do not appear to be entirely destitute of
contractility, as we learn, not only from the alveoli, which are well known to
^come narrower after the extraction or lo^ of ^eth, but also from the morbid
affection termed necrosis (i. e. mortification), from which it appears, that
after a lifeless part of bone is quite removed, the new production of bone, by
which the vitiated part was before surrounded, contracts itself very gradually,
almost to the natural thickness and former figure of the part.

But as we observed on a former occasion, that the vitreous substance of the
teeth was quite destitute of cellular membrane, so it appears to me probable,
that it is entirely destitute of contractility also, because when a part of it
is either consumed by a caries, or broken off by accident, the remaining
portions or sides are not approximated to each other, as we have already said
takes place in the alveoli, but an irreparable hiatus or chasm continues
without a shadow of diminution.

51.
This very power of contraction, possessed by the cellular membrane, should be
ranked among the primary and leading securities or supports of firmness and
health; and to it should be referred that tone of parts, so highly and
favorably spoken of by the acute and ingenious Stahl. To advance one argument
in favor of the forcing position, from many which might be adduced, it is the
cellular substance which, in a healthy subject, absorbs, after the manner of a
sponge the aqueou^ liquid, of which we have already spoken, and by means of its
contractility ^els it forward into the lymphatic vessels: on the contrary, in a
diseased state, being deprived of its proper tone, and reduced to an atonic
condition it becomes oppressed and distended with a lo^d of water, and thus
gives rise to oedema and other cachectic symptoms.

52.
Finally, from the universal prevalence of contractility throughout the whole
body, we may plainly infer its influence and contagious effect, as it were, on
the other vital energies; and also from its infinitude of modifications and
degrees in different men, we learn its highly influential part in the
constitution of both the proper health and peculiar temperament of each
individual.

SECT. V. OF SOUND HEALTH, AND OF THE NATURE OF MAN.
53.
THOSE three subjects ( 1.) in the consideration of which we have been hitherto
engaged, perpetually act and re-act on each other in the living human body. The
fluids, for example, act by their stimulus on the solids; while these again, in
consequence of their vital energy, are fitted and prepared both to receive the
action of the stimulating fluids, and to re-act on them in turn. In a sound and
healthy subject, this whole routine of action and re-action, corresponds with
such exactness and definitude, as to constitute a perfect and harmonious
equilibrium.

54.
There further exists in the living system a wonderful consent of parts, even
the most remote; this consent is derived not from one, but seems to owe its
origin to different sources.

One of those sources resides in the nerves, depending as well on the
astonishing net-like anastomoses, formed by their numerous branches, as on the
intricate nature of their plexus and ganglia; by the medium of which, the
impulse of stimuli being communicated to the sensorium, may from thence re-act
on parts more remote.

Another source of this wonderful consent must be referred to the different
vessels of the system, as well the sanguiferous as the lymphatic.

Another, again, arises from a certain similitude of structure, giving origin
to what may be called a native sympathy.

The cellular membrane, which, as has been already observed, appears to
constitute a common bond of union to the whole body, may be readily conceived
to possess a very striking and powerful influence in promoting the consent of
distant parts.

55.
Finally, to this head belongs what is justly esteemed one of the greatest
mysteries of nature, namely, the connection of the mind with the body, and the
diversified and astonishing power of the one over the other. As this subject
will be again resumed, and treated more fully in another place, it will be
sufficient on the present occasion briefly to observe, that besides the obvious
power of the will over most of the muscles, there are also other faculties
which exert their influence on the body, even without the concurrence or aid of
the will.

Of this description are those blind and purely animal instincts of our nature;
such, for example, as that which excites to the gratification of venereal
enjoyments.

Further, the body is greatly under the influence of the internal senses, more
especially of the imagination, and those passions of the mind which it
contributes to excite.

Finally, it is by the interposition, and through the medium of these, that a
communication and reciprocal influence are preserved between the powers of the
body, and the more exalted faculties of the mind.

56.
By this diversified consent of the solids, of the fluids, and of the vital
energies ( 53.), by this sympathy of parts ( 54.), and by this intimate
connection between the mind and the body, ( 55.), life and health are preserved
in vigor; yet not always existing in the same, but in widely different degrees
of perfection and energy.

57.
Between the two extremes of life there exist different grades, of which one is
called vita maxima, or perfect life; the other vita minima, or imperfect life.

Life is said to be perfect in the flower of age, when the functions of the
body have reached that pinnacle of perfection, called by the Greeks acme; this
might also be denominated the athletic state.

Life, on the other hand, is said to be imperfect when the functions are
performed with less vigor; although their perfection may be the most
consummate, when the situation of the subject, and its mode of existence, are
taken into consideration: thus life is imperfect in a foetus in utera, and that
in proportion as the foetus is render and young. Finally, life is less perfect
in the sleeping than in the waking state; less perfect also in a subject
advanced in years, than in one basking in the meridian blaze of manhood.

58.
The varieties in point of health are no less numerous and considerable: there
is indeed a certain state of health which may be said to be peculiar to each
individual. Such persons as we suppose to be in the enjoyment of the most
complete health, differ, notwithstanding surprisingly from each other, as well
in consequence of a difference in the constitution of the blood, as of a
diversity of tone, and of the other vital energies; hence different individuals
are so differently affected by the same stimuli acting on their bodies. Perhaps
each individual may possess peculiar idiosyncrasies, though so very
inconsiderable as to be scarcely observable: the influence of custom is so
powerful, as to create, in different subjects, an intolerance of different
impressions, though in themselves quite innocent; it also produces a facility
of bearing, and finally creates a desire for, such things as appeared at first
both unnatural and disagreeable.

59.
This appears to be the very hinge on which revolves the nature and variety of
temperaments, so frequently the subjects of physiological discusion. The
constitution of the temperaments depends, not only on the proportion and
mixture of the constituent parts of the blood ( 22.), but also on the peculiar
vigor of the vital energies already treated of; and likewise on the consequent
variety in the mode of the reciprocal action and re-action of the body and mind
on each other. From this combination and concurrence arises that peculiarity of
sensation to the impressions of stimuli; and also that singular power of
performing motions with greater or less facility.

60.
Hence the varieties of temperaments are literally infinite, and can never be
reduced to any certain and definite classes. But its it has been the pleasure
of physiologists to arrange them under certain heads, for the sake of
regularity, we may with sufficient propriety give our assent to the common mode
of arrangement, by which they have been reduced to four orders, namely, the
phlegmatic, the sanguineous, the choleric, and the melancholic.

61.
For although Galen erected this division on an absurd foundation, falsely
supposed to be derived from the nature and constituent parts of the blood, yet
if this erroneous foundation be kept entirely out of view, the division appears
in other respects so consonant to nature, that the different temperaments of
all men generally, and of every individual in the different periods of life,
may be with propriety referred to one or other of these four leading classes.
Thus, in the tender age of infancy the phlegmatic temperament chiefly prevails.
This in youth is exchanged for the sanguineous. The choleric marks the period
of manhood. And the melancholic is the temperament of old age.

But, as has been already observed, the variety in the existing degrees of the
same, and in the mixtures of different temperaments, is so unbounded, as to
afford an open and a very extensive field of speculation to such as would wish
to amuse themselves with tracing out, and establishing, on this subject, more
minute combinations, or divisions and orders.

62.
This whole collective assemblage of all the faculties and laws hitherto
mentioned, by which the functions of the human body are performed and regulated
from the opening, to the closing pulse of life, are called human nature, or the
nature of man; from whence arose the name of physiology, the science now under
our immediate consideration.

63.
Those functions of the body may be themselves properly enough divided into
four classes; which division, although not entirely free from exception, nor
perfectly conformable to nature, may nevertheless be aptly enough retained as a
useful assistant to the memory.

I. The first class of this division embraces the vital functions, so called
because their incessant and unmolested action, is more especially and
essentially necessary to the continuance of life. To this class belong the
circulation of the blood, and after birth the process of respiration.

II. The second class embraces the animal functions; these serve to distinguish
animals from organized bodies belonging to the vegetable kingdom I lament it as
a serious misfortune to the science of natural history, that his final object
did not call on the very learned and ingenious professor to be more explicit
and minute on that class of functions denominated the animal. He has told us in
terms very general and definite, that they are such as serve to constitute the
great barrier of distinction between animal and vegetable bodies. I am sorry
that neither the object nor extent of an elementary work permitted him to
descend to a more minute specification of those characteristics, in which the
difference between animals and vegetables more immediately consists. Few points
of investigation can be proposed which have given rise to a greater diversity
of opinion, than that which respects the difference between these two classes
of natural bodies; and fewer still perhaps can be advanced, with regard to
which philosophers, even in the present imperfect state of physical science,
should more unanimously agree. Be this later position, however, true or false,
I have always been led to consider the strangely diversified, and even
contradictory opinions, entertained by naturalists respecting the difference
between animals and vegetables, as so many unanswerable testimonies of the
equivocality of the whole. The discovery therefore of an exclusive line of
distinction between the animal and vegetable kingdoms, (if indeed the supreme
author and arbiter of nature permits such a line to exist) must still be
considered as a peculiar d^sideratum in the science of natural history.

From all my speculations on this interesting subject (and it is with me a
favorite object of pursuit) I am firmly of opinion, that there exists no
incommunicable characteristic, and I will venture to add, no congregation of
characteristics, which serve to constitute a complete partition-veil between
the animal and vegetable kingdoms. The numerous and highly diversified subjects
of these two important kingdoms of life, appear to be nothing else than
different individuals of one extensive family, descended from a common parent,
and exhibiting the most unequivocal testimonies of their kindred nature. Like
the delicate tints of light and shade in a well finished picture, they so
gradually intermingle, and run into each other so insensibly, that it is
literally impossible to say with definitude, where the one terminates and the
other begins

All researches therefore after an exclusively distinctive characteristic
between vegetables and animals, appear to me equally irrational and visionary
with the late enthusiastic pursuits of the deluded alchemists, after the
philosopher's stone, or their more chimerical researches after their flattering
panacea. Why then should man, presumptuous man! attempt the establishment of an
essential distinction between physical bodies, where wiser nature acknowledges
none!


. This class in man includes the connection of the mind with the body, but it
regards more especially sensation, and muscular motion.

III. The natural functions constitute the third class. These are subservient
to the nourishment of the body.

IV. The fourth and last class consists of the genital functions, which are
destined for, and employed in the propagation of the species.

Let us now consider each class of functions in order, beginning with the vital.

SECT. VI. OF THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD IN GENERAL.
64.
THE blood as we have already seen, affords the primary origin to the principal
parts of the body, and continues afterward to convey to them uniform and
perpetual supplies of nourishment, and ought therefore, with a very few
exceptions ( 5.) to be distributed far and wide, through even the most subtle
and distant recesses of the whole body. That such a minute distribution
actually takes place, we learn not only from a fine injection of the vessels,
but also from every day's experience, from which it appears that very few parts
of the body can be punctured with the point of the smallest pin without the
occurrence of a greater or less hemorrhagy.

65.
This vital liquid does not, as was the opinion of the ancients, flow and ebb
like the waves of Euripus A narrow arm of the sea, extending between Boeotia
and Euboea, said to ebb and flow seven times during each diurnal revolution of
the earth, or each term of 24 hours. In this extraordinary portion of sea,
Aristotle, that celebrated ancient philosopher, is falsely reported to hate
drowned himself, because he was not able to develope the cause of the constant
flux and reflux of its waters. C. C.
, through channels of the same nature and order, but is so moved onward in an
orbit, or circulates, as they express it, in such a manner, as to be carried
from the heart, by means of the arteries, to every part of the body; and being
there taken up by the veins, conveyed back again by them to the same original
fountain, the heart.

66.
After a few, and those very indefinite, expressions The unfortunate Servetus,
and that truly illustrious character Andr. Coesalpinus, appear to have advanced
nearer to a true knowledge of the genuine circulation of the blood, than any of
the other physiological writers who are commonly enumerated in the same class.

It may not be improper on the present occasion to advert to a re^able clause
in the writings of Servetus, contained in a phy^al dissertation, which he
included in his celebrated and very scarce work, that occasioned the death of
its illustrious author. The work is entitled "Restitutio Christianismi," etc.
(Vienna Allobrog.) 1553-8. The dissertation particularly alluded to, is
contained in the fifth book of the abovementioned work, " de trinitate divina,
in quo agitur de spiritu sancto," in which we are presented with the following
words, " Vitalis est spiritus qui per anastomoses ab arteriis communicatur
venis, in quibus dicitur naturalis."

But from the memorable problem of Coesalpinus, " de venis ultra vinculum
^umescentibus, non citra," it appears obvious as the blaze of day, that that
truly illustrious physiologist trod on the very confines of a complete
knowledge of the circulation of the blood. See his "Quaestionum medicarum," L.
II. quaest. 17. page 234.


of his predecessors, William Harvey established, in a manner tolerably
conclusive, the circulation of the blood, in a small but immortal work
published in the year 1628.

In process of time, however, every shadow of doubt on this subject was
removed. This was effected chiefly by frequent recourse to actual and simple
observations with the microscope; but in part also by injections of wax and
other substances into the arteries, which were seen passing again to the heart
by the route of the veins; and, further, by the elegant and sublime experiment
of transfusing the blood of one living animal into another, or into a human
subject; as also by various other experiments which may be performed on animals
in a living state.

67.
What should be esteemed the definite standard of the celerity of this motion,
in a healthy human subject, we are not well able to determine. In this respect
there is not only a difference between one subject and another, but there also
occurs a great variety relating to this point, arising from the difference of
ages: there indeed exists a difference in the celerity of the blood's motion,
even in the different parts of the same body.

Finally, the venous blood appears to glide on more slowly than the arterial;
and when flowing through the trunks of vessels, its motion is more rapid than
when passing their smaller ramifications. Former physiologists, however, have
notwithstanding exaggerated these several diversities, in the celerity of the
blood's motion, beyond their natural magnitude.

The common conclusion, however, on this subject is, that the blood, flowing
through the aorta with its mean velocity, passes over a distance of about eight
inches during the space of one pulsation; at which rate it would travel about
fifty feet in the first minute of time.

68.
The globules of the cruor appear to revolve on their axes or centres of
motion; and it is said that the same are propelled forward with greater
velocity than the other constituent parts of the blood. I know not whether this
conclusion be drawn from actual experiment, or whether it be only an inference
from an absurd application of the common laws of hydraulics to the circulation
of the blood: I call the application absurd, because it is certainly the very
summit of folly, to attempt to account for that motion of a vital fluid, by
which it is carried through the living canals of an animated system, on the
purely mechanical principles by which water is forced through hydraulic
machines. -- As to myself, I must acknowledge I have never been so fortunate as
to be favored with a view of this prerogaitve or precession of the globules.

69.
I am fully persuaded, that those globules only glide forward, suspended or
swimming in the fluid formed by the other constituent parts of the blood, but
that they do not at the same time rotate on their own axes at all. To conclude,
it is not fully and clearly ascertained, that the blood, besides its
progressive motion, of which we are now speaking, is also subjected to one of a
different kind, called an intestine motion; although there can be no doubt, but
that the elementary parts of the blood may be occasionally affected to their
arrangement and combination, when, they are tumultuously agitated in
consequence of the immensely varied directions, the minute divisions and
numerous anastomoses of the vessels through which they pass.

70.
Thus much we thought proper to advance on the motion of the blood in general.
Previously to our entering on a more close and minute consideration of this
subject, we think it best to treat of the vessels in which the blood is
contained, and also to consider with attention the energies, by which these
vessels are animated, and fitted both to receive and again propel the blood.

SECT. VII. OF THE ARTERIES.
71.
THE vessels which receive the blood immediately from the heart, and convey it
to all the different and minute parts of the body, are called arteries.

In their collective or aggregate dimensions, they are less capacious than the
veins; but their texture is far more solid, more compact, very elastic, and, as
appears, from the experiments of Wintringham, remarkably strong.

72.
They are composed of three membranous strata, or coats.

I. Of an external, which Haller called a true cellular coat, Albinus a
nervous, Vesalius a cartilaginous, others a tendinous, etc. It consists of
condensed cellular membrane, externally more lax, but becoming by degrees more
compact, as you advance nearer to its internal surface, where it is overspread
with numerous small blood vessel. To this coat the artery appears to be chiefly
indebted for its tone and elasticity.

II. The second or middle stratum, is composed of transverse fibers, assuming a
lunated or falciform figure and direction; its substance has a fleshy
appearance, from whence it has been called the muscular coat, and in it the
vital energy of the arteries appears in a very particular manner, to reside.

III. The last and most internal coat, is a membrane of an extremely smooth and
polished surface, which serves as a lining to the cavity of the artery.

In the trunks and larger branches of the arteries, these coats may be
distinctly observed; but they are less evident in the more minute ramifications.

73.
All the arterial branches in the human body take their origin from either one
or the other of two leading trunks.

The first of these trunks is the pulmonary artery, which, rising from the
anterior ventricle of the heart, passes into the lungs.

The second is the aorta, which rises from the posterior ventricle of the
heart, and shoots its ramifications into every part of the system.

These trunks are divided into branches, which again undergo farther and more
minute subdivisions.

74.
An opinion has been conceived and propagated as an established truth, that,
throughout the whole sanguiferous system, the aggregate capacity of all the
branches, taken together, is superior to that of the trunk from which such
branches directly originate. I fear, however, that the authors of this opinion
have expressed themselves on this subject in terms by far too general, and have
sometimes even confounded the measure of the diameter of vessels, with that of
their area. In my investigations and inquiries on this subject, I did not trust
to the result of a single experiment, nor did I confine my experiments to
vessels filled with wax, which, however improper, were the only kind used by
some celebrated physiologists, in their attempts to ascertain the matter now
under consideration; but, as the nature and importance of the subject evidently
demanded, I made my experiments and observations on the sound and unaltered
vessels of subjects recently dead. I took, for example, that nameless trunk
from which the right carotid and subclavian arteries diverge as branches, and
also the brachial trunk, together with its branches, the radial and cubital
arteries, and having formed a rectangular triangle, from the diameter of the
trunk and the diameters of its appended ramifications, I found, from the well
known theorem of Pythagoras, that the square of the hypothenuse was equal to
the sum of the squares of the base and perpendicular.

Indeed, in arteries of the smallest orders, Haller himself acknowledged that
the capacity of the trunks is greater than that of their ramifications; so
that, at least, the common calculation does not apply universally, but, (if it
be indeed ever admissible), must be restricted to a very few orders of vessels.

75.
Each trunk and ramification, separately considered, have been commonly
believed to possess a conical figure, the base, or that part next to the heart,
being supposed more capacious than the opposite extremity. This opinion appears
however to be hypothetical: for, whoever will take the trouble of examining the
arteries with accuracy and attention, will find their figure to be perfectly
cylindrical: indeed, on the other hand, there are not wanting instances of some
arteries which in their progress rather widen and expand, such, for example,
are the mammariae internae, or internal mammaries, and even the arch of the
aorta itself is more contracted at its base than at its apex or top. All
arteries, especially those of the larger orders, appear to be a little dilated
and enlarged, just before their division into branches.

76.
The number of orders, formed by the divisions of the main arterial trunk into
the progressive series of uniformly decreasing ramifications, from its first
origin at the heart, to its final termination in the extreme capillaries,
cannot possibly be universally ascertained and established as a general and
unvarying result. The truth of this position will be obvious to any one who
considers, that in the different parts of the body, especially in the viscera,
the arteries are subject to great variety with respect to their divisions; and
that, on this account, they sometimes form more, sometimes fewer orders of
vessels, previously to their separation into evanescent capillaries.

Hence the disagreement of authors who have attempted to amuse themselves with
calculations of this kind. Thus, for example, Keil estimated the number of the
orders of arteries at fifty, while Haller contended that they amount to no more
than twenty.

77.
After numerous divisions of this kind, and various anastomoses, by which the
neighboring branches of arteries communicate with each other, they at length
arrive at their final terminations, which are completely continuous with, or
which fairly open into, the origins of veins; so that, their route being
uninterrupted, they are reflected from extremities that can scarcely be
discerned, and thus converted into those returning vessels, by which the blood,
lately arterial, but now become venous, is conveyed back again to the heart.

78.
But although this complete continuity of the arteries and veins be so
extremely evident in numerous parts of the body, as to be obvious even to the
naked eye, yet it still remains a matter of doubt, whether this be the only and
exclusive mode, in which arteries communicate with veins, or whether there may
not be, at least in certain parts of the system, an intermediate and
parenchymatous substance, which receives the blood from the terminations of the
arteries, and again deposits it in the incipient mouths of the veins?

There occur certain phenomena, such for example, as erections of the penis,
and the common phenomenon of blushing, which render the existence of such a
connecting medium between those two kinds of vessels, at least not improbable.

79.
There are, again, vessels of a nature evidently different from those already
spoken of, which appear to arise every where from the smaller arterial
branches; these vessels consist chiefly of two kinds, namely, the serous, which
are so narrow as not to be able in a healthy subject to admit the globules of
the cruor, but only to receive the thinner fluid or vehicle in which those
globules swim ( 69.); and the secretory, which do not appear to attract any
thing from the mass of arterial blood, but such specific fluids as are destined
for secretion ( 4.)

80.
With regard to the former kind of vessels, which we denominated serous, it is
necessary to observe, that we do not mean by them the imaginary orders of
yellow and of white vessels, spoken of by Boerhaave, which appear to have been
fancifully conceived, in conformity to the account given by Leeuwenhoek of his
equally imaginary sixfold conformation of the globules of the blood: neither do
we mean the neuro-lymphatic vessels of Vieussen and Ferrein, of which those
gentlemen supposed the viscera to be in a great measure composed; but which do
not indeed appear to be any better founded than the preceding conjectures of
Boerhaave and Leeuwenhoek.

By the serous we mean those colorless vessels which are never visible, unless
in certain cases of violent inflammation, where the impetus of the blood is
very powerful; and indeed in some parts of the body, even this energetic
process of nature is not of itself sufficiently powerful to bring them into
view, unless they be still farther dilated by means of an anatomical siphon or
injector: of this latter description are, for example, the vessels of the
cornea, which can scarcely e^ be filled with wax, unless in the dead bodies of
such subjects as have died while laboring under a violent inflammation of the
eyes.

81.
The secretory vessels, on the other hand, appear to be different from those,
and belong chiefly to the secreting viscera and conglomerate glands; they can
also be traced by means of a very subtle injection, which, for instance, when
thrown with force into the artery of the parotid gland, flows out and escapes
through the duct of Stenonius. But on these vessels we will have a stated
opportunity of being more pointed and particular in a subsequent section.

SECT. VIII. OF THE VEINS WHICH CARRY BLOOD.
82.
THAT blood, which, by means of the a^teries has been distributed throughout
every part of the system, must be conveyed back again to the heart through the
medium of the veins.

These vessels differ very widely from the arteries, both in their functions
and structure: to this, however, veins of the smallest orders form an
exception, as their structure does not differ from that of arteries of the same
magnitude in so wide and obvious a degree.

83.
The veins (if we except the pulmonary system) are more capacious in their
collective or aggregate dimensions than the arteries; their ramifications are
also more numerous; they are much more irregular in their courses and modes of
ramifying; their texture is also much softer than that of the arteries; they
are far less elastic, but nevertheless extremely tenacious, and capable of
wonderful expansion.

85.
Their coats are considerably thinner than those of the arteries; whence the
blood which they contain appears in some measure through them; they are also
less numerous, being no more than a certain cellular covering, somewhat
resembling what has been called the nervous coat of the arteries, and an
internal membrane of a very exquisite polish, similar to that with which the
arteries are lined.

No part of the venous system is furnished with muscular fibers, except the
larger trunks near the heart.

86.
In by far the greater number of the larger veins, such, for example, as exceed
in their diameter the twelfth part of an inch, this internal membrane forms, by
its foldings, an immense number of valves of the most beautiful structure,
exceedingly pliant or moveable, and exhibiting the appearance of small sacks:
they are, for the most part, simple and alone, frequently however, arranged in
pairs, and sometimes in triplets; and are so situated and disposed, that the
bottom of the little sack points to the origin of the vein, while its mouth or
orifice opens, and is directed toward the heart.

Those small valves are, nevertheless, wanting in the veins of certain parts,
as in those of the encephalon, the lungs, etc. and in the whole system of the
vena potarum.

87.
The small ramifications of the veins (which would, indeed, with more propriety
be called their radicles or little roots) form, by their junctions, larger
branches, and these unite finally into six leading trunks; viz. the two venae
cavae, one called the superior, the other the inferior, and the four trunks of
the pulmonary vein.

The vena portarum alone exhibits one phenomenon peculiar to itself. The trunk
of that vein, on entering the liver is, after the manner of an artery,
immediately divided into branches, the extreme ramifications of which become,
at length, radicles to the inferior cava, and finally lose themselves in the
bosom of that trunk.

88.
We need not, on the present occasion again advert to the common, and by far
too general, opinion, that the areas of the branches are more capacious than
the area of the trunk from which they rise, nor yet to that respecting the
conical figure of single vessels, as what was said on those subjects, when
treating of the arteries ( 74, 75.), will apply with sufficient precision to
the veins.

There are also among the veins, a few examples of vessels being more capacious
at a more remote distance from the heart; such, for instance, is the vena
poplitea, where it passes between the condyls of the os femoris.

What has been already said, with regard to the final terminations of the
arteries ( 77, 78, 80.), may, by making such obvious and necessary changes, as
are adapted to the different nature and circumstances of our subject, be fitly
applied to the origins of the veins.

SECT. IX. OF THE HEART.
89.
THERE exists, as we have already had occasion to observe ( 65), a twofold
communication between the arteries and veins: one, for instance, at the minute
extremities of each kind of vessels ( 77); and the other at the heart, their
common fountain, in which the leading trunks of the whole sanguiferous system
meet.

90.
The heart is, as it were, the first active organ and moving spring of the
whole human machine, as it is by the perpetual and truly astonishing energy of
this body, that the most important vital function, namely, the circulation of
the blood, is performed, from so early a date of our existence, as the fourth
week after conception, down to the closing period of transient life.

91.
This active organ, by its alternate dilatation and contraction, first receives
and again ejects the blood in the following manner. Into the anterior venous
sinus, and its appendage, the anterior auricle of the heart, the blood is
conveyed from the whole body, by means of the two venae cavae, viz. the
superior and inferior, and likewise from the substance of the heart itself, by
means of the coronary veins, the common orifice of which is furnished with a
valve of a peculiar structure; and from this auricle, it is again conducted
into the corresponding ventricle of the same side.

92.
From this anterior ventricle (formerly called the right ventricle, in
conformity to the situation of the heart in brutes) the blood is thrown into
the lungs through the pulmonary artery, which was called by the ancients vena
arteriosa; from thence, by the four pulmonary veins, called in former times
arteriae venosae, it is conducted into a common sinus, formed by their conflux,
and thence again into the corresponding auricle; these were once called the
left, but are now more properly named the posterior, sinus and auricle.

93.
From the posterior auricle it passes on to the ventricle of the same side,
from whence it is distributed, by means of the aorta, through the whole
arterial system appropriated to the other parts of the body, and by the
coronary arteries, through the substance of the heart itself.

94.
The blood having passed from the extreme and ultimate branches of the
arterial, into the incipient radicles of the venous system, reenters the two
venae cavae, (while that from the coronary arteries is also returned by veins
of the same name), and thus the whole collective volume resumes ^ain, and
incessantly continues, the same circuitous route already described.

95.
This circular and regularly progressive motion of the blood through the
cavities of the heart, is powerfully directed, and the regurgitations of that
fluid are completely prevented, by means of small valves, which surround and
serve as portals to the principal avenues which lead to the heart. These valves
are situated on the margins, or extreme lips, of the ventricles which are
adjacent to, and look toward, their corresponding sinuses, and also at the
mouths of the two great arterial canals leading out of those ventricles.

96.
Thus a small venous ring or tendon, which forms a partition between the
anterior sinus and ventricle, descending into the cavity of the latter,
separates into three small valves of a tendinous appearance, each one of which
was formerly believed to divide again into three apices or points, from whence
they received the name of valvulae triglochines or tricuspides. These valves
are connected at their points to fleshy columns, commonly called musculi
papillares.

97.
In like manner another small ring of the same kind, which constitutes a
partition between the posterior sinus and ventricle, is also divided into two
small valves, which, from a certain supposed resemblance to a sacerdotal mitre,
have been called valvulae mitrales.

98.
At the entrance into the pulmonary artery, as also at the mouth of the aorta,
are situated, in an annular or circular position, three valves much smaller
indeed than those already described, but of a very elegant and beautiful figure
and appearance, and furnished with fleshy fibers; these have been called
valvulae semilunares or sigmoides.

99.
Now it evidently appears, that by means of these different kinds of small
valves, sufficient provision is made against the irregular, confused and
retrograde movement of the blood. They easily yield, and afford a passage to
the blood when advancing regularly forward in the established course of its
circulation. But they prevent the ^egurgitation of this fluid, by becoming, in
consequence of its refluent effort, fully expanded like the swelling of a
well-filled sail, and thus completely closing the orifices round which they are
arranged.

100.
The valve of Eustachius which, in the foetal state, is stretched like a
curtain across the mouth of the ascending cava, becomes after birth (sooner or
later in different subjects) so gradually obliterated for the most part, as to
be rendered wholly unfit for the execution of its former functions; neither
indeed does the system stand any longer in need of it, as a passage is now
opened and prepared for the blood through the lungs, and its return from those
viscera prevented by the semilunar valves already spoken of, and as each
subsequent column of blood, pressing from behind, must pursue the same route
with that immediately preceding it. But as it does sometimes notwithstanding
happen, that the passage of the blood from the right side of the heart into the
lungs is by some means obstructed, we then learn from the preternatural
pulsation observable in the superior cava, that the blood is repelled in a
retrograde direction from the right sinus into the two adjoining great venous
trunks.

101.
It is a point of controversy, whether or not the semilunar valves suffer the
ventricles to be perfectly and completely evacuated, or whether they do not
rather by means of their expansion intercept a part of the blood in its escape
from those cavities, and thus force it to take in some measure a retrograde
course.

Observations made on frogs, and even on the minute heart of the nascent chick,
prove that in those animals the heart is indeed completely evacuated; but
whether or not the same thing takes place in man himself, when in a found state
of health, is not yet clearly ascertained; if, however, it be admissible, in
physiological discussions to speculate and draw conclusions from the structure
and mechanism of those valves themselves, as they appear on the dissection of
the heart, the contrary opinion appears the most probable.

102.
The texture of the heart is altogether singular, and peculiar to that organ.
It is indeed fleshy, but remarkably close and compact, and widely different
from the common constitution and appearance of muscles.

It is composed of small bundles of fibers, more or less oblique, frequently
ramifying in a singular manner, contorted and wound spirally in diversified and
truly strange directions; these fibers lie over, and rest on, each other in
certain orders of strata, they are intermingled and closely knit together in
the septum which separates the two ventricles, and are fastened and firmly
connected at the basis of those ventricles by four cartalaginous rings or
bands, which (according to the accurate unravelling and developement of the
whole fibrous texture of the heart, lately executed by the indefatigable and
illustrious Wolff), appear to serve as a stay and support to the fleshy
structure of the ventricles, and also to separate and distinguish it from the
fibers of the sinuses.

103.
Those fleshy fibers are every where overspread with an infinitude of small
nervous ramifications of extreme softness, but they are more particularly
supplied with such an immense apparatus of blood vessels, arising from, and
belonging to, the coronary arteries and veins, that Ruysch has declared in his
writings, that the whole fabric of the heart appears to be composed solely of
sanguiferous tubes.

104.
By means of the foregoing structure ( 90. seq.) and texture ( 101. seq.) the
heart is fitted for the performance of those perpetual and uniformly equable
movements, which return in such general order, that the preliminary appendices
and ventricles themselves, are alternately contracted and relaxed, or perform,
in alternate times, those motions, called in physiological language, systole
and diastole.

105.
With such definitude do they preserve this harmonious order in their routine
of contraction and dilatation, that as soon as the appendices contract
themselves, to propel the blood, returning from the lungs and venae cavae, into
the ventricles, these latter are at the same instant relaxed and fitted to
receive the same advancing wave of blood; but in the subsequent and next
moment, when it is the point of time for the ventricles, now recently filled,
to contract and force the blood into the two arterial trunks, the appendices
are again relaxed, and their mouths rendered patulous for the purpose of
drinking in a fresh tide of venous blood as it rolls on in its usual course.

106.
This systole of the ventricles, which is supposed to consume about one third
part of the whole time of the heart's pulsation, is performed in such a manner,
that the exterior sides of those cavities are approximated and contracted
toward the intermediate septum which separates the right ventricle from the
left; which contraction, especially if we attend to the conical figure of those
cavities, appears fully sufficient to evacuate them of their contents.

But besides this approximation of the lateral parts of the heart toward each
other, the apex of that organ is, during its systolic motion, contracted
toward, and brought nearer to its basis; as has been frequently observed not
only in the inferior animals both of cold I have not in the live-dissection of
any animal discovered the heart more evidently shortened, during its systolic
motion, than in that of coluber natrix or water serpent. Throughout the forests
in the neighborhood of our city, this species of serpent may be sometimes
found four feet in length. Having taken one of these animals and subjected it
in a living state to the anatomic knife, I observed that the length of its
heart during the diastolic, exceeded its length during the systolic motion, at
least the space of two lines.
, and warm blood, but even in man himself, while in a living state It does not,
however, appear that this diminution of the longitude of the heart during its
systolic motion is an absolute condition of life. I am led to the adoption of
this opinion from a variety of observations made on the heart of a duck, in a
great portion of which a complete ossification had taken place. This heart was
deposited in my anatomical collection by my very liberal and worthy friend C.
F. Michaelis, and is marked by completely ossified striae running from its base
to its apex. On its sides, however, it was still furnished with fleshy
substance sufficient to continue the lateral motion of its ventricles, and thus
preserve the circulation of the blood.
.

An argument seemingly in favor of a contrary opinion has been derived from,
and founded in, vulgar experience, from which it appears that the apex of the
heart strikes, during its systolic motion, against the left mamma or breast,
and seems therefore to be rather elongated than contracted and shortened; this
apparently conclusive argument will however have no weight with one who
considers, that those sensible percussions or strokes of the heart are to be
attributed as well to the impetus of the venous blood rushing into the
appendices of that organ, as to that of the arterial blood forcibly ejected
from its ventricles; by both which sources of propulsion the whole heart is
carried toward and impinged against that region of the ribs.

107.
The impetus, which is by this systolic contraction of the heart imparted to
the blood, is communicated to the arterial system, receiving the blood, in such
a manner, that every systole of the heart may be plainly perceived in such
arteries of the other parts of the body as can be felt by the touch, (of which
description are all those that exceed in their diameters the sixth part of a
line), and likewise in such other arteries as can by any means whatever have
their pulsations rendered obvious to the senses: this can be easily effected,
for example, in the internal ear or eye, in either of which a singular kind of
motion can be excited and rendered sensible, which (as well as the same kind of
throbbing or pulsatory motion so perceptible in the other parts of the arterial
system) is called the diastole of the arteries: of this diastolic motion we
shall have an opportunity to speak on a future occasion, at which time we will
take up the inquiry, whether or not it is to be attributed solely to the action
of the arteries themselves, or derives its existence from some other source.

108.
In whatever manner this point may be determined, one thing we learn from
experience, the surest guide to truth, viz. that in a healthy subject, what is
called the pulse of the arteries, is precisely synchronous with, and perfectly
correspondent to, the motions of the heart; and likewise in a morbid
intermission of the pulse, the heart and arteries still harmonize in their
action, by ceasing from, and again commencing, motion at precisely the same
moments.

109.
The frequency of the pulsations of the human heart in a healthy state, is
extremely different in different subjects. This diversity arises principally
from diversity in point of age, but partially also from other conditions of the
system, which at any and every period of life constitute the health proper to
each individual; so that it is not possible to ascertain and establish, on this
subject, any certain and definite rule. It may nevertheless be proper to
mention the general result of my observations (made in our own climate) on the
frequency of the pulse in the different periods of human life.

In the first days after birth I have generally found the pulsations of the
heart of the tender infant, while sound asleep, amount to about 140 in the
space of a minute.

At the expiration of the first year, they amount to 124 in a minute.

At the end of the second year to about 110.

At the end of the third year to about 96, etc.

At that period in which the first set of teeth, usually called the milk-teeth,
drop out, the pulsations of the heart amount to 86 in a minute.

At the age of puberty to about 80.

In the prime of life, or at the period of manhood, to about 75.

And to about 60 at the sixtieth year of human life.

In subjects still farther advanced in years, I have scarcely found two in whom
the number of pulsations were the same, at the same period of old age.

110.
All other circumstances being alike, the pulsations of the heart are more
frequent in females than in males.

If proper and necessary allowance be made for the habit of body, they are less
frequent in men uncommonly tall, than in such as are rather low. This
circumstance I have ascertained to be a truth by comparative observations made
on the pulses of dwarfs, and giants or men remarkably large.

111.
On the subject of those varieties in the pulse, occasioned by extraneous
circumstances, vulgarly called non-naturals, it is necessary to observe, that a
cold climate produces a slow pulse; thus, for instance, the heart of a
Greenlander when in perfect health, does not pulsate oftener than from thirty to
forty times in a minute.

But it is an observation as common as it is true, that the pulse becomes more
frequent after the taking in of aliment, and after an emission of semen. The
same effect is also produced on the pulse by a want of sleep, by bodily
exercise, or by passions of the mind.

112.
The foregoing observations relate to the natural or healthy pulse, in the
consideration of which it seems more consistent, and agreeable to nature, to
direct our views to the heart, as its exclusive source, than to the arteries,
on which physiologists have usually fixed their attention when engaged in the
investigation of this subject.

In this incessant routine, the heart continues its pulsations, down to the
extreme glimmerings of life's perishable flame; and even then, all its parts do
not cease from action at the same moment, but it is the prerogative of the
right ventricle with its appendices, the right auricle and sinous, survive the
left ventricle, and its appendices.

This may be sufficiently illustrated in the following manner: After the last
act of expiration, the lungs now in a collapsed state, can no longer admit the
blood to flow through them in its customary channel, while at the same time
that wave of blood which they have just returned to the left side of the heart,
is from thence forceably expelled through the aorta, and thus urges forward by
a vis a tergo the advancing column of venous blood: from this combination and
concurrence of circumstances, the blood returning with precipitation and
impetuosity, rushes violently into the appendices and ventricle on the right
side of the heart, in consequence of which the parietes of those cavities are
thrown into convulsive efforts, and thus continue to be agitated, for some
time, after the left side of that organ is completely deprived of all vital
motion.

113.
From a knowledge of this fact, viz. that during the last vital efforts of
declining nature, the blood is propelled into the cavities on the right side of
the heart, we deduce, with the utmost ease, the cause of that state of
depletion in which the larger arteries are found after death. To the same cause
also Weiss, and after him the illustrious Sabatier, were desirous of
attributing the superior size of the cavities on the right, to that of those on
the left, side of the heart, especially in the corpse of an adult subject.

114.
The whole of this motion of the heart, which has been the subject of the
preceding observations, is to a very considerable degree limited and directed
by the pericardium, in which the heart loosely hangs, and by which it is
completely enclosed as in the walls of a prison.

The pericardium is a membranous sac, considerably capa^ious, and accommodated
to the figure of the heart which it encloses. It takes its origin from the
membranes constituting the mediastinum, and although, from its fineness, it may
appear somewhat tender, yet we learn from the experiments of Wintringham, that
it is so very tenacious and firm, as far to exceed in strength all other
membranes of a similar nature in the human body.

That the pericardium is a part of the first importance in the animal economy,
we safely infer from this single circumstance, namely, that throughout all
classes of animals possessing red blood, it is found as constantly and
uniformly existing as the heart itself; and records do not furnish more than
one or two examples of the human heart having been found completely destitute
of a pericardium. These singular examples of such an unnatural state of the
heart are recorded in the writings of Dinkler.

115.
The internal surface of the pericardium is kept constantly humid by a dew-like
serous effusion, which appears to exhale from the small arteries of the heart
itself.

In like manner a fluid, of a similar nature, appears to transude into the very
cavities of the heart, and to moisten and lubricate their surrounding parietes
or walls.

In either case the effusion during the healthy state of the part is of a
serous nature, and not accompanied by any real lymph, unless the heart be
laboring under inflammation; but when this organ becomes the seat of an
inflammatory affection, then genuine lymph transudes, giving rise, on the
external superficies of the heart, to five filaments of a hair-like appearance,
together with those preternatural portions of cellular membrane, which in such
cases connect the heart to the pericardium, but on the interior surfaces of the
cavities themselves producing excrescences of a truly polypous nature. ( 19.)

SECT. X. OF THE POWERS BY WHICH THE BLOOD IS KEPT IN MOTION.
116.
HAVING thus completed the consideration of the organs in which the blood is
contained, we now pass on to take a view of the powers, by which those organs
are qualified and fully prepared to keep that vital fluid in motion.

Let us, in the first place, take an attentive and accurate survey of those
powers which reside in the heart itself, and which ought, without doubt, to be
considered as by far the most active and essential in the great business of
circulation: we will then proceed to consider what may be called the secondary
and assistant powers, which we will also find of high importance in the animal
economy, from the concurrent and effective aid which they afford to the action
of the heart.

117.
It will at first view appear obvious to even the most superficial observer,
that it is a matter of Herculean difficulty indeed, either to ascertain by
accurate calculation the force of action exerted by the heart, or to determine
with precision the quantity of blood thrown into the aorta by that organ at
each pulsation; neither will the speculative physiologist find himself beset
with difficulties of less moment, when he attempts to ascertain and establish
with definitude, either the distance to which each projected wave of blood is
carried by the impetus it receives from the heart alone, or yet the celerity
with which such wave rolls forward; but he will be surrounded with
difficulties, still increasing at each advancing step, in his attempts to
render a just statement and accurate account of all such obstacles as oppose,
and thus greatly diminish the effects of the force exerted by the heart, in its
action on the circulating mass of fluids.

118.
A certain estimation may nevertheless be formed of the power of the heart, by
collecting and comparing the most probable conjectures which have appeared on
the above points of physiological speculation. Thus for instance, if we suppose
the whole mass of blood to amount at a mean rate to 33 pounds, i. e. 396 ounces
( 23), and estimate the number of pulsations at 75 in a minute, i. e. 4500
every hour ( 109); and further, if we adopt the opinion that at each systole
the left ventricle ejects two ounces of blood, it will then follow, that during
the course of every hour the weight of the whole volume of blood makes 22
complete transitions through the heart. We may also form a tolerable conception
and estimation of the impetus with which the circulating blood is propelled
from the left ventricle of the heart, by observing with what astonishing
violence, and to what a considerable height, the blood spouts from one of the
larger arteries when wounded in the neighborhood of the heart. Thus, from the
wounded carotid of an adult subject, I have seen the blood, during a few of the
first contractions of the heart after the accident, mount in jets to the height
of at least five feet.

119.
But when we institute an enquiry for the discovery of those unfailing
fountains or springs, which supply the heart with a force so powerful, and at
the same time so uninterrupted and lasting, that which first attracts our
attention, as being foremost both in point of time and importance is its
irritability, ( 44). This vital energy, as has been already evinced ( 90), is
much longer possessed by the heart, than by any other muscular part in the
whole human body.

That the parietes, or walls themseves of the cavities, are irritated and
excited to contract by reiterated impressions from the circulating waves of
blood, is manifest from a well known experiment of the illustrious Haller. From
this celebrated experiment, of that indefatigable physiologist and acute
philosopher, it app^, that he could at pleasure grant, either to the right or
left side of the heart, the prerogative of a more protracted vital motion, (
i.e. of longer life) accordingly as he first deprived the one side or the other
of its peculiar stimulus, the blood See Haller "De motu cordis a stimulo nato,"
in Commentar. Soc. Scient. Goettingens, tom. i.
.

120.
When the proportional quantity of the blood is well adjusted to the size of
the containing vessels, and its quality uncontaminated by any morbid change,
its action on the heart, and the re-action of that organ again on the blood,
proceed with such an equable, regular and happy facility, that, when in a state
of rest, we are scarcely sensible of the circulation of this vital fluid, which
is the kind and constant dispenser of life and vigor to every part of our
bodies.

But if the circulating volume of blood be either too abundant, or
preternaturally scanty, but especially if this vital fluid be contaminated by
the admixture of any foreign substance, as noxious miasmata, ai^ in an elastic
state, or poisons injected into the veins, etc. the heart, either roused
immediately into excessive action, or depressed to the opposite extreme of
prostration and debility, continues no longer fit for the salutary discharge of
its important function, but falls into motions convulsive, irregular, and very
widely different from the equable tenor of its healthy action. Foreign
substances of the same kind, as air blown into the veins, etc. are also
sometimes able to rouse again, and excite to motion, the heart of an animal
recently dead.

121.
It has been a point of controversy, even in very modern times, whether this
extreme irritability of the heart be essentially inherent in its own substance,
or if it be nor rather adventitious, and derived, as some celebrated characters
would induce the world to believe, from the mysterious influence of the nerves?
We will hereafter have a fit opportunity of declaring our sentiments respecting
the whole of this controversy, when we come to consider the doctrine of
muscular irritability, under which head, this subject of inquiry most naturally
falls. On the present occasion it may suffice to observe, that I am daily more
and more convince^, that irritability is a species of vital energy altogether
peculiar in its nature, belonging exclusively to muscular fibers, and
completely distinct from the vis nervea ( 34, 45.) But, on the other hand, it
is no less evident and incontrovertible, that the nerves do also possess a very
powerful influence and command over the action of the heart: this we learn, as
well from the peculiar habit and appearance of the cardiac nerves, from their
softness, their defect of covering, and their singular disposition and
arrangement, as from the astonishing consent of the heart with by far the
greater number of the functions of the human body, even with those of the most
opposite nature. In testimony of the reality of this consent, it may be
sufficient barely to mention, the sudden and transient sympathy which, even in
a healthy subject, exists between all the passions of the mind and the heart,
together with that, which, in a great many species of disease, manifests itself
between this organ and the primae viae.

122.
But, besides those vital energies of the heart, it possesses also another
power, arising out of its mechanical structure, which appears to contribute not
a little toward carrying on the circulation of the blood. The cavities of this
organ being closely contracted, in the time of its systole, and the blood by
this means completely expelled, a vacuum is thus produced, into which, on the
principles of the well known law of derivation, the neighboring blood must of
necessity flow; for, as the valves prevent the regurgitation of the wave just
ejected, it follows of course, that the cavities of the heart must then drink
in, and swallow down, with rapidity, the blood advancing in the trunks of the
veins.

123.
We proceed now to enquire, whether or not, any of the other organs through
which the ^ood passes, besides the heart itself, are furnished with powers
contributary to the continuance of the circulation of that fluid. Judging from
first principles, or a priori, as it is termed, we are led to suspect that such
powers do exist; for it appears hardly probable, that the wisdom of nature has
entrusted so important a function, on which the life of sanguiferous animals
immediately depends, to one organ only, the faults and defects of which might,
in such case, with too much facility, be attended with fatal consequences. But,
reasoning a posteriori, as they term it, i. e. from actual observations, made
on the animal economy, we are furnished with numerous facts sufficient to
establish, beyond a doubt, the existence of such powers, which we may therefore
term secondary powers, and which are able, not only to aid the action of the
heart, but, in some cases, to compensate for almost the complete absence of the
influence of that important organ. A striking instance of this nature, is the
continued motion of the blood, in certain parts of the body, on which the power
of the heart can have but very little effect, if indeed it can extend to them
at all: this phenomenon is observable, as well in the venous system of the
liver, as in the placenta of the uterus; not to mention numerous instances of
foetuses having been born, without the smallest vestige of a heart.

124.
Of these secondary powers, the first to be mentioned is, the functions of the
arteries, the influence of which, in promoting and continuing the circulation
of the blood, appears to be, indeed, very considerable; although the true
principles and mode of their action, on this fluid, have not yet been fully
developed and established.

Speaking in general terms, there exists a very considerable resemblance
between the arteries and the heart itself: that the arteries, for example, have
a muscular coat, is a fact of the utmost publicity ( 72.)

That they also possess irritability, has been very generally known, since the
famous experiments of the illustrious Verschuir.

And, further, as the aspect or disposition of the cardiac nerves on the heart
itself is truly singular, thus also the larger branches of the arteries are,
here and there, surrounded with astonishing reticular intertextures of soft
nerves.

125.
Finally, It is well known to every one that the arteries pulsate, and that
indeed with such vehemence and force, that if we suffer one of our legs to lie
over the other knee, the pulsations of the popliteal artery are sufficient to
elevate in a ^ubsultory manner, the superincumbent leg not only alone, but even
with a very considerable weight appended to it. Indeed for a long time past,
both a systolic contraction and diastolic relaxation have been attributed to
the arteries, which motions have been said to correspond and harmonize with the
alternate contractions and dilatations of the ventircles of the heart.

Though the truth of this last proposition is generally believed to be
established and confirmed by the simple testimony of the senses themselves, the
subject is nevertheless still embarrassed with various doubts and difficulties:
these difficulties immediately rise to view, when it is asked, whether this
vibrating or pulsatory motion, which is felt on examination by the finger, is
to be attributed to the inherent energy of the arteries, or to the impulse of
the heart; and whether the whole motion of the arteries does not depend solely
on the impetus with which the blood is projected into the aorta, and thus
impinges against the sides of that tube, and its ramifications?

Dissections of living animals have not been sufficient to decide this
controversy. For it sometimes happens that during the live-dissections of warm
blooded animals you may discover the larger arteries pulsating, while at other
times again they appear in a state of complete rest. In man himself, while in
the enjoyment of vitality, I had once an occasional opportunity of observing
the neighboring trunks of the aorta and pulmonary artery, to be perfectly
destitute of all motion; but it should not be forgotten, that this phenomenon
appeared in a case of monstrous or preternatural formation of the parts. There
are also arteries which we sometimes feel in a state of violent pulsation, and
which we nevertheless know, from anatomy, are, in consequence of their
situation, almost immovable; of this we have an example in the cerebral
carotid, where it passes through the canal of the o^ petrosum.

126.
When all circumstances relative to this subject are impartially weighed and
dispassionately considered, this appears to be the result, viz. that the
diastole of the larger arteries takes place in consequence of their peculiar
nature, and is to be attributed to the impetus of the blood rushing forcibly
into them, and expanding their coats or tunics, which, by means of their
elasticity, immediately return again to their natural dimensions. To the same
impulse also should be attributed that lateral or curving motion of their axes,
which may frequently be observed in the larger arteries when they run in a
serpentine direction, and lie embedded in soft cellular membrane.

But in a sound state of the system, we contend that the arteries scarcely
exhibit any unequivocal proofs of a true systole, i. e. they do not by a
genuine contraction recede from their natural, to smaller dimensions, as long
as the heart is adequate to the due performance of its momentous function; but
although it be certain, that the arteries do not always, yet we acknowledge
that they do sometimes, exhibit and exercise a power of real contraction: thus
for instance, when the heart is deficient in its action in consequence of
laboring under either a morbid ossification, or some other species of disease,
it is probable that then the duties of this important organ devolve on, and are
discharged by, the arteries, and that the blood is thus kept in motion by the
vital energy of those animated tubes.

127.
As it has been the decided opinion of several celebrated physiologists,
especially the famous Whytt, that the powers of the heart cannot possibly
extend their influence to blood vessels of the smallest order, as, for example,
to the extreme terminations of the arteries, and to the incipient radicles of
the veins; they have therefore attributed the motion of the blood, in that part
of the system, to a certain oscillatory action of those minute vessels
themselves, by the help of which their contents are propelled forward: and this
same vibratory motion they have also applied, with a great deal of ingenuity,
to explain and demonstrate the nature of inflammation, etc.

There are indeed a variety of phenomena, as well physiological, which shall be
mentioned when on the subject of animal heat, as pathological, particularly
observable in spasmodie affections, accompanied with fever, which seem to
favor the existence of such a power of oscillatory motion, although no such
motion has ever been actually observed, even with the assistance of glasses, in
the dissections of living animals.

128.
It yet remains to enquire also after those assistant powers, by which the
other parts of the veins, besides their radicles or incipient roots, are ^itted
to complete finally the return of the blood to the heart. It appears, indeed,
at the first view of the subject, that the veins possess and exert a much
smaller portion of the active vital energies than the other parts of the
sanguiferous system, because the return of the vital fluid, contained in those
vessels, toward the heart, seems to be owing to the impetus of the arterial
blood urging it on by a vis a tergo, as well as to the valvular structure of
the veins themselves, which effectually prevents the blood from regurgitating.
That these minute valves are of the utmost importance in promoting and
continuing the regular and free circulation of the blood, is satisfactorily
demonstrated by the frequent congestions and infarctions, which happen in those
veins that originate in the inferior parts of the abdominal cavity, and which
are entirely destitute of such valves.

But there are nevertheless a variety of arguments which render it probable,
that the trunks of the veins do possess, and actually exert, certain degrees of
the vital energies; as is well exemplified in the veins of the liver, and of
the uterine placenta ( 123.), etc.

It is also well known to every one, that the experiments first instituted by
the illustrious Verschuir, are highly in favor of the existence of a vital
energy in the veins.

And, that the two leading and extreme venom trunks have a stratum of a true
muscular nature, we have briefly hinted on a former occasion ( 84).

129.
These are indeed the leading powers which are active in promoting the
circulation of the blood, and which derive their origin from the very structure
of the vessels in which this fluid is contained. I say nothing of the manner or
degree in which the motion of this vital liquid is influenced by weight,
attraction, or such other properties as are possessed by all bodies in common.

I also pass over in silence the more remote and inconsiderable aids, which, in
a human subject after birth, are afforded to the circulation of the blood, by
the exercise of the other functions of the system, such as respiration,
muscular motion, etc.

SECT. XI. OF RESPIRATION, AND ITS PRIMARY USE.
130.
THE lungs, which are very intimately connected with the heart, as well from
the vicinity of their situation, as from their uniform intercourse in the
performance of their important function, are two viscera, large in the human
subject after birth, but of such specific lightness, as to float on the surface
of water. They consist of a parenchymatous substance, of a spungy texture, and
even exhibiting somewhat the appearance of foam, yet still considerably
tenacious and strong.

131.
The lungs fill up the two cavities of the thorax, and thus lie in perfect
contact with the sacs of the pleura, to which, as well as to the other parts
contained in the thorax, they apply and accommodate themselves with the utmost
definitude and exactness.

132.
These viscera are appended to an air tube commonly called the aspera arteria,
which, (besides an internal membrane, lined with mucus, under which is expanded
a nervous intertexture of extreme sensibility), consists also of a muscular
coat, which surrounds the nervous expansion, and on the posterior side is
easily distinguished at the terminations of certain cartilaginous arches, which
assist in the formation of the tube, but are not uniform in their number.

133.
After the aspera arteria has entered the thorax it first forms, by
bifurcation, the two trunks of the bronchiae, which as they shoot still deeper
and deeper into the lobes and lobules of the lungs, pass again, by reiterated
divisions and subdivisions, into branches and ramifications, uniformly
decreasing in size. During these progressive and multiplex divisions into
inferior orders, both the small cartilaginous rings, and their muscular coat
gradually disappear, till the evanescent extremities of the tubes finally
terminate in those minute cells, which constitute by far the greater and more
important part of the substance of the lungs, as their office is to receive,
and again discharge the vivifying aerial element, in the process of respiration.

134.
Those small air cells do not appear to possess uniformly, either the same
figure or dimensions. With respect to the former of these, (viz. their figure),
it is in general that of a polyhedron. The latter, ( i. e. their dimensions),
as far as their superficial extent is embraced in the consideration, cannot
without the utmost difficulty, be ascertained; but, if we consider only their
aggregate capacity, this, in the lungs of an adult subject, whose inspirations
are full and strong, is sufficient to admit and contain about 60 cubic inches
of air. We do not here speak of the immense size, to which the lungs may be
expanded by inflation, after the thorax is opened, but only of the quantity and
volume of air which they do actually admit in the living subject, when the
process of respiration is performed with ease and vigor.

135.
These vesicles or cells, destined for the reception of air, are every where
surrounded and bound together by that common, but extremely tender, cellular
membrane, which, as we have already learned, constitutes a general vinculum or
bond of union to the whole body. But it is necessary to distinguish clearly and
accurately between the two kinds of cells which exist in the pulmonic system. I
have seen the air cells so separate and distinct, in the lungs of a healthy
human subject, that a person's breath, gently and cautiously blown through a
very minute and tender ramification of the bronchiae, would elevate only a
single circumscribed cluster of vessels or cells, and would neither pass into
the neighboring cells of the same kind, nor yet into the common cellular
membrane, which is every where interposed between those cells intended for the
reception of air. But, if the breath be urged with considerable force, the air
cells will be lacerated, and such a communication formed with the surrounding
cellular membrane, as to give free passage to the subtle elastic fluid, and
thus the whole and every part, of the pulmonary lobe, will appear to be
inflated.

136.
This exceedingly tender cellular membrans, which encloses and lies between the
air vesicles of the lungs, is every where interspersed with innumerable small
ramifications of both kinds of pulmonary vessels, viz. of the pulmonary artery,
and of the four pulmonary veins, the branches of which accompany the branches
of the bronchiae, and afterward, form in their course, by an immense number of
divisions and subsequent anastomoses, reticular intertextures, and expansions
of extreme fineness and subtilty. This truly astonishing reticular tissue,
running in all directions through the cellular membrane, so completely
surrounds, and closely embraces, the cells destined for the reception of air,
that the whole volume of blood, which passes in an incessant round through the
pulmonic system, is separated from the air taken in at each inspiration, by
nothing else than membranes so amazingly fine and subtle, as scarcely to be
equal in thickness, (according to the observations and calculations of Hales),
to the one thousandth part of an inch.

137.
As we have already observed, that each individual ramification of the
bronchiae has appended to it its own peculiar cluster of air vesicles ( 135),
so likewise it appears, that to every individual vesicle of each cluster is
peculiarly appropriated its own system of small blood vessels, the minute
ramifications of which communicate very frequently with one another, forming
those surprising reticular tissues aleady spoken of, but scarcely appear to
anastomose, in any degree, with the small blood vessels of the adjacent
clusters. That this is a truth we are taught, if I am not deceived, as well
from microscopical observations made on the lungs of living frogs and serpents,
as from more minute and successful injections of the lungs of human subjects:
the same thing is also further evidenced by certain pathological phenomena
which may be observed in vomicae, and other similar topical affections of the
pulmonic system.

138.
It is necessary to mention also, in the last place, that singular and striking
apparatus of lymphatic vessels, which spreads and appears, in a more particular
manner, on the external membrane by which the lungs are invested. To this
apparatus of vessels belongs that numerous assemblage of lymphatic or
conglobate glands, which, though of a quite different and distinct order, are
nevertheless commonly confounded, through mistake, with those glands in their
neighborhood, which are called bronchiales.

139.
The thorax, in which the lungs are securely enclosed, has for its foundation
or skeleton, bones and cartilages, arranged and disposed somewhat like the
walls or sides of a cave. Though this bony cavity, taken together as an entire
whole, be to a considerable degree firm and steady, yet most of its parts are
so pliant and moveable, as to be well adapted for the performance of those
motions which the business of respiration requires.

This pliability, or facility of motion is particularly observable in six pairs
of the true ribs, which being placed beneath the superior and first pair, are
more moveable in proportion as their situation is lower; or their aptitude for
motion is commensurate with the superior length of their bodies, and
cartilaginous appendices, which connect them to the margins on each side of the
sternum, by a species of articulation called amphiarthrosis.

140.
Between the edges of those ribs lie two strata of intercostal muscles, the
fibers of which assume indeed and pursue different directions, but which,
nevertheless, cooperate in their action in producing the same motion in the
parts to which they are attached.

Across the basis or inferior part of the whole of this cavity the diaphragm is
stretched, somewhat in the form and direction of an arch. This is a muscle
worthy of particular attention, and, to use the words of Haller, next in
importance to the heart itself; its parts appear to depend chiefly on the
phrenic nerve for their fitness to cooperate in the function of respiration,
as was long since demonstrated by the celebrated live-dissections of the
immortal Galen.

The diaphragm alternates for the most part, by an antagonizing motion, with
the muscles of the abdomen, especially with the external and internal oblique,
and the transverse muscles.

141.
The thorax thus formed and finished is, in the living human subject after
birth, alternately dilated at the time of each inspiration, and contracted
again to its former dimensions in every subsequent act of expiration.

In inspiration, the enlargement of the thoracic cavity extends, in a more
especial manner, laterally and downwards, so that the bodies of those ribs of
which we have particularly spoken ( 139) are elevated, and their inferior
margins or edges turned in some degree outward; while, at the same time, the
arch of the diaphragm is somewhat depressed, and brought nearer to the position
of a plain, or level surface.

But as to what is boldly asserted of the sternum, viz. that its inferior end
is at the same time protruded forward, this is a phenomenon which I must
confess, I have never been able to observe in the tranquil and unmolested
respiration of a healthy person.

142.
This alternate motion of the thorax, which in a healthy subject is indeed
performed spontaneously and without effort, is uniformly continued from the
moment of birth to the extinction of life, for the following necessary and
important purposes, namely, that the lungs themselves may, by a similar
vicissitude of motion, be expanded for the free admission and convenient
reception of the air we inspire, and again contracted in order that the same
may be forthwith expelled.

143.
For man, together with all other warm blooded animals, is prevented, by
absolute necessity, from a lengthy retention of the air which he inspires; he
is obliged, after a very short period to discharge it again, and exchange it
for a fresh supply of this vital pabulum or food, as the air has been termed,
even from the most remote ages. It appears indeed from the most common
observation, that the air which is inspired and retained any time in the lungs,
however great may have been its original purity, suffers, in a very short time,
such remarkable changes as affect it with the most obvious contamination, and,
unless it be speedily renewed, render it wholly unfit to be any farther
employed in the important process of respiration.

144.
Enquiries have been instituted for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of
those changes which the air we inspire undergoes in our lungs. Such changes
certainly do not arise, as was formerly believed, from the loss of any
mysterious principle of elasticity, which resides in the air, but are evidently
produced by a decomposition of its elementary parts. For the atmospheric air
which we breathe is truly an astonishing mixture of elementary substances, very
widely different from each other in their natures. Not to mention the various
heterogenous matters which this necessary fluid contains; such, for example, as
the aerial seeds of the smallest and most simple plants, the odorous effluvia
arising from numerous bodies, volumes of dust, and a thousand other similar
substances, which for the most part float in the atmosphere. Not to mention, I
say, these heterogenous bodies at all, the air which we breathe always contains
aqueous exhalations in larger or smaller quantities, and is also more or less
charged with the matters of electricity and magnetism. But finally, though the
whole of the foregoing substances be left entirely out of view, yet even then
the air of our atmosphere does not consist of one simple aeriform fluid, but is
composed of dephlogisticated, phlogisticated, and fixed airs.

The proportion of those elementary matters, especially of such as are organic,
is varied extremely from diversity of places, and by the nature of the bodies
which exist in these places. It is in the mean time, however, the common
estimation, that the air of our atmosphere consists of about th, part of
dephlogisticated, 11/16ths of phlogisticated, and 1/6th of fixed air.

145.
It appears, that at each inspiration, (in which an adult subject, breathing in
a quiet and tranquil manner, draws in about 30 cubic inches of air,) a fourth
part of the dephlogisticated air is decomposed, and, in a great measure,
exchanged for phlogisticated and fixed airs; so that the expired fluid, being
received into a proper vessel, extinguishes flame or coals when immersed into
it, precipitates lime from the water which suspends it, and far exceeds
atmospheric air in its specific gravity, etc.

146.
It is probable that the igneous parts of the dephlogisticated air, i. e. those
parts suited to favor the process of combustion, being set at liberty by the
decomposition which takes place in the lungs, enters the arterial blood, and is
thus distributed throughout the whole body; while, on the other hand, the basis
of fixed air is carried back, along with the phlogisticated and venous blood,
to the right side of the heart, and thence (as the ancients were pleased to
express themselves) excreted through the lungs like foot.

The more florid dye of the arterial blood, the more obscure color of the
venous, and the similitude of colors imparted to both kinds of blood, when
exposed to the action of those species of air now under our consideration (
16), are circumstances very much in favor of the preceding opinions.

147.
In a foetus which has never yet re^eived vital air into its own pulmonic
system, there is in general less difference between the arterial and venom
blood, than in an adult subject, in whom the process of respiration has already
taken place.

After the infant is born, the new sensation, excited by the contact of an
unusual element, in an animal which had hitherto led an aquatic life, and the
application of various other stimuli altogether new, appear to afford us a
happy clue for explaining the new motions which at that period take place in
the body, more especially the dilatation of the thorax and the first act of
inspiration.

When the lungs are dilated by this first complete act of inspiration, a new
passage is thus opened through them for the blood, so that this fluid is ever
after diverted from the umbilical vessels to the thorax.

But when this inspired air is, by that decomposition of its elementary parts,
of which we have already spoken, rendered both noxious and troublesome to the
lungs, I ascribe to the most simple preservative efforts of nature, the
immediately subsequent motion, by which this poisonous mephitis is exspired,
and profitably exchanged for a fresh supply of the fostering pabulum of life.

From all the foregoing circumstances, taken collectively, (especially if we
attend to the great influence of respiration on the circulation of the blood,
as demonstrated by the well known experiment of Hook), we are furnished with a
much better explanation of the celebrated problem of Harvey, than has yet been
given by most of the other reiterated labors of physiologists, who have
attempted to solve that difficulty.

SECT. XII. OF VOICE AND SPEECH.
148.
THE leading function of respiration has been already the subject of our
consideration. We will speak, in another place, of the part which this sublime
process acts, in blending and intimately uniting the chyle with the blood, and
also of the services which it renders, in a variety of ways, to almost the
whole class of natural functions, ( 63.112.) We now proceed to consider its
other uses in the animal economy.

The first object or phenomenon which attracts our attention, in this
investigation, is the Voice, which belongs to the human subject after birth,
and evidently proceeds from the lungs, as was long since very justly observed
by Aristotle, who said, that no animals are vocal, i. e. possess the power of
emitting sound, but such as breathe through lungs. For, by the denomination of
voice, we properly designate that sound formed, by means of the exspired air,
in the larynx, which is a small apparatus or machine of the most exquisite
structure, placed on the top of the windpipe or aspera arteria, somewhat like
a capital on the summit of a column.

149.
This small machine is composed of various cartilages joined together somewhat
after the form of a capsula or casket. These cartilages are furnished with a
great and truly admirable apparatus of muscles, in consequence of which, not
only the whole are rendered fit for motion collectively, but some of them are
also enabled to move individually and alone, according to the different
variations about to be produced in the voice.

150.
That part which is more particularly engaged in the immediate generation of
the voice is the glottis, a very narrow passage leading into the windpipe from
above, to which is prefixed, or applied as a lid, a minute cartilage called the
epiglottis. That sound is produced by the air expelled from the lungs,
striking, in a proper direction and with due force, against the edges of this
strait passage, is a matter too plain to admit of a doubt.

151.
Controversies have existed on the subject of those changes that take place in
the glottis, by which the modulations of the voice are produced, namely,
Whether this cartilaginous part be alternately expanded and contracted, as was
the opinion of Galen, and afterward of Dodart? or, Whether the variations of
the voice do not rather depend on the tension and relaxation of its ligaments,
as was held by Ferrein?

The latter of those, therefore, compared the primary organ of the voice to a
violin, the former to a flute -- i. e. the one set of disputants conceived it
to emit sound on the principles of a corded, the other on those of a wind,
instrument of music.

From a faithful collection, and impartial consideration, of all the arguments
which have been advanced on this contested point, we are of opinion, that both
kinds of changes do actually take place in the glottis when employed in the
emission of sound; but we, nevertheless, believe, that the principal and most
important of those changes depend on and arise from the tension of the
ligaments, more especially of the thyreo-arytonoidel inferiores (which appear
to have been the vocal cords of Ferrein.

152.
That all this mobility of the glottis, of whatever kind it may be, is
influenced and wholly direct^^ by the numerous muscles which belong, and are
attached, to the larynx, may be fully established by the following beautiful
experiment, viz. If the recurrent or wandering nerves (as they are termed) be
either secured in light ligatures, or completely cut asunder, the voice of the
animals subjected to such experiments, will be in the former case, rendered
extremely weak and low, and in the latter, entirely destroyed.

153.
The faculty of whistling belongs in common both to the human species, and to
small birds of note. To qualify them for this, singing birds are furnished with
a bifurcated larynx at each extremity of the aspera arteria. But though human
subjects be supplied with only one plain and simple larynx, yet they learn to
imitate those small animals, as appears to me, by a co-arction or puckering up
of their lips.

154.
But song, which is composed of speech and a harmonious modulation of the
voice, I would consider as peculiar to man alone, and as constituting the
leading prerogative of his vocal organs. The faculty of whistling is, as
already observed, a part of the birthright of birds: a numerous train of the
feathered race, and sometimes even dogs themselves, have also been taught to
pronounce a variety of words. But I doubt extremely indeed, whether any brute
animals have ever yet possessed a faculty of true and genuine song; whereas, on
the other hand, I believe there scarcely exists a a nation so barbarous, where
song does not very generally prevail.

155.
Speech itself is a peculiar modification of the voice, chiefly by the aid of
the tongue, but partially also by that of the lips, the teeth, the palate, and
by the further assistance of the nose, combined into the formation of words.

Hence the difference between voice and speech appears very obvious and plain:
the first is evidently formed in the larynx itself; whereas the latter is
effected by the singular mechanism of the other organs already mentioned. It is
but just and proper, however, to observe, that this last position is not
capable of universal application, as there are a few nations (of which the
Sinensians may serve as an example), among whom their almost homonymous A word
is said to be homonymous, when it is highly equivocal, or used indiscriminately
to represent a discordant variety of objects or things.
words are distinguished only by a varied modulation of the voice itself.

But further, voice belongs in common to brutes as well as to man; it is
possessed also by the newborn babe, nor is it wholly denied to such unhappy
infants as have passed their lives amidst the haunts, and in the gloomy
society, of wild beasts, nor even to those that have been born without the
sense of hearing. But speech is not acquired till after the cultivation and
exercise of reason; it constitutes, therefore, no less than that operation of
the mind itself, a characteristic privilege, and distinctive prerogative
between man and the rest of the animal kingdom. To serve all the purposes, and
answer all the demands of brutes, that instinct with which nature has
beneficently supplied them, is completely adequate; of this instinct, however,
man is destitute, as also of such other aids and individual powers as might
enable him to preserve and sustain life by his own solitary exertions; he is
therefore kindly furnished with the prerogatives of reason and speech, by means
of which, embracing the advantages, and discharging the duties, annexed to a
social state, he is able both to disclose his own wants, and relieve those of
his fellow creatures.

156.
That truly admirable mechanism, by means of which speech and the pronunciation
of letters are effected, has, since the celebrated researches of that
paradoxical character, Franc. Mercur. Helmont, been very much illustrated and
explained by further and later enquiries, especially those of Jo. Wallis and
Conr. Ammanus.

That division of the letters by Ammanus into I. Vowels, II. Semivowels, and
III. Consonants, is, of all others, by far the most simple and natural.

I. Vowels he again divides into simple, as a, e, i, y, o, u, and mixed, as, a,
o, u.

II. Semivowels are themselves either nasals, such as, m, n, ng, (i. e. n
placed before g in the German language); or Orals (otherwise called Linguals)
such as, r, l.

III. Finally, Consonants he divides, 1st, into the Sibilantes or hissing (i.
e. into those consonants the pronunciation of which can be continued for an
indefinite length of time). These are h, g, ch, s, sch, f, v, ph.

2dly, Explosive, as, k, q, d, t, b, p, and

3dly, Double (or Compound), such as, x, z.

157.
Finally, It yet remains to mention certain other modifications of the human
voice, which usually occur as symptoms, or signs of either particular passions
of the mind, or more violent affections of the organs of respiration. The
greater part of these modifications of the voice, such for example, as laughing
and crying, appear to belong exclusively to the human race.

158.
Most of the modifications which immediately follow, are connected together by
such a powerful kindred alliance, that one of them is not unfrequently observed
to pass into another. It must be also further observed, that the greater part
of them do not always assume and exhibit the same uniform appearance, etc.

To speak, however, in general terms, in the act of laughing, exspirations
short, interrupted, and in some measure broken, follow each other in quick
succession.

Crying produces deep inspirations, which suddenly alternate with lengthy
exspirations frequently interrupted and broken.

Sighing consists in a lengthy, full, and strong inspiration, and a subsequent
flow exspiration, which is not unfrequently accompanied with somewhat of a
groan.

Coughing is produced by quick and sonorous exspirations succeeding a deep
inspiration.

Sneezing is a more violent and somewhat convulsive exspiration, which had been
preceeded by a short and forcible inspiration.

The Hickup on the other hand consists entirely of a single inspiration,
sonorous, extremely sudden, and at the same time of a convulsive nature.

The present seems a very suitable occasion to speak of the phenomenon of
yawning, which consists in a full, slow, and lengthy inspiration, succeeded
again by a similar exspiration, while, at the same time, the jaws are drawn so
very widely asunder, that the air which is received into the expanded fauces
can enter with ease the Eustachean tubes. One thing peculiar to this phenomenon
is, its being extremely contagious, i. e. it very readily excites to imitation:
the cause of this is, without doubt, to be sought for in the remembrance of the
agreeable sensatious produced at a former time, by the languid operation of
yawning.

SECT. XIII. OF ANIMAL HEAT.
159.
IT is worthy of observation, that man in a living state, together with the
other subjects belonging to the class Mammalia, as well as the whole feathered
race, are distinguished from the rest of the animal kingdom by this
peculiarity, that the native heat of their bodies far exceeds, in degrees of
temperature, the usual heat of the medium or element in which they live. With
respect to man himself, it is however to be remembered, that he appears to be
inferior, in the heat of his system, to those other kinds of animals we have
just mentioned. Thus, in our climate, the heat of the human body generally
stands at about the 96th degree of Fahrenheit's scale, whereas, in other
animals belonging to the class Mammalia, the vital temperature very
considerably exceeds this point, while it ascends still higher in individuals
of the feathered tribes.

160.
Indeed, the degree of native heat possessed by a healthy person is so constant
and uniform, that in general, (provided we make allowance for the state of
health peculiar to each individual), its range will include but a very few
degrees of the thermometer, whether the subject be exposed to the inclemencies
of the most rigorous climate, or placed beneath the fervors of a tropical sky.
For the opinion formerly delivered by Boerhaave, that man has not a power of
existing in a medium of such a nature as exceeds in temperature the native heat
of his own body, has, since the famous observations of that illustrious
traveller and former governor of Georgia, H. Ellis, been refuted by a great
number of characters learned in the science of physiology, and the reverse
completely demonstrated and est^blished by experiments well adapted to the
nature of the subject. In this particular, indeed, appears to consist one of
the great prerogatives of man, that imprisoned and confined to no one climate
or zone of the earth, he is able to pass his life in any section of the immense
globe we inhabit, and is free to fix his habitation either beneath the rigors
of Hudson's stormy channel, where the quicksilver passes spontaneously to a
state of complete congelation, amidst the tempests of Nova Zembla, or in the
bosom of those glaring solar fires, which scorch the glowing shores of the
Senegal.

161.
We proceed now to enquire into the origin and source of that astonishing fire,
which minutely pervades our bodies, and uniformly supplies them with their
necessary degrees of warmth. To pass in silence over the visionary conjectures
of the ancients on this subject, some of the moderns have attempted to derive
animal heat, with all its phenomena, from the matter of electricity and the
nerves, others from the attrition generated by the circulation of the blood,
others from the reciprocal friction between the solid elementary parts of
living animals, while others, again, have embraced and defended different
opinions.

162.
But all those hypotheses are embarrassed with insurmountable difficulties,
whereas, on the other hand, the utmost simplicity, and an entire correspondence
to the phenomena of nature, combine in recommending and confirming that
doctrine, in which the lungs are considered as the focus or fireplace where
animal heat is generated, and the dephlogisticated part of the air which we
breathe, as the fuel that supports the vital flame. That justly celebrated
character, Jo. Mayow, sketched out, formerly, the leading traces and first
great outlines of this doctrine, which, in our times, has been greatly
improved, extended, and farther elucidated, by the labors of the illustrious
Crawford.

163.
The whole drift and tenor of Crawford's theory obviously results in this, that
respiration, no less than combustion, belongs to such processes as are called
phlogistic; in which the phlogiston residing in, and constituting a part of,
our bodies, is expelled by the accession of free or sensible heat, (which ought
to be carefully distinguished from heat existing in a fixed or latent state.)

For phlogiston and the matter of heat are elements of such contrary and
opposite natures, that the greater quantity of the one our bodies at any time
contain, the less, at the same time, is their proportion of the other; thus,
fixed air, for example, is not supposed to contain more than ^/^^th part of the
quantity of the matter of heat, which belongs to an equal weight of atmospheric
air, etc.

But it appears, from experiments, that atmospheric air has a stronger affinity
to phlogiston than to the matter of heat, so that it unites itself with the
greatest readiness to the former, while, at the same time, it sets at liberty
the latter, which had been hitherto held in a fixed and latent state.

164.
When we come to apply the foregoing positions and principles to the phenomena
of respiration, it appears highly probable, that animal heat is generated by a
process of a similar nature.

For, as we have already had occasion to observe, the air which we exspire
differs, in a very remarkable degree, from what we had immediately before
inspired; being deprived of its igneous portion, or of that part fit for
contributing to the support of flame, it is returned highly impregnated, on the
contrary, with phlogiston and the base of fixed air. ( 146.)

165.
It appears, therefore, extremely probable, that the igneous portion of the air
we breathe enters those minute blood vessels, which are every where dispersed
throughout the substance of the lungs, and separated from the air-vesicles
themselves by nothing more than subtle partitions of the most filmy texture (
136); that from the lungs it is conveyed through the pulmonary veins to the
aorta, from whence it is again, by means of the arterial system, distributed
throughout every part of the body.

During the whole course of this minute distribution, more especially while in
the extreme ramifications of the vessels, it appears to be exchanged for
phlogiston, which it every where meets with in considerable quantities. This
phlogistic principle, being thus mixed with the blood, and occupying the place
just evacuated by the matter of heat, is conveyed back, by means of the venous
system to the right side of the heart, and from thence by the pulmonary artery,
into the lungs, where, agreeably to those laws of affinity which we just now
hinted at, it is immediately received and taken up by the volume of air
recently inspired. In consequence of the accession of this quantity of
phlogiston, and its union with the air contained in the lungs, a fresh portion
of the element of fire or heat is set at liberty, which instantly enters the
blood and is thus incessantly distributed throughout the system in the manner
already described.

166.
The truth of this theory is evidenced by those diversities between arterial
and venous blood, to which we have every where adverted. It is also farther
evidenced by the difference between the specific heat of arterial, and that of
venous blood; thus the specific heat of the blood contained in the arteries is
to that of the blood contained in the veins, as 11 to 10. Finally, as an
additional evidence of the same thing, we might mention, in the last place,
that oscillatory action exerted by the smallest order of blood vessels, which
was the subject of our attention on a former occasion.

167.
For it seems altogether probable, that those extremely minute ramifications of
the sanguiferous system, are parts of such utility and importance, that in
proportion as their action is stronger or weaker, a correspondent increase or
diminution takes place in that exchange of the element of fire for the matter
of phlogiston, which goes constantly forward in the body, and also in the heat
of the animal uniformly generated by such exchange.

Those memorable and striking phenomena, from which it appears, that animal
heat (if indeed the matter be determined by a thermometer, and not trusted to
the fallacious test of sensation), remains in general at very nearly the same
precise point of temperature, little augmented by the summer's blaze, little
diminished by the winter's blast; and further, that on certain occasions the
heat of our bodies is even increased in consequence of an immersion in cold
water -- Those phenomena, I say, seem to demonstrate, and reduce it to a
certainty, that according to the variations that take place in the temperature
of the medium in which we live, corresponding diversities immediately follow in
the action of the smallest vascular ramifications of our bodies. From this
singularly accommodating power, resident in the minute extremities of our
vascular system, it follows, that on being exposed to cold (which appears to
act by increasing their tone), they are immediately enabled to exchange a
larger quantity of the principle of phlogiston for the igneous pabulum, and
thus generate a higher degree of heat; whereas, on the other hand, they are
obliged to exchange a much smaller quantity, as often as they are rendered
inactive by being subjected to the influence of a relaxing and debilitating
medium.

SECT. XIV. OF CUTANEOUS PERSPIRATION.
168.
SO various, and extremely diversified, are the functions of the cutis, with
which the human body is invested, that an enumeration and complete account of
the whole of them can scarcely be comprehended with propriety under one and the
same head; they would appear to be more fitly arranged for consideration, each
one under that class of actions to which, from its nature it belongs.

For, in the first place, the cutis is the organ of touch, of which we will
speak when treating of the animal functions.

It is again the medium or instrument of inhalation, by which office it makes a
part of the absorbing system of lymphatics; this shall be a subject of further
consideration, when we come to take a view of the natural functions.

Finally, It is the laboratory or organ of perspiration also. This function
agrees in a great variety of respects with the process of respiration, and
appears therefore to be introduced with sufficient propriety as the subject of
the present section.

169.
The cutis is said to consist of a threefold membrane, or of a membrane
composed of three laminae. These laminae or layers are the corium or true skin,
lying on the interior side, the cuticula or cuticle making the exterior
covering, and the reticulum (i. e. the rete mucosum), which is spread between
the two laminae just mentioned. Of each of these we will treat severally and in
order.

170.
The cuticle, or epidermis, forms, as just observed, the external covering to
the whole body: It is thus, from its situation, exposed to a free accession of
the air, the immediate contact of which element, scarcely any other part of the
body can bear with impunity, even in a sound state, except the enamel of the
teeth, the tubes of respiration, and the alimentary canal.

171.
The texture of the epidermis is simple to the utmost degree, being entirely
destitute of vessels, of nerves and of pores. This texture, though on the whole
scarcely organic, is nevertheless highly singular and striking; notwithstanding
its semipellucid and tender appearance, its tenacity is yet so very
considerable as to resist effectually, for a great length of time, not only
maceration, but various other modes of generating putrefaction.

172.
The origin of this filmy expansion is as yet involved in doubts and
difficulties. It is in the mean time, however, probable that it springs, along
with the small bulbs surrounding the roots of the hairs, from the corium or
true skin expanded beneath it: that this is the case, we are led to infer, from
the myriads of minute and extremely tender fibrils, by which it and the skin
are connected together.

When by any means destroyed, it is re-produced again with greater facility,
than any of the other solid parts of the human body.

173.
That this membranous lamina is of the utmost importance in the economy of
organized bodies, is incontestibly evinced by its universal prevalence
throughout both the animal and vegetable kingdoms. It may be observed already
formed even in the tender embryo itself, at so early a period as the third
month after the time of conception.

174.
Underneath the cuticle is expanded a thin mucous membrane, which, from an
opinion entertained respecting it, by its celebrated discoverer, is called
reticulum Malpighianum.

This reticulum or subtle net-like expansion, exhibits the habit and appearance
of mucus, extremely easy of solution: it can scarcely in any part, except in
the scrotum of Aethiopians, be separated entire from both the cuticle and true
skin, and thus be procured in the form of a genuine and complete membrane.

175.
The part now under consideration, constitutes the primary and principal seat
of color in the human race. In all men the true skin is fair and shining; the
cuticle also is semipellucid and whitish in all nations, except the inhabitants
of Aethiopia, in whom it is more duskish and obscure. But in the human subject
after birth, the color of the reticulum mucosum is varied, in correspondence
to the diversities of age, mode of life, climate, and also in proportion as the
constitution is more or less sound.

Thus, for example, of the five varieties, into which the human race appears to
me, to be with much propriety divided, the first has the reticulum more or less
whitish. This description includes, besides Europeans, those who inhabit the
west of Asia, and the north of Africa, together with the natives of Greenland
and Esquimaux.

2 dly, In the second variety, which includes the inhabitants of all the other
parts of Asia, the reticulum somewhat tawny, inclining to an olive east.

3 dly, In the third, which embraces the inhabitants of Aethiopia, it is
blackish.

4 thly, In the fourth, which consists of the aborigines of America, it is to a
certain degree copper-coloured.

5 thly, Finally, in the fifth, which comprehends the inhabitants of all the
South Sea islands, it is more or less tawny or brown.

But all, and each one of those varieties of color, as well as all other
varieties, by which man differs from man, and nation from nation, appear to be
so intimately blended together, and are disposed to run into each other with so
much facility, that it seems scarcely possible to establish any divisions or
classes of them, but such as are plainly arbitrary.

176.
The Corium or true skin itself, to which the reticulum and epidermis serve as
a covering, is a membrane of a peculiar nature; it is porous, tenacious,
capable of vast dilatation, varied in its degrees of thickness, consisting
chiefly of condensed cellular membrane, and extremely close and compact on its
external superficies; it is more lax on the internal surface, which, (if you
except a few regions or parts of the body) ( 36.) contains, for the most part,
a certain quantity of common fat.

177.
Besides nerves and absorbents, of which we will speak particularly on a future
occasion, the corium or true skin is also plentifully supplied with innumerable
small blood vessels, which run on its exterior surface, and, as we learn from a
successful injection, invest the same with reticular expansion of the most
close and subtle texture.

178.
Over the same exterior surface is also interspersed an immense assemblage of
small sebace^ follicles, which thoroughly anoint the whole cutis with a very
subtle and limpid oil, of such a nature as not to be easily evaporated and
dried up. This fine fluid should neither be confounded with the common sweat,
nor yet with that fetid substance which infests only some particular parts of
the body.

179.
Finally, almost the whole of the true skin is planted with hairs of various
kinds. The most numerous and abundant of these are very short and tender,
inclining more or less to the nature of down; of hairs which fall under this
description, scarcely any part of the body is destitute, except the eyelids,
the male penis, the palms of the hands, and the soles of the feet. But, on
certain parts of the body, the hairs, being destined for particular uses, grow
to much greater lengths; examples of this we have in the hair of the head, in
the eyebrows, in the eye-lashes, the hairs in the nostrils, the whiskers, the
beard, together with such hairs as grow in the armpits, and about the anus and
parts of generation.

180.
In general, man is indeed less hairy than most other animals belonging to the
class mammalia. A difference exists, however, in this respect, between the
inhabitants of different countries. For, to pass in silence over those nations
who are in the daily practice of plucking out, as well the beard, as the hairs
which appear on other parts of the body, there are not wanting certain tribes,
who are naturally destitute of hair; of this description appear to be the
Tungusae and the Buratae. On the other hand, we are informed by travelers of
the highest reputation in point of veracity, that the inhabitants of Nadigsda,
one of the northern Kurilikian islands, are remarkable for the unusual
quantities of hair with which their bodies are protected.

181.
Neither are the varieties fewer, which are exhibited by the hair, in regard to
length, flexility, curliness, and, more especially, in point of color: this
last property depends, in general, on the power of climate, on age, and other
causes, which exert their influence in perfect conformity to the established
laws of nature; but it sometimes also depends on a morbid and misplaced
temperament, as appears to be the case in the white natives of Aethiopia. The
color of the hair corresponds, for the most part, to that of the eyes.

182.
There is also a further peculiarity in the direction of the hairs, on certain
parts of the body; thus, for example, on the vertex or crown of the head, they
pursue a spiral direction; on the pubes, they diverge and point upwards; on the
posterior side of the arm, they look, (as on the ape, and contrary to their
direction on the satyr), toward the elbow, (that is, they point from the
shoulder downwards, and from the wrist upwards): of the directions pursued by
the eyebrows and eye-lashes, it seems unnecessary to say any thing on the
present occasion.

183.
The hairs originate from the interior surface of the true skin, which contains
a quantity of face they are fixed with considerable firmness in each of the
small bulbs, which are composed of two involucra; the external involucrum is
vascular, and oval; the internal is cylindrical, appears continuous with the
epidermis, and serves as an immediate covering to those elastic filaments of
which each individual hair is itself composed, and which are from five to ten
in number.

184.
The hairs are always completely besmeared with an oily halitus, and are almost
incorruptible. They appear to possess more of the nature of original electrics
(or of electra per se, as they are called), than any of the other parts of the
body. Their nutrition is extremely simple and easy, as is also their
re-production after having fallen off, unless the cutis itself be laboring
under some morbid affection.

185.
Besides other important purposes which these common integuments of the body
serve, they are, in a particular manner, to be reckoned among the number of the
excretory organs of the system; by their assistance, in this point of view,
certain foreign matters, which would from retention prove highly noxious, are
hourly eliminated and totally removed from the general volume of our fluids.

The truth of the above position is fully demonstrated and established, by the
well-known circumstance of miasmata being completely removed from the system,
under the appearance of exanthemata or eruptions; it is also proved by the
odours of garlic, musk, and other substances taken into the body, passing by
the skin; it is still further demonstrated and confirmed by the process of
sweating, and by other phenomena of a similar nature.

186.
But above all, those excretory passages convey of a certain fluid, which is
called the perspirable matter of Sanctorius, in honor of that most acute and
ingenious philosopher, who instituted the first series of rational inquiries
for the express purpose of ascertaining its utility and importance.

It is necessary, however, to observe, that under this appellation,
physiologists commonly designate excrementitious matters, which, if not
opposite, are at least exceedingly different, in their natures, and which
ought, therefore, to be distinguished from each other with the utmost accuracy
and care; as (...) excretion of sweat, for instance, from the genuine matter of
perspiration.

The former ( i. e. the sweaty excretion) is a liquid of an aqueous nature,
faltish to the taste, and which scarcely ever issues spontaneously from the
healthy body when in a state of tranquillity and rest.

But the latter, (viz. the genuine matter of perspiration), of which alone we
intend to treat on the present occasion, is an aeriform fluid, permanently
elastic, and bearing a very striking resemblance to that which we exspire by
the lungs.

187.
Like that elastic fluid, it is highly charged with the principle of
phlogiston, like that, it precipitates quicklime from the water in which it
was suspended, and, like that, it is also unfit both for contributing to the
nourishment of flame, and also for supporting the process of respiration, etc.

188.
The quantity of this fluid that exhales from the whole superficies of the body
(which, in an adult human subject of the middle size, amounts by measurement to
about fifteen square feet) can scarcely be reduced to accurate calculation.

For, that the scales, which from the time of Sanct^ri^s have been made use ^f
for as^taining the exact weight of the body, are not well calculated for
determining the precise quantity of this elastic fluid, may be easily
understood from what we have just now said respecting the different substances
which are eliminated from the system by the skin, besides the true matter of
perspiration.

It was long since discovered, that the nature and quantity of perspiration
vary extremely, not only in different persons, but even in the same persons, at
different times. It seems at present, however, to be a point too well
ascertained to admit of a doubt, that there does really exist, with respect to
the matter perspired, a national variety and peculiarity; the truth of this we
confidently rest on what has been said, by authors of the highest veracity,
with regard to the singular and specific odours which are transpired through
the skins of the Caribeans, of the Greenlanders, of the Aethiopians, and also
of the individuals belonging to other barbarous tribes.

189.
On considering what has been said with respect to the vascularity observable
in the texture of the skin ( 177), and also w^ ^espect to the analogy that
exists between the matter of perspiration and the air we expire ( 187); and
further, on considering what has been advanced respecting the power and
influence of the smallest vascular ramifications, in the generation of animal
heat -- to him, I say, who carefully weighs and attentively considers all these
circumstances, it will appear extremely probable, that there exists a striking
similitude indeed between the action of the lungs in respiration, and that of
the skin in the process of perspiration. It will appear that there exists
between the cutis and lungs a reciprocal consent; so that the one may be
supposed capable of assisting and somewhat relieving the other, and even of
supplying its place, at least to a certain degree, in case of any accident or
derang^nt.

190.
In support of this opinion we can adduce the concurrent testimonies of a
variety of phenomena, observable not only in a sound, but also in a diseased,
state of the system.

Some of these phenomena are, for example, those leading points, in which the
human foetus, as well as that of the other animals belonging to the class
mammalia, differ from the incubated chick, or the young of the feathered
tribes, while yet enclosed in the parietes of the egg.

A further evidence in favor of the same opinion, is that singular coldness of
certain parts of the body, even in warm blooded animals, (as in the noses of
dogs, etc.) which appears to be referred with sufficient propriety, to a less
ph^gistic action of the small vessels, with which these parts abound.

On the contrary, from an increased action of the minute vessels in certain
parts of the body, we explain, with the utmost fairness and facility, a variety
of morbid symptoms, such, for instance, as that singular heat and flushing in
the palms of the hands, which occur so frequently, and are so strikingly
observable in patients laboring under a hectic fever.

With regard to that vicarious action of which we formerly spoke, and by which
we said it appeared probable, that the functions of the lungs and cutis lend
mutual aid and assistance to each other; that such an action does unequivocally
exist, we derive some force of testimony from those phenomena in pathology,
where human subjects, after birth, and even after advancing to an adult age,
having their lungs almost totally destroyed by a consumption, or highly
vitiated by some other contamination, have nevertheless survived such
melancholy misfortunes, for a long time, and in some cases have even passed
several years, during the whole of which period they appeared to be almost
entirely deprived of the use and advantages of respiration.

191.
Finally, It does not appear improbable, but that the interior surface of the
alimentary canal, may also, besides its other primary functions, be perpetually
engaged in the performance of a phlogistic process, not unlike that conducted
by the skin and pulmonary system.

This canal or tube appears, indeed, to be the only interior part of the body,
except the lungs themselves, to which the atmospheric air has free access; but
that the air has really free access to the prima viae, or first passages, as
they are called, and that we swallow that elastic fluid in considerable
quantities, are matters, much too plain, to stand in need of any proof.

Further, That the air which we swallow undergoes a change very similar to the
change suffered by that taken by inspiration into the lungs, is satisfactorily
demonstrated by the nature of the air contained in the whole alimentary canal.

Finally, To all those concurring circumstances we may further add, that truly
astonishing congeries of small blood vessels, spread in profusion over the
interior surface of the intestines, which is commonly believed to be equal in
extent to the external superficies of the whole body.

SECT. XV. OF THE SENSORIUM AND NERVES.
192.
WE come now to treat of another class of the functions of the human body,
which embraces what we denominated the animal functions ( 63): by means of
these, an uninterrupted commerce and intercourse are kept up between the body
and the various faculties of the mind. They belong therefore exclusively, (as
indeed the name itself plainly imports,) to organized and animated bodies; but
as they pervade the whole animal kingdom more universally than the vital
functions, they appear to have an exceedingly just and well founded claim to
the epithet, animal.

193.
The organs which are principally subservient to the exercise of these
functions are, the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and their appendage the medulla
spinalis, together with the nerves that originate from these three sources. The
whole of these organs may, with sufficient propriety, be arranged under two
leading classes, namely, the Sensorium and Nerves. The former of these embraces
(if we except the nerves themselves, and those parts which constitute their
more immediate origins) all the remainder of that whole system, which forms,
more particularly, the vinculum or medium of connection, that exists between
the offices or functions of the nerves and our nobler part, the faculties of
the mind.

194.
On this division is founded that beautiful observation of the illustrious
Sommering, in which he alleges, that the relative magnitude which the two
preceding classes of organs bear to one another, corresponds so accurately with
the faculties of the mind, that the smaller and less bulky the nerves of
animals are, when compared to the size of the other organs or parts which we
have comprehended under the denomination of Sensorium, the more vigorous and
active are the faculties or their minds. In this respect he observes, that man
may be said to possess the largest cerebrum or brain, if its bulk be compared
to the small size of the nerves that originate and proceed from it, but not if
its weight be compared with the relative weight of the whole body.

195.
Besides the bony cranium or skull, in which the cerebrum itself is enclosed,
it is still farther invested with three involucra or coverings; these are the
dura and pia matres, between which is expanded the third, viz. the tunica
arachnoidea.

196.
The dura matter, which lines, as a periosteum, the cavity of the encephalon, is
lengthened out into a variety of partitions or processes. By its falciform
process, which is the most prominent and remarkable, it separates from each
other, the two hemispheres of the brain; while, by means of that process called
the tentorium, it forms a partition between the cerebellum and the parts
situated above it, and thus, by giving support to the posterior lobes of the
brain, prevents them from making an undue pressure on the subjacent cerebellum.

Further, the dura matter, by various duplicatures or doublings of its own
membrane, forms what are called the venous sinuses, while it gives them at the
same time firmness and support, and prevents them from being unduly compressed.
Through these sinuses the blood of the encephalon, or parts contained within
the cranium, glides back toward the heart: this blood is said, by
physiologists, to possess properties peculiar to itself, and appears, from
actual calculation, to be so considerable in quantity as to amount, at least,
to one tenth part of the whole mass of blood contained in the human body.

197.
Next to the dura matter lies the tunica arachnoidea, so called from its extreme
tenderness and filmy texture. It is destitute of blood vessels, ( 5.), and does
not, any more than the dura matter, enter the various sulci or furrows, and
receive the different eminences or ridges, which mark the surface of the
cerebrum, but only expands, with uniformity, over the whole volume of that
important viscus.

198.
Very different from this is the state and situation of the internal involucrum
or covering of the brain, on which the ancients bestowed the name of pia matter.
This membrane every where accompanies the cortical part of the cerebrum so
closely, that the innumerable small blood vessels, with which it is profusely
supplied, enter, and even perforate the cortex itself, with their infinitude of
minute ramifications; hence, when the pia matter is separated by force from the
cerebrum, its external surface presents a smooth and exquisitely beautiful
polish, while its internal surface, on the contrary, is considerably villous,
and resembles, not a little, those delicate radicles by which the mosses adhere
to their native soil, or places of growth.

199.
Both the cerebrum and cerebellum are composed of a variety of parts, different
from each other both in texture and figure, the uses of which have been
hitherto generally unknown: these parts are particularly distinguished by the
four ventricles, as they are called, the communication between which has been
of late traced and developed, with the utmost accuracy, by the illustrious
Monro: of these ventricles, the two anterior and the four^^ contain what are
denominated the plexus choroidei, the uses and functions of which are also
involved, as yet, in intricacy and doubt.

200.
In all parts, of both the cerebrum and cerebellum, there exist two kinds of
substance, one of a cincritious or ash color, which is called the cortical
part, although it does not always form the exterior stratum, the other white
and shining, and therefore called the medullary portion. Agreeably to the
observations of the illustrious Sommering, there is interposed between the two
foregoing substances, still a third, of a color bordering on white; this body
is most conspicuously observable in the arbor vitae of the cerebellum, and in
the posterior lobes of the cerebrum.

201.
The proportion, which the cineritious substance bears to the medullary,
decreases as life advances; thus, in infants it is greater, in adults less.
Almost the whole of this cineritious substance, is composed of an immense
assemblage and contexture of the smallest sized blood vessels, together with
vessels of an order still inferior, even so minute as to be incapable of
admitting any thing except a white or colorless fluid of the most exquisite
tenuity, ( 79.): a small number of these vessels passes into the medullary
portion, which appears to contain in its own composition, (besides these minute
vessels and a quantity of very tender cellular membrane), a soft pultaceous
parenchyma, in which physiologists, even when armed and aided by the most
powerful glasses, have not yet been able to discover any uniform and definite
texture.

202.
In the cerebrum is observable a perpetual but very gentle motion, bearing such
a relation and exact correspondence to the process of respiration, that while
the lungs are collapsed, and their volume diminished in the act of exspiration,
the cerebrum is slightly elevated, but immediately subsides again, when the
thorax is dilated by means of a subsequent act of inspiration.

203.
What has been called by physiologists the medulla oblongata, terminates in the
medulla spinalis, which is contained in that flexible tube, formed by the
vertebrae of the spine or back, and is still clothed in the same membranes
which we have already seen investing the cerebrum or brain itself: further, as
the brain, so likewise the spinal marrow, is found to consist of two kinds of
substance, with this striking circumstantial difference, however, that, in the
latter, the cineritious or ash-colored substance forms the internal, whilst
the shining or medullary composes the external, part.

204.
From each of the foregoing sources, namely, the cerebrum and cerebellum,
together with the medulla spinalis, the nerves primarily derive their origins.
These are small ropes or cords, of a color more or less whitish, differing
likewise in their degree of firmness), which are minutely distributed
throughout almost all the other soft parts of the human body. This opinion of
the minute, and universal, distribution of the nerves through every part of the
human system, though admissible as a general rule, is, however, subject to
certain well founded exceptions.

204.
For it appears from an infinitude of experiments made by the illustrious
Haller, and other able observers, that there are several of the parts
similares (or similar parts 46) of our bodies, in which, the knife, and
powerfully armed eye of the anatomist, have not been able to detect the
smallest vestige of nerves, and where neither surgical observations nor live
dissections, often repeated by the most dextrous hand, have succeeded in
discovering even the faintest phenomena of sensibility.

In an enumeration of such parts, as appear to be destitute of sensation and
nerves, we must embrace, besides the naked cellular membrane, the epidermis,
the reticulum mucosum, the hairs, and the nails.

We include further, the cartilages, and bones, with their periostia and marrow.

To these must be added, the tendons, the aponeuroses, and ligaments; as also
most of the broader and more extensive membranes, such, for example, as the
dura matter and tunica arachnoidea; the pleura, with the mediastinae and
pericardium; the peritoneum; the cornea, etc.

Under the same head we arrange most parts of the abso^ system, but more
especially the thoracic duct.

Finally, This catalogue of such parts as neither possess nerves, nor are
endued with sensibility, shall be closed, by the addition of the secundines,
and umbilical cord.

206.
The primary or nascent origins of the nerves, emerging from the sensorium
itself, have, as yet, eluded the most zealous researches of the subtle knife
and prying eye of the anatomist: it therefore still remains a matter of
controversy and doubt, whether the nerves on each side of the body derive their
origins from the corresponding, or from the opposite side of the sensorium?
Certain pathological phenomena appear indeed to favor the latter of these
opinions. It has been also lately established by the illustrious Sommering that
a true decussation or crossing of the optic nerves does actually exist.

207.
A certain continuation of the pia matter accompanies the medullary part of the
nerves in their course, in such a manner, as to form for them a vascular
cortex, or covering, of extreme tenderness. No sooner, however, do these cords
emerge from the cerebrum, or the spinal marrow, than they assume a very
singular habit and appearance, by which they may be readily distinguished from
almost all the other similar parts of the body. This peculiarity of appearance
is produced by small plicae or folds, which they exhibit, running in angular
directions, more or less oblique. These folds were formerly described by P. P.
Molinel, who compared them, not inconsistently with propriety and fitness, to
the rugae of the lumbricus, or round worm, or to the small rings of the aspera
arteria.

208.
The nerves, especially those of the single or unpaired orders, such, for
instance, as the intercostal and vagantes or wandering nerves, are every where
furnished with ganglia, i. e. small bulbs, of a texture considerably compact,
and of a cineritious color, somewhat inclining to a pale red: the functions
and uses of these bodies in the animal economy have not yet been satisfactorily
ascertained and demonstrated. We are, however, in the mean time, most inclined
to adopt the opinion formerly entertained respecting these substances by the
ingenious Zinn. That acute physiologist believed the ganglia to consist
entirely of mazy complications and intertextures of minute nervous filaments
originating from di^ferent sources. In consequence of this intricate and
uninvestigated texture of these bodies, he conjectured, that each nervous
filament, or thread proceeding from them, participates, or contains in its
composition, a part of every filament that enters into their structure, however
numerous those filaments may be, or however different the sources from which
they originate.

209.
Neither does there appear to exist any very material difference between the
nature of ganglia, as just described, and of what are called plexus nervosi.
These latter are also indebted, for their existence and form, to a similar
concurrence and anastomosing intertexture of nerves that originate from
different sources. The composition of such nervous filaments as ramify and
proceed from these plexus nervosi, appears to be also perfectly analogous to
the composition of those, that originate from the ganglia, of which we have
already spoken.

210.
But as the nascent origins of the nerves, so likewise (with a few exceptions),
the final terminations of their extreme ramuli, or remote filamentary branches,
are as yet involved in the depth of obscurity. For if we except those few
nerves that terminate in a kind of medullary expansion, as the optic nerve in
the retina, and the soft portion of the seventh pair, in that pulpy zone,
contained between the spiral laminae of the cochlea of the ear -- If, I say, we
except these two nerves, the evanescent filaments of such of the others as
enter the viscera, the muscles, the skin, etc. become so minutely blended with
the real parenchyma of the parts on which they are distributed, and gradually
assume such a pulpy consistence, that the eye of the anatomist can no longer
trace them through their mazy courses.

SECT. XVI. OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN GENERAL.
211.
WE have thus seen, that of the sensorium, and nerves so generally and minutely
distributed throughout most parts of the body, a complete system is beautifully
constituted, which, during the continuance of life, serves as a medium of
communication and mutual intercourse between the body and the mind.

212.
Various circumstances and phenomena combine in rendering it probable, that the
mind is indeed attached and closely connected to the brain itself. That the
brain is thus honored and dignified in its alliance is very powerfully and
strikingly evidenced, by most of the instruments of sensation being situated in
the very vicinity of that organ; by the astonishing conformation of its various
parts, considered with regard to their figure and structure; but more
especially by the phenomena attendant on its morbid affections.

213.
With respect to that connection of which we have just hinted, I would further
observe, that certain physiologists, wantonly sporting in the delusive fields
of imagination, have suffered themselves to be so far influenced by the form
and situation of particular parts of the encephalon, that they have considered,
and even endeavored to prove, sometimes one, sometimes another of these parts,
to be indeed the very seat, and royal court, (as it were) of the mind. This
honorary and sublime privilege, of affording a sacred seat to our nobler and
immortal part, some metaphysical physiologists have been solicitous to bestow
on the pineal gland In favor of the Cartesian hypothesis, some degree of
testimony appeared to be derived from the dissections of certain maniacs, in
whom the pineal gland was found invested with calculous concretions. On more
accurate observation, however, it was discovered, that not only in maniacs, but
also in numerous other subjects possessing the most complete degree of mental
sanity, this same glandular body was surrounded, from about the 12th year of
life, by minute sandy concretions of a pearl-like appearance. -- Cl. Sommering
de lapillis vel prope vel intra glandulam pinealem sitis, s. de acernulo
cerebri Mogunt. 1785. 8.
, others on the cerebellum, others on the corpus callosum Those fictitious
prerogatives both of the cerebellum and corpus callosum are refuted in a very
masterly manner by Zian in his "Experim. circa corpus callosum, cerebellum,
duram meningem, in vivis animalibus institut. Goetting. 1749. 4.
, and others, again, on that part which has been denominated pons Varolii.

214.
We are not by any means to suppose, that the whole energy of the nervous
system depends on the encephalon alone; it is also derived in part from the
spinal marrow, and even the nerves themselves possess such a degree of inherent
or native energy, as is sufficient of itself to throw the muscles into a state
of convulsion. This native or exclusive energy of the nerves, appears to be
principally supported and preserved by that vascular cortex or covering of
those organs, of which we briefly spoke on a former occasion ( 205). It is,
however, a truth which ought not to be forgotten, that this inherent power of
the nerves themselves is less, and that energy, on the contrary, which is
derived immediately from the encephalon, greater, in man, than in other
animals, especially such as are supplied with cold blood.

215.
The office of the nervous system appears, in a particular manner, to be
twofold. First, by means of this system, other parts of the body, especially
such muscles as are subjected to the influence of the will, are excited to
motion; of this function, however, we will treat more fully in another place.
But, secondly, the nerves are peculiarly subservient to sensation; whatever
sensible impressions are made on the body, they, like active heralds, convey
and announce immediately to the sensorium, and there give rise to perception.

216.
Finally, the sensorium is evidently possessed of the following very singular
faculty or power, viz. that, having received sensible impressions through the
medium and agency of certain nerves, it is able to re-act again in its turn,
not only on the same nerves, but also on such as are completely different. In
testimony of the truth and authenticity of this position, it will be sufficient
to mention the action of the retina, when affected by light, on the sensorium,
and the re-action of this latter, again, in either constricting or dilating the
iris.

217.
It is principally from this last source, that we are to derive and explain
most of the effects of the imagination, and passions of the mind, on the human
body: of these effects we will speak more fully on a future occasion. To the
same source, also, must we refer that extensive and diversified consent of the
nervous system, which prevails throughout almost the whole body ( 14.), and the
astonishing power and influence of the same, over most of the other functions
of the animal economy.

218.
That the phenomena which we have just mentioned, proceed from certain
properties essential to the nervous system, is a position, that appears, from
observation and experiment, to be founded on the most indubitable evidence.
But, to elucidate and explain the manner in which this system acts, in the
production of such phenomena, is, indeed, a difficulty of the utmost magnitude.

219.
When we view the subject in a general light, the various opinions, which have
at different times been advanced on this contested point, may be all referred
to two leading classes: one of these alleges the action of the nervous system,
to depend on a certain oscillatory motion; while the other supposes it to be
produced by the motion of a peculiar fluid, respecting the nature of which
physiologists, again, hold different opinions. Thus, while some believe this
fluid to be animal spirits, contained in, and passing through, vessels, others
contend, that it is a certain modification of matter, similar to fire,
electricity, or the magnetic effluvia.

220.
Although I am disposed to adopt neither of the above opinions as my own, yet
it is proper to observe, that most of the arguments, by which the advocates of
either hypothesis have endeavored to invalidate the other, appear to me to be
as crude and inconclusive, as they ought to be subtle, ingenious and forcible.
This observation applies, as well to the arguments made use of to prove the
oscillations of the nerves, as to those advanced for the purpose of
establishing the existence of a nervous fluid.

221.
If, indeed, our views of the subject be not erroneous, the two foregoing
opinions may, without impropriety, be united, and thus a third one formed, more
plausible, at least, than either of the originals, namely, that a certain
nervous fluid does actually exist, and that this fluid is also capable of
motion, and of being thrown into oscillatory vibrations, when subjected to the
action and influence of stimuli.

222.
Not to mention various other evidences, which might be obviously deduced, from
the different phenomena of the nervous system, the structure of the brain
itself, which bears a striking resemblance to that of certain secreting
viscera, appears indeed to be highly in favor of the existence of a nervous
fluid. It is surely a matter too obvious to admit of controversy, that there is
no more need of any direct tubes and canals, for the distribution of such a
fluid through the nerves, than there is, for the conveyance of a liquid through
brown paper, or any other filtre.

The nugatory calculations, respecting the astonishing rapidity, with which the
animal spirits have been supposed to hurry through their nervous canals, in all
parts of the system, are subjects too hypothetical and visionary to merit our
time, or command our attention.

223.
That an oscillation of the nerves does indeed exist, is a position, powerfully
supported by a great variety of very striking and pointed physiological
phenomena. This oscillation must not, however, be supposed to bear any
resemblance to the rude vibrations of tense chords, but is such a subtle,
tremulous motion, as may be readily conceived to take place in the tender,
pulpy substance of the brain. That hearing is excited by an oscillation of a
liquid, has been reduced to satisfactory demonstration. That an oscillatory
motion somewhat similar takes place also, in the act of vision, is (though we
should not be willing to repose implicit confidence in the opinions of Leon.
Euler) a position founded, at least, on strong probabilities. That the action
of the other senses depends also on an oscillatory motion of a similar nature,
is an opinion, which was not only embraced by the illustrious Newton Vide ejus
Quaestiones ad calcem optices. Qu. 23. p. 355. edit. Land. 1719-8.
, but has been since ably and successfully defended in the writings of the
sagacious Hartley. It is on the principle of the existence of such a motion,
that this last mentioned author, has first happily accounted for the
association of ideas, and then, by the aid of this, proceeded to explain, with
the utmost ingenuity, most of the functions performed by the different
faculties of the mind David Hartley's Observations on man, his frame, his duty,
and his expectations. Land. 1749, vol. ii. 8.
.

SECT. XVII. OF THE EXTERNAL SENSES IN GENERAL, BUT PARTICULARLY OF THE TOUCH.
224.
ONE office of the nerves, as we have already had occasion to observe, consists
in communicating to the sensorium, impressions made by external objects. This
they do through the medium of the external senses, which officiate as watchful
sentinels to the body, and diligent instructors to the mind.

These, therefore, shall constitute, at present, the sole object of our
consideration. For to arrange among the senses, the stimulus or propensity
which animals feel to evacuate their faeces, the sensation of hunger to which
they are subjected, or other internal calls of nature of a similar kind, would
be, as Haller formerly observed, an unnecessary species of subtility and
refinement.

225.
It ought to be remembered, that no other class of functions belonging to the
animal economy, is subjected to such an astonishing variety in different
individuals, as that of the external senses, which constitutes the subject of
our present consideration. This infinite diversity, which exists between these
senses in different individuals, is either natural or acquired, and relates to
their greater or less acumen or sharpness, their subtlety, or to the manner in
which they are affected by similar applications of the same stimuli.

226.
In giving an entire and complete account of the external senses, it appears
most proper to begin with the touch, this being the one which manifests itself
at the earliest period in the human subject after birth. The organ of the sense
of touch is expanded over the whole superficies of the body, and is so
constituted and formed as to be affected by much the greatest number of the
properties of external objects.

227.
For we are not only made sensible of certain qualities of substances by means
of the touch alone, as of heat, hardness, weight, etc. but there also exist
other qualities, such, for instance, as figure, distance, etc. of which we
acquire, a much more certain and accurate knowledge by the aid of the touch,
though it must be acknowledged that these qualities are at the same time
subject to the cognizance of some of the rest of our senses.

228.
The touch is less liable to deception than the other senses; and is capable of
becoming, by cultivation and attention, so exquisitely perfect and refined, as
to be able to compensate, in a certain degree, for any deficiency in its sister
senses, more especially in that of vision.

229.
The organ of this sense is indeed the skin in general, concerning the fabric
and texture of which we spoke formerly; but those parts that are more
immediately subservient to the touch, are the papillae of the corium or cutis
vera; these papillae exhibit various figures in different parts of the body;
they are indeed, for the most part, verrucose, in other places they are
fungous, in others filamentous or thread-like, etc. under all which
appearances, the extremities of the cutaneous nerves terminate after the manner
of small pulpy pencils.

230.
But by far the most important and distinguished instruments of the touch are,
in particular, the hands, the skin of which is impressed with a great number of
striking peculiarities. Thus, for example, the skin on the palms of the hands,
and on each side of the joints of the fingers, is sulcated and completely
destitute of hair, for the purpose of facilitating the folding or doubling up
of those parts. The extremities of the singers, on their internal, and of the
toes, on their inferior, surfaces, are furrowed with slight and very elegant
grooves running in directions more or less spiral: but the former, on the
exterior, and the latter on the superior, sides, of their terminations, are
protected from injury by nails.

231.
These scutiform nails are possessed only by man, and a few other animals,
(belonging to the class mammalia), which are also furnished with hands, and
excel in the acuteness of their sense of touch. These nails appear to be
designed for the purpose of making a gentle resistance to the pressure of the
fingers when examining substances, and thus aiding their action.

The nails, though of a horny nature, must nevertheless be considered, on the
whole, as productions or continuations of the epidermis: for immediately under
them lies the reticulum mucosum, which in Aethiopians is black; and finally,
beneath this again is expanded the corium or true skin, which is firmly
attached to the periostium of the extreme phalanx of the fingers. Also these
constituent parts of the nails are striated in a longitudinal direction. At
their posterior margins (which are distinguished by small semilunar segments,
of a shining or somewhat brilliant appearance) they are securely fixed in a
groove formed by a reflection of the cutis, from whence by a daily, but very
moderate, increase, they are gradually protruded forward, in such a manner, as
to be completely renovated in every term of about six months.

SECT. XVIII. OF THE TASTE.
232.
TASTES are certain impressions made on, and perceived by, the tongue, and
also, in some measure, by the adjoining cutaneous parts of the os internum (i.
e. the inside of the mouth); these parts are, in particular, the medium palati,
the fauces, the cheeks, and even the lips themselves; with respect, however, to
the whole of these auxiliary parts, it is proper to observe, that they have no
perception of any tastes except such as are acrid or intensely bitter.

233.
The principal instrument of taste is the tongue, an organ capable of the
utmost agility in motion, very pliable, and exceedingly changeable in point of
form: it consists of a fleshy texture, which exhibits a striking appearance,
somewhat resembling the texture of the heart.

234.
It is invested with involucra or coverings, which bear a similitude to the
different strata of the cutis: these are, the epithelion, which corresponds to
the cuticle, the reticulum Malpighianum, and lastly, a papillary membrane, that
differs but little in its structure from the corium or true skin.

235.
The principal difference consists in this, that the epithelion, instead of a
fine cutaneous oil, is lubricated and moistened by mucus, which exsudes from
that imperceptible orifice, named after Meibomius, and also from the rest of
that glandular expansion, discovered by Morgagni: another point of difference
is, the conformation of the papillae, which are divided into the pe^iolated,
the obtuse, and the conical; of these, the former, being very few in number,
are placed in a lunated arrangement, at the root of the tongue, while the
others, being of various sizes, are crowded promiscuously and without order, on
the back of the tongue, but more especially on its edges and tip, where the
sense of taste is most acute and exquisite.

236.
To these papillae pass the extreme filaments of the lingual branch of the
fifth pair of nerves, by the offices and aid of which it appears probable, that
the sense of taste is proximately generated and preserved.

For the ninth pair of nerves, and also that branch of the eighth, which is
distributed throughout the ton^ue, appear to be subservient to the various
motions performed by that organ in chewing, swallowing, speaking, etc. rather
than to its function as the immediate instrument of taste.

237.
That the tongue may exercise the sense of taste in perfection, it is necessary
for it to be kept in a state of complete humidity; the substance to be tasted
should also be a liquid, and ought to abound with salts in a state of solution:
for if either the tongue itself, or the substances applied to it be dry, it may
then indeed examine them by the touch, which it generally possesses in an
exquisite degree, but cannot with strictness and propriety be said to taste
them.

When the tongue discharges the office of tasting with most perfection and
acuteness, the papillae situated on its apex and edges, appear to be brought
into a state of genuine, though slight, erection.

SECT. XIX. OF SMELLING.
238.
BY means of the sense of smelling we perceive impressions made by the odorous
effluvia of substances, which being inhaled in inspiration, come in contact
with that part, in particular, of the Schneiderian membrane, which invests each
side of the septum narium, and lines the unequal surfaces of the concha.

239.
For although the whole of the internal nares, together with the adjoining
sinuses, which open into them, be lined with a humid membrane, similar in
appearance to the Schneiderian, it nevertheless appears to be diversied in its
nature in different places.

That part of the membrane, which is situated near the opening of the external
nares themselves, bearing a stronger resemblance to the other parts of the real
cutis, is overspread with sebaceous follicles, which are completely mantled in
clusters of hair.

But that part which lines the septum narium, and conchae, is of a fungous
nature, and abounds with small muciferous cryptae or cells.

Finally, Those portions which invest the parietes of the frontal, the
sphenoidal, the ethmoidal, and the maxillary sinuses, are by far the most
tender and delicate of all, and are completely overspread with an infinitude of
minute blood vessels, which constantly exhale from their extremities a subtle
dew-like fluid of an aqueous nature.

240.
The principal, if not, indeed, the only use of those sinuses appears,
therefore, to be, to furnish a watery liquid, of such a nature, as has been
just described, which being first conveyed into the three passages or avenues
of the nares, may be from thence communicated to those adjacent parts, which,
we have already said, constitute the immediate instruments of the sense of
smelling. By thus supplying, with a due degree of humidity, the parts which
proximately form the olfactory organs, those sinuses contribute, not a little,
to preserve the acuteness and perfection of this interesting sense.

For the attainment of this end, such a wise provision is made by the very
situation of those several sinuses, that in whatever position the head be
suffered to rest, one or other of them may still discharge and deposit a
quantity of this subtle dew, on the immediate seat of the sense of smelling.

241.
The fungous part of the nasal membrane, of which we have already spoken, and
which constitutes the proximate organ of smelling, besides, the immense number
of minute blood vessels with which it is overspread (and which are rendered in
a particular manner remarkable, by this circumstance, that there are no other
vessels in the whole body equally liable to spontaneous hemorrhages); besides
these small blood vessels, I say, this part of the membrane is also furnished
with nerves, especially from the first pair, and also from both branches of the
fifth pair: of these, the first pair appears to be of itself solely subservient
to the sense of smelling; while the others supply the parts, to which they are
distributed, with branches for the purposes of common sensation, such, for
example, as that which gives rise to sneezing, etc.

242.
The extreme filaments of this first pair of nerves are not, (as is the case in
the organs of touch and taste), lengthened out and rounded into papillary
elongations, but appear to deliquate, or melt down, as it were, into the spongy
and uniform parenchyma of the membrane in which they terminate.

243.
In newborn infants, the chamber destined for the immediate reception of
odours is narrow, and as yet extremely imperfect. The sinuses, of which we have
already spoken, have at this time scarcely made their appearance: hence,
infants do not acquire the sense of smelling till a late period, as the
expansion and complete formation of their internal nares are but gradually and
very slowly accomplished. The larger those instruments become, and the more
accurately they are formed and finished, the more exquisite will be the
acuteness and perfection of this sense.

244.
Finally, it is a truth well worthy of being remembered, that there is scarcely
another external sense, which possesses such a powerful connection with, and
influence over, both the sensorium itself, and the internal senses, as that of
smelling.

There is none subject to such striking diosyncrasies; none better calculated
either to produce, to prevent, or to remove, paroxysms of fainting.

Neither is there any one susceptible of more delicate and pleasing
impressions; the smell is, therefore, happily termed by Rousseau the sense of
the imagination.

Nor are there, lastly, any other species of sensations that appear to excite
so clear and vivid a remembrance, as that which specific odours recall to the
memory.

SECT. XX. OF HEARING.
244.
SOUND, which is excited by a tremulous collision of elastic substances, and
propagated from sonorous bodies, through the medium of the air, is at length
perceived by the sense of hearing, after having proceeded onward in the
following order: viz. it is first received by a shell-formed cartilage
denominated the external car, over which a few of the human species possess a
power of voluntary motion: being collected and concentrated, as it were, by
means of this concha or shell, it passes immediately into the meatus
auditorius, which is thoroughly anointed and defended by a very bitter and
som^what yellowish cerumen, or wax-like substance: at the internal extremity of
this meatus auditorius it strikes against the membrana tympani, which is
situated in an oblique position, is firmly attached to an annular groove in the
os temporis, and forms a complete partition between this meatus auditorius, or
passage for sound, and the middle portion of the ear.

246.
Behind this membrane, the middle portion of the ear, denominated the cavity of
the tympanum, is so situated as to have its fundus or bottom pointing upwards
and inwards.

It contains three small bones, belonging to the organ of hearing, the external
of which, called the malleus, is connected by its handle to the membrane of the
tympanum; from its spinous process, which runs in a forward direction, a bulb
or globe is formed, (especially in an adult subject), with an annular groove
surrounding its base; this small globular head rests on the body of the incus.

The incus itself is attached to the minute knob or head of the stapes, by its
longer process, which extends nearly to the middle of the cavity of the
tympanum.

Finally, the stapes, resting its basis on the fenestra ovalis, looks toward
the vestibulum of the labyrinth, into which, sound, having percussated against
the membrane of the tympanum, is propagated by means of the connections of
those three osiccula or small bones.

247.
The Eustachean tube, running from the interior parts of the fauces, opens also
into the cavity of the tympanum; the inferior winding passage of the cochlea
enters likewise into the same cavity; over the mouth or orifice of this
passage, called the fenestra rotunda, a fine membrane of a peculiar nature is
expanded. Physiologists have not yet ascertained and demonstrated, in a clear
and satisfactory manner, the uses of either of those two last mentioned parts.

248.
Lastly, in the deep and hidden recesses of the o^ petrosum lies the labyrinth,
or internal portion of the ear, which embraces again three several parts.

These are the vestibulum, which is situated in the middle between the other
two, and into which open, besides the fenestra ovalis, both the five mouths of
the semicircular canals that run in a backward direction, and also the superior
winding passage of the cochlea, which extends and lies anteriorly.

249.
The labyrinth itself contains a very subtle, limpid water, which has been
named after the illustrious Cotunnius, and which had celebrated physiologist
discovered to be absorbed by two very minute canals: these small canals, called
by Cotunnius, aqueducts, (and by Meckel diverticula), arise, the one from the
vesti^ulum itself, the other from the inferior winding passage of the cochlea.

250.
The soft portion of the seventh pair of nerves, together with the hard, (which
afterward passes through the aqueduct of Fallopius), having entered the
internal chamber of hearing, transmits its medullary filaments through the
perforated bottom of that cavity. These filaments pass, in part, to the
vestibulum and semicircular canals, but are distributed more especially over
the base of the cochlea, where their extremities are arranged in such a manner
as to run between the laminae or plates of the septum of the cochlea,
exhibiting the appearance of a fine medullary zone, beautifully ornamented with
plexiform striae or streaks.

251.
The oscillatory tremor which we formerly traced and followed up, even to the
fenestra ovalis, ( 246.), is from thence propagated to the vestibulum, where,
finally, through the medium of the subtle aqueous liquid already described (
249.), it strikes and impresses the auditory nerves themselves, which are
distributed with infinite art and ingenuity throughout the mazy circumvolutions
of the labyrinth.

252.
The impetus of sound, striking against the membrane, and being propagated
through the cavity of the tympanum, is thought to be modified and regulated,
not only by the muscles of the malleus and stapes, which appear, in their
contraction and relaxation to be subject to the influence of the will, but also
by the chorda tympani, which is situated in the middle, between the handle of
the malleus and the longer leg of the incus.

SECT. XXI. OF VISION.
253.
THOSE rolling or versatile globes, denominated eyes, are to be considered as
the immediate instruments of the sublime sense of vision. They are fixed as if
on footstalks, by their optic nerves (respecting the decussation of which we
have already spoken, 205.), in such a manner, that their insertions are not
directly opposite to the centres of the cornea and iris, but are placed behind
the imaginary axes of the eyes, in situations somewhat nearer to the nose.

254.
Each orb is composed of various tunics or coats, which enclose humors of
different densities, and so extremely pellucid, that the rays of light, having
entered the pupil or window in the anterior segment of the orb, can pass
through, without the least interruption, to its bottom or opposite side.

255.
The external involucrum of the globe of the eye is called sclerotica, the
anterior hiatus or chasm of which is closed up by the transparent cornea, which
is a lamellated membrane, more or less unequal, and projects in a slight degree
forward, like a segment of a smaller globe protruding out of a larger.

256.
Next to the sclerotica lies the tunica choroidea, which abounds in
blood vessels, more especially in verticose or circuitous veins: this coat is
stained on each side by a black pigment, which loosely adheres to its concave
surface after the manner, and with the appearance, of mucus.

257.
The choroides encloses, finally, the retina, which is the most internal of the
common tunics embracing the visual orb. This coat consists entirely of the
medullary substance of the optic nerve, which having perforated the sclerotica
and and choroidea, is expanded on the concave surface of this last involucrum,
and there arranged with the utmost beauty and elegance of structure.

258.
The anterior border of the tunica choroidea terminates in a cellular ring,
which is denominated orbiculus ciliaris, and by means of which the choroides is
more firmly attached to a corresponding groove or depression in the sclerotica.
From this cell^^ar girdle or attachment, two other membranes of different
kinds, (namely, the iris and ciliary processes), originate and diverge from
each other, like two expanded circles.

259.
The iris (the posterior surface of which, being overspread with a dark
pigment, is denominated uvea) is situated anteriorly, is gently unequal on the
surface next the cornea, and is surrounded on all sides by a humor of an
aqueous nature. That segment of the iris, which lies next the nose is narrower,
while that which looks toward the temples is possessed of greater expansion.
Its texture consists entirely of condensed cellular membrane, without the
smallest vestige of muscular fibers; upon the whole, it appears to be in
reality a membrane sui generis, as was formerly well observed by Zinn, and not
by any means an appendage to the choroides. On its anterior surface it is
differently colored in different individuals, and while distended and animated
with a plenitude of life, it exhibits somewhat of a sloccose appearance.

260.
The blood vessels of the iris run principally on its anterior surface, and, in
the foetus, are continued into what is called the membrana pupillaris:
respecting the nature and use of this membrane, I have spoken more fully in
another place Commentat. societ. scient. Goettingens. T. VII.
. It appears to be intended for the purpose of preserving the iris, (during the
rapid growth of the ball of the eye), in a state of expansion, and thus
rendering it more fit for future motion.

About the seventh or eighth month of pregnancy, when the ball of the eye has
now acquired a considerable magnitude, this membrane begins to open and give
way in its center; the elliptical arches of its vessels are retracted in a very
gradual manner, and thus form, in my opinion, the small interior ring of the
iris; it is, at least, certain, that not a single trait of this ring can be
discovered in the eyes of a foetus previously to the abovementioned period.

261.
The p^sterior of those two orbicular membranes, of which we have already
spoken, ( 258) is called the ciliary body or band; it runs in a backward
direction, and therefore, in its progress, diverges still farther from the
iris; by its external border, which is gross and firm, it is attached to the
orbiculis ciliaris ( 258), but by its internal, which is more fine and
delicate, it embraces the margin of the capsule of the lens: it is also shaded
with that same dusky pigment, of which we have twice already spoken.

Its anterior surface, lying opposed to the uvea, is somewhat striated.

Its posterior surface, resting on the vitreous substance, is distinguished by
about seventy plicae or folds, which exhibit an extremely elegant floccose
appearance; these are called ciliary processes, and are remarkable for a
vascular apparatus of inexpressible subtlety and beauty.

262.
In the eye-ball itself, the membranes of which we have been hitherto
describing, there are enclosed, in particular, three different humors.

The vitreous humor occupies and fills the posterior, and by far, the
greatest, portion of the visual orb. It is distributed, in a countless number
of minute drops, throughout as many minute cells of the membrana hyaloidea, in
such a manner, that the whole mass, consisting, in part, of membrane, and in
part, of lymph, exhibits the appearance of a peculiar, tremulous jelly.

263.
The anterior part of this vitreous substance, has appended to itself, and
embraces, in the ciliary girdle, a capsule, in which is contained the
chrystaline lens, surrounded on all sides by a very subtle water, first
discovered and described by Morgagni.

This lens itself, is also composed of extremely pellucid cellular membrane; it
is by far more dense than the vitreous substance, and is furnished with so
minute a quantity of genuine humor, that, when pressed between the fingers, it
resembles glue of the most tenacious consistence, but at the same time of
astonishing transparency.

264.
The remaining portion of the internal cavity of the eye, is filled up by an
exceedingly limpid aqueous humor, and, by the expanded orbicular curtain of
the iris, is divided into two chambers: these are, the anterior, or more
capacious chamber, which separates the cornea from the iris, and the posterior
one, of smaller dimensions, extending from the uvea to the corpus ciliare.

265.
These most precious and inestimable parts of the body, as Pliny, the elder,
has emphatically called the eyes, are securely protected from external
injuries, as well by their recluse situations in their orbits, as by their
valviform coverings, the palpebrae.

Between the folds of the palpebrae are planted, in immense profusion, the
crowded sebaceous follicles of Meibomius; their extreme or lower edges, fringed
with three or four phalanges of cilia or lashes, are kept in an expanded state
by certain cartilages called tarsi, which are also of further service in
facilitating the motion of the palpebrae on the eye balls.

But (to adopt the language of the eloquent Cicero) the parts situated
immediately above the palbebrae, being closely mantled in the supercilia or
eyebrows intercept and turn aside the sweat flowing down in streamlets from
the head and face, and also serve to moderate, in a certain degree, the
excessive effulgence of light.

266.
For the purposes of lubricating the eyes, of preserving their splendour, and of
washing out heterogeneous substances, the tears are provided: the principal
source of this fluid is a small conglomerate gland, deeply situated in a
depression toward the external part of the circumference of the orbit. The
excretory ducts belonging to this gland are numerous, but extremely tender;
they are supposed to convey, from both eyes, in the course of twenty-four
hours, about two ounces of tears; After having been excreted, the tears are
again absorbed by the puncta lacrymalia, from whence they are conducted through
what are called the cornua limacum, or snail's horns, to the lachrymal sac, and
from thence finally discharged into the lowermost passage of the nares.

267.
Thus much it was necessary to premise respecting the admirable structure of
the visual organ. We come now to treat of the functions of this organ, or, in
other words, to consider the doctrine of vision.

All the rays of light which fall on the unequal surface of the cornea pass
through it, provided their angle of incidence be less than that of 48 degrees.
In consequence, not only of the density, but also the figure of the aqueous
humor, the rays are refracted in that medium, and turned a little nearer to
the real axis.

As many of the rays as, having passed through the pupil, enter the crystalline
lens, must necessarily, in this more dense medium, be subjected to a still
higher degree of refraction.

But by means of the more attenuated and less refractive vitreous medium, wise
provision is made to prevent these rays from uniting in a focal point at too
short a distance: this point, being thus farther removed from the unequal
surface of the cornea, falls on the retina, and there exhibits, i^ an inverted
position, the images of all objects presented, and that in perfect
correspondence to the nature of surrounding and attendant circumstances.

268.
This difference in the density of the refracting media of the eye, exhibits a
very striking instance of the exquisite and inimitable workmanship of the
divine creator. By means of this diversity, such a complete remedy is provided
against the twofold separation or divergency of the rays of light, (the one
arising from the different refrangibility of the different colored rays, the
other from the very figure of the lenses), that they are all finally collected
and united in the same focal point.

269.
The celebrated problem, in which the cause is demanded, wherefore we see those
objects erect, the images of which are nevertheless exhibited in an inverted
position on the retina? appears to admit of an easy solution, when we consider,
that objects are said to be inverted, only from the relation they bear to
others, which are exhibited in an erect position.

In as much then as the images, not of a few, but of all objects, even of our
own bodies, are received by the retina in the same relative position, the
situations and relations of the whole of them harmonize and correspond to one
another, equally as well, as they could possibly have done, had their positions
been truly erect: in consequence of this, the mind, (which does not attend to
the image itself, but to the sensation excited by its impression), is
sufficiently guarded against embarrassment and mistake.

270.
In as much as the conditions, essentially necessary for the purposes of acute
and distinct vision, are extremely numerous and varied, the creator of man has
made the wisest provision for these, by endowing the part, subservient to this
sublime sense, with a great variety of functions.

As a certain adequate, but yet definite, quantity, and not too potent a glare,
of light, is essential to the existence of clear and per^ ^or a (...) fold
caution is thus taken; first, to admit, (^cording as the light (...) ^nger or
weaker) a greater or less column of rays to fall on the ^e^^^ and secondly,
that all superfluous rays which enter the eye, and tend only to d^zzle by the
intensity of their splendor, be absorbed and rendered inactive.

The former of these purposes is effectually accomplished by the motion of the
iris; the latter, by means of the black pigment.

271.
The iris possesses an astonishing mobility, by which it accommodates itself so
perfectly to the quantity of light acting on it, that when exposed to a more
intense glare, it is immediately expanded, and thus diminishes the size of the
pupil, but wh^ subjected to the action of a weaker light, it (...) again
retracted, and the pupil consequently ^larged.

Physiologists have attempted a satisfactory explanation of this motion, in a
variety of mo^ses, founded on different principles; by some it has been derived
from diversified ^lses of the blood on the tender vessels of the moving part,
while others have figured to themselves the existence of certain imaginary
muscles in the iris, and have committed to them the whole of the phenomenon in
question, etc. But I have lately made it appear in a separate paper, that
neither of these modes of explanation is well founded, but that it is much more
agreeable to evidence, and correspondent to the phenomena of nature, to derive
the immediate cause of the motion of the iris from its vita propria, or
specific life. ( 47.) The more remote cause of this motion, as we observed on a
former occasion ( 250), cannot be referred to any other source, than the
re-action of the sensorium itself.

272.
The function of this dusky pigment, of which we have already so repeatedly
spoken ( 256, 259 261,) to wit, that it is destined to absorb the superfluous
rays of light, and is hence of the utmost importance in the business of perfect
vision, may, besides other arguments, be safely inferred from dissections of
the eyes of various animals; but is more completely demonstrated and
established, by the morbid constitution of the white Aethiopians, or Albinos,
as they are called, in whom, from a deficiency of this pigment, the organs of
vision are painfully tender, and the impulse of light consequently too powerful
to be borne.

273.
It is further requisite, that the focus of refracted rays be perfectly formed
on the retina, (...) that it may strike the very point of vision, and (...)
neither so far extended as to fall behind it, nor (...) much contracted as to
terminate before it, in the vitreous substance.

The latter of these deviations from perfect vision is what takes place in
those individuals called myopes, in whom the lucid cornea is rather too unequal
and gibbous.

But the former deviation is that under which the presbytae labor, as the
conformation of the anterior parts of the eyes is directly the reverse.

274.
But as an eye perfectly sound is able to discern, with equal distinctness,
bodies, whether at a greater or less distance, it must, without doubt, be
furnished with peculiar faculties or powers of accommodating itself to the
various distances of objects. That these internal and accommodating changes of
the eye, are in a great measure produced by the pressure of the recti muscles
on the ball which they embrace, is a position so clear, and apparently well
founded, as scarcely to admit of a doubt. Besides other arguments which might
be advanced in favor of this opinion, I am induced to adopt it in
consideration of the very singular structure, and extreme flexility, of the
sclerotica, in the eye of the Greenland phoca, or sea-calf. By this peculiarity
of fabrication and arrangement, nature has made the most exquisite provision to
enable this amphibious animal to enjoy at all times, the advantages of vision,
though passing its life alternately in media of very different densities.

275.
By means of these same muscles, our eyes, whilst we are awake, are perpetually
agitated, although with an almost insensible motion, and so directed as to have
their visual axes arranged in right lines with the objects viewed. For although
the whole of the retina be possessed of sensibility, yet it is not in every
part equally well adapted to receive the images of objects.

For at the genuine axis of the eye-ball, in the place, for example, where the
optic nerve enters, it appears, from the well-known and celebrated experiment
of Mariotte, that the human eye is destitute of the power of vision.

But the principal focus of the retina, and that which ought to be considered
as the leading and immediate instrument of distinct vision, is situated in an
imaginary axis of the eye-ball, which is supposed to pass through the center of
the cornea, and to be thus continued through the center of the whole orb. It is
not, however, (as was lately observed by the celebrated Kaestner in his
comments on certain works of Boerhaave), to be from hence understood, that we
are unable to set cle^ly and distinctly, more than one single point of an
object while the eye remains perfectly at rest, and that we are obliged to
shift or alter its axis in order to distinguish any other point. The case is
quite otherwise, because the sensation produced by one entire object, is also
itself, like its original, or exciting cause, one and entire.

276.
The habit of directing the axis of the eye with dispatch and facility toward
the object of vision, is finally acquired only by use and daily exercise. That
this is a position founded in truth, is demonstrated not only by the example of
such individuals as, having been born blind, acquired afterward the power of
vision in adult age, but also by that of tender infants, who seldom attain to
this happy facility of moving their eyes previously to the third month after
birth.

277.
To the same power of custom and habit, must we also attribute the remarkable
circumstance of our seeing objects only single, though our eyes be two in
number. Newborn infants appear to see objects double, and double vision, which
frequently continues sometime after certain diseases of the eyes, may be at
length overcome and removed by use and exercise.

278.
The joint power of both eyes, with regard to the acumen and strength of
vision, does not, according to the calculation of Jurin, exceed that of one
eye, more than a thirteenth part.

And, agreeably to an observation, long since made by that celebrated painter
Leon. da Vinci, it is much best in judging of the distances of objects to make
use of one eye only.

279.
Finally, In treating of the strength and perfection of the eye, our former
illustrious countryman, Tob. Mayer, demonstrated, by a series of very elegant
and ingenious experiments, that the angle of vision ought to exceed, in
dimensions, at least 34 seconds of a degree. From hence he at the same time
illustrated and proved the extreme perfection of the human eye, because this
extent of the angle of vision may continue nearly the same, under any light
whatever, whether that of the meridian sun, or that of a weak lamp, so that
though the window or pupil of the eye be greatly contracted and diminished, yet
the clearness of vision can, from that source, be scarcely in any degree
affected.

280.
From hence we may infer, the inconceivable smallness of the images of objects
which are thrown and delineated on the retina, and which are nevertheless
impressed with so much force, that, under certain circumstances, vestiges of
them remain a considerable time, even after the objects themselves have been
entirely removed from the eye.

SECT. XXII. OF THE INTERNAL SENSES, AND OTHER FACULTIES OF THE MIND.
281
THROUGH the medium of those external senses, of which we have hitherto
treated, ideas are conveyed to our nobler part, the mind; for, agreeably to the
tenor and spirit of a well-known theorem, nothing can enter the understanding
save by the route or avenue of the senses.

282.
For the purposes of receiving and preserving the ideas thus acquired, by the
aid of the senses, and also for making the best use and improvement of the
intellectual stock received, various faculties of the mind contribute their
united exertions. Though these faculties be, (as we have already had occasion
to observe, 42.), widely different from the vital energies which reside in the
body, nevertheless, by means of the nervous system, they are so closely
connected with those corporeal energies, that an astonishing intercourse is
thus established and supported between the body and mind, ( 211.)

283.
The first of those powers, possessing indeed, apparently, the lowest grade, is
the faculty of perception, by means of which the mind is rendered conscious of
impressions made on the different organs of sense.

284.
This faculty is aided by another, of better rank and higher dignity, namely,
attention, which so directs and determines the mind toward any idea when once
excited, as to rivet its thoughts to that object alone.

285.
For the important purposes of preserving ideas, which have been already
perceived, of re-exciting them, and associating them into more lively and
picturesque species of imagery, two other faculties, called internal senses,
are brought into action: these are memory and imagination, two powers, which,
though nearly allied to each other, may, notwithstanding, be readily
distinguished by the following characters: memory appears to be more
subservient to, and engaged in, the reception and retention of arbitrary signs
of things; whereas, imagination, on the contrary, wakes up rather the very
images of things, bestows on them form and coloring, and marshals them under
the view of the mind, as if the objects themselves were again actually present:
this faculty is more particularly and powerfully exercised on such objects as
are calculated to excite sensations of pleasure or disgust.

286.
Upon the whole, the faculty of choosing and refusing, and, (when we consider
the matter a little more minutely), even the foundation of the whole will
itself, appear to rest and depend entirely on certain agreeable and
disagreeable varieties of sensation.

287.
From the same prolific source, namely, the imagination, are also to be derived
the affections or commotions of the mind, to which we see different individuals
variously subjected, in conformity to the countless diversities of existing
temperaments ( 59.) The very intimate and instantaneous consent of these
affections with certain functions of the body, appears strikingly evident in an
infinitude of examples; thus, for instance, there is scarcely a single passion
of the mind, which does not possess considerable influence over the motion of
the heart, the appetite for food, and the powers of digestion, -- not to
descend to a minute specification of particular effects, such, for example, as
the action of shame in giving rise to blushing, the action of love or hatred on
the organs which serve to distinguish the sexes, the action of anger on the
secretion of bile, etc. etc.

While speaking of the effects produced in the economy of the human body, by
the commotions of the mind, it is proper to observe, that they may be divided
into stimulant and sedative, or into those which excite, and those which
depress.

Of the former description are joy, love, hope, anger, etc.

Of the latter, fear, sorrow, nostalgia, and other species of permanent desire
or longing, terror, envy, etc.

288.
Those faculties of the mind hitherto enumerated, are observed to exist in
brutes as well as man, though the latter undoubtedly possesses them in by far
the highest degrees of strength and perfection: thus, for example, in none of
the interior animals do we discover a memory so extensive in its range, and so
powerful in its tenacity; in none do we discover such a splendid brilliancy,
and glowing warmth of imagination; in none do we discover such an unbounded,
and sometimes fatal, vehemence of mental passions, etc.

289.
The leading prerogative of the human mind, consists in this, that it alone
possesses the exclusive power of reason, by means of which it is able to judge,
to form abstract ideas, etc. and which exerts also the greatest influence over
most of the other faculties of the mind. In place of this divine power, other
animals are endowed with various instincts, or blind and involuntary impulses,
which lead them to the performance of such actions, as are suitable to their
several economies and modes of life. Of these instinctive impulses man, on the
other hand, is furnished with scarcely any, save that which prompts him to
participate in venereal gratifications.

290.
The immense and striking difference between animal instinct and human reason,
will appear glaring as the noonday light to him who considers:

That instincts are faculties co-eval with birth, whereas, on the other hand,
the use of reason is acquired only by culture and education:

That instincts remain stationary, and admit of no improvement, whereas the
expansive improvement and exercise of reason, are literally free from
circumscription:

That instincts are suited only to the destined mode of life, to the climate,
etc. of each species of animals, and, on this account, are not adequate to the
exigencies of man, who, confined to no climate, exclusively restricted to no
mode of life, is destined to be an inhabitant of the world at large: from which
boundless and splendid prerogative, an inconceivable diversity of wants arise,
which simple instinct is too weak! -- far too weak to supply! b^ ^h, the powers
of reason, from resources equally diversified as the emergencies themselves,
are able to satisfy, in the most ample and complete manner.

Lastly, another high prerogative of man, depending on the powers and exercise
of his reason, is the use of speech, of which we have briefly spoken on a
former occasion ( 154.) This invaluable privilege is the exclusive boast of man
alone, brutes being only furnished with voice, or a power of emitting sound.

SECT. XXIII. OF THOSE ACTIONS OF THE BODY WHICH ARE SUBJECT TO THE POWER OF
THE WILL.
291.
THE nerves, as we have already seen, are so constituted as to perform two
different functions ( 215), namely, sensation and motion. The doctrine of the
former we have already considered. It yet remains to add a few observations on
the subject of the latter.

292.
The motions in general of the several parts of the human body, are usually
divided into two classes, one of which is excited and governed by the power of
the will, while the other is not in any measure subject to its influence, or
control.

For examples of the latter class, physiologists commonly refer to the
harmonious action of the heart, and likewise to the peristaltic motion of the
intestines and certain other viscera, etc.

Instances of the former class we have in the motions of by far the greater
part of the other muscles of the body.

Doubts are still entertained, with respect to the real nature of certain
motions which take place in the human system; such as the motions in
respiration, in sneezing, in the tension of the membrana tympani, etc. These
are by some classed with the voluntary, by others with the involuntary, while
others again refer them to a third class, called mixed motions.

293.
When this division, however, is considered with a little more steadiness and
attention, it is easily perceived to be embarrassed with such momentous
difficulties, that it is scarcely possible to ascertain, and mark, with
definitude, the precise limits between the classes.

For, on the one hand, a few of the functions of our bodies, over which the
will, unassisted by other powers, may be said to possess no command at all, may
notwithstanding be excited and brought into action, when the imagination and
passions of the mind act in concert with the will.

On the other hand there are not wanting instances of muscular functions,
which, though naturally subject to the immediate command of the will, have,
notwithstanding, been rendered in a great measure involuntary, by the plastic
power of custom, (the influence and energetic agency of which, on animal
motions, are indeed of the utmost moment and importance.)

294.
Of this latter description are those kinds of muscular motion, which, although
at other times subject to the control of the will, yet, under certain
circumstances, take place not only without the consciousness, but even contrary
to the inclination of the mind.

Thus, for example, we wink contrary to our determination, when the finger of a
friend is hastily approached toward our eye, although it does not touch it;
and in most persons, the flexion of the little finger is usually attended with
a synchronous flexion of the ring finger, though a determination had been
formed to preserve the latter entirely unbent.

Without the consciousness of the mind we frequently move our limbs, even when
wrapped in the most prosound sleep.

There are, on the other hand, examples of muscles, which, although for the
most part perfectly obedient to the will, yet in certain cases refuse to obey
its commands. To this head we may refer the difficulty of describing, by
synchronous movements, circles in contrary directions, with the hand and foot
of the same side, together with other motions of a similar nature, which,
although truly voluntary, and extremely easy when practiced alone, are,
notwithstanding, performed with the utmost difficulty, if an attempt be made to
associate them with certain other motions.

295.
With respect to those motions, which physiologists suppose to be perfectly
exempt from the influence of the will, I know of none which can be clearly and
unexceptionably referred to this head, save the spasms of the uterus in the
labor of part^rition.

With respect to the pulsation of the heart, a very remarkable account stands
on record of a British colonel, who possessed a power of suspending, at
pleasure, the motion of both the heart and arteries. In confirmation of the
truth of this, we have the public testimony of Baynard and Cheyne, two
physicians of the highest reputation and veracity, who were themselves
witnesses to the astonishing phenomenon.

That the motion of the stomach may be voluntary, (as indeed the process of
rumination in general seems to evince), I had once an opportunity of
ascertaining, to my entire satisfaction, in a ruminating human subject, in whom
this retrogade or reverted motion of the stomach, was under the most perfect
subjection to the command of the will.

Although the motion of the iris be involuntary, in by far the greater part of
the human race, I have, notwithstanding, been favored with an account,
sufficiently authenticated, of a man, who possessed a power of voluntary
command over this membrane, in such a manner, as to be able, by a very singular
effort, to contract the pupil of the eye even in a weak and dull light.

There are indeed a great variety of motions, which, though generally performed
without the influence of the mind, are nevertheless voluntary in certain
individuals, especially if a high degree of attention, and a vigorous effort of
imagination be excited. Thus, I have known men, who were able at any moment, to
produce and exhibit on themselves a spasmodi^ ho^ipilation of the skin, and
also to renew and completely revive i^ themselves the ideas or perception of
certain disagreeable sensations.

296.
Perhaps those phenomena may be satisfactorily explained from the re-action of
the sensorium, which appears to be indeed as powerfully excited by means of the
imagination waking up and exhibiting before it, the image of an active
stimulus, as by the stimulus itself, when impressing it by its actual presence.
There are indeed an infinitude of phenomena of the animal economy, which
admirably correspond to this explanation; as the various causes, for example,
which excite erections of the male penis, etc.

297.
With regard to voluntary motions in general, it may be proper finally to
observe, that they are among the primary and leading characteristics which
serve to distinguish the animal from the vegetable kingdom; for, as on the one
hand, a power of voluntary motion is never observed to be possessed by any
plant, so on the other, such a power constitutes an essential attribute of even
the most simple and imperfect genera of animals.

298.
In our own systems, the voluntary motions furnish the most full and striking
evidence, of that intimate and truly astonishing harmony, which subsists
between the mind and the body. Of the existence of this harmony every one will
be convinced, who considers with attention, the amazing celerity with which
such diversied motions succeed each other, in the fingers of an able and
skillful performer on the violin, or in our organs of speech, while we are
engaged in conversation.

SECT. XXIV. OF MUSCULAR MOTION.
299.
THE immediate organs of by far the greater number of the motions of our
bodies, are the muscles, which constitute the principal portion and bulk of
what are called parts similares.

300.
The muscles are, however, distinguished, in a particular manner, from the rest
of the similar parts, by a twofold characteristic; one depending on their
texture; and the other of a very singular nature, derived from their vital
energy.

301.
Their texture is fleshy, composed of a peculiar set of fibers, of a very pale
red color: they are so joined together, that every muscle consists, in the
first place, of fibrous cords, these cords again, of smaller bundles of fibers,
which bundles, by a still further progressive division, may be finally
separated and resolved into fleshy fibers and fibrils of inconceivable
minuteness.

302.
Each muscle is enclosed in a cellular sheath or covering, which, passing into
the very substance of the muscle, appears to be interwoven throughout the whole
of its volume, and thus forms partitions, first between the larger lacerti,
then between the smaller fasciculi or bundles, and lastly, between the fibers
and more minute fibrils themselves.

303.
Besides this cellular expansion, the whole texture of the muscles is also
interspersed with an infinitude of blood vessels and nervous filaments; of
these, the latter appear to deliquate into an inscrutable pulp, and to be thus
very intimately blended along with the muscular fibers; but the former are so
extensively and minutely interwoven among those very tender fibers, as to paint
the whole of the fleshy parts with that beautiful crimson dye, by which they
are uniformly characterised. When these are thoroughly washed, they are again
restored to their native color, which, as already observed ( 301.), is
somewhat pale.

304.
Finally, a circumstance common to most of the muscles is, that they terminate
in tendons -- parts, which, though likewise of a fibrous texture, are
notwithstanding so extremely different, with respect to color, structure,
elasticity, etc. that their entire disagreement from both the preceding kinds
of fibers, is very easily ascertained and demonstrated. Hence, therefore, we
are enabled successfully to refute the opinion of those physiologists, who have
erroneously supposed, that the tendinous, are nothing more than mere
continuations of the muscular fibers. To the adoption of this opinion, they
have been inadvertently led by attending to the following phenomenon,
observable in the muscles of infants; namely, if we compare the muscular parts,
of these tender subjects, with those of adults, we will find the proportion of
flesh, to that of tendon, greater in the former than in the latter.

305.
The other exclusive characteristic of muscles, which we have mentioned ( 300.)
is, the irritability of Haller. Although we endeavored, on a former occasion,
to give a general view of this vital energy, and to ascertain the difference
between it and contractility, ( 44.), yet it may not be improper, at present,
to pursue the inquiry a little further.

306.
This irritability, otherwise called vis muscularis, vis insita, or vis
propria, is indeed common to all the muscular parts of our bodies, but does not
reside in all of them in the same degree, some parts being observed to possess
a much higher proportion of it than others.

The principal seat of this energy, where it most plentifully abounds, is the
hollow muscles, subfervient to the vital and natural functions: of these
muscles, the heart, as was observed formerly ( 119.), possesses the highest
degree of the characteristic now under consideration: of this last mentioned
organ, the internal surface, in particular, is endowed with the most exalted
degree of life, and is by far the most tenacious of irritability.

Next to the heart, in point of this prerogative, is the intestinal canal, more
especially that portion of it which constitutes what are called the small
intestines: in warm-blooded animals, this part of the tube sometimes contracts
on being irritated, even after the heart itself has become incapable of motion.

Next in degree is the stomach, -- next, the urinary bladder, etc.

Among the remaining muscles of the system, irritability resides, again, in a
very striking degree, in those actively concerned in the function of
respiration, as the diaphragm, the intercostals, and the triangularis sterni.

Next in order to these are the various other muscles of the body.

The arteries doubtless possess irritability, though in a degree far inferior
to what exists in the parts just mentioned ( 123.)

This vital energy resides also in the trunks of veins contained in the thorax,
( 84.)

In a degree still lower, does it exist, in the other parts of the sanguiferous
veins, if, indeed, those parts can be said to possess any genuine irritability
at all ( 128.)

307.
Haller himself, that illustrious defender of the doctrine now under
consideration, appears to me to have, without sufficient foundation, attributed
irritability to certain parts of the body, which are found, indeed, on
experiment, to be endowed with contractility ( 50 seq.), but in which I have
never been able to discover any indubitable testimonies of genuine irritability.

Among these parts may be reckoned the lacteal veins, the small glands, the
gallbladder, the uterus, the dartos covering, and the male penis.

On no better foundation, in my opinion, is irritability attributed, by others,
to the iris, to the external surface of the lungs, etc. in all which parts (if,
indeed, I be capable of judging rightly), there exists no more of this vital
energy, than there does in the common cellular membrane, and parts composed of
it, such, for instance, as the common integuments, the meninges, the pleura,
the peritoneum, the periosteum, the medullary membrane, the tendons, the
aponeuroses, etc.; or than there does in those viscera composed of genuine
parenchyma, ( 27.), such as the liver, the spleen, the kidneys, the secundines,
the brain, with the rest of the nervous system, etc. all which parts, as they
are throughout, completely destitute of muscular fibers, so are they likewise
destitute of irritability, which resides in muscular fibers alone.

308.
As we have, thus, on the one hand, seen muscular irritability now and then
confounded with cellular contractility, so on the other, certain celebrated
characters have lately been desirous of ascertaining and establishing an
identity between irritability and the vis nervea.

For although we can neither deny the powerful influence of the nerves on
muscular motion, (of which we will speak a few words presently), nor exhibit
the smallest fibril of muscular flesh, perfectly destitute of the pulp of
evanescent nerves, yet these circumstances are not sufficiently momentuous to
compel us to a dereliction of the opinion, that irritability is, in its own
nature, as widely and essentially different from the vis nervea as it is from
contractility. On the one hand, this energy is wanting in all parts not
muscular, although they be supplied with the utmost profusion of nerves, as the
skin, all the nervous viscera, etc.; whereas, on the other, we are not able to
produce any portion of true muscular flesh, where the genuine and obvious
phenomena of irritability do not exhibit themselves. From a close and impartial
consideration of the foregoing arguments, besides a great number of others
which might be advanced, it appears more consonant to reason and sound
induction, to attribute the singular phenomena of irritability to the equally
singular texture of muscular fibers, than to re^ them to the nerves, which, in
so many other pa^ of the body, are as minutely distributed as they are through
the muscles, and yet do not generate and exhibit, in those parts, the faintest
shadow of real irritability. I say nothing of the weighty arguments which might
be drawn from the following well-founded position, viz. that no steady
proportional relation is observed to exist, between the degree of irritability
in any part of the body, and the quantity of nerves with which it is supplied.

309.
With respect to the extreme terminations of the nerves, which are well known
to exert an influence over the muscles, the following appears to be the most
rational conclusion, viz. that they may be considered as remote or exciting
causes of muscular motion, but should not be confounded with the proximate or
efficient cause, which is indeed irritability alone, and that residing
exclusively in the muscular fibers.

The passions of the mind, for example, act on the sensorium, this again
re-acts on the nerves of the heart, in such a manner, as to excite its
irritability, and thus produce palpitations and other irregular motions of this
organ.

The will acts on the sensorium, this re-acts again on the nerves of the arm,
these nerves in like manner operate immediately as remote causes in exciting
muscular motion, which, notwithstanding, depends ultimately for its existence
on irritability itself.

310.
This distinction, of the two kinds of causes which concur in the production of
muscular motion, is indeed fully authorized and sanctioned by actual
experiments: from a variety of these it appears, that certain parts of the
animal system have been oftentimes rendered paralytic, by cutting, or enclosing
in ligatures, the nerves leading to them, while they have, notwithstanding,
still continued to retain their irritability for a long time afterward.

311.
In what degree the blood, with which the muscles are very abundantly supplied,
contributes to their action, is not yet clearly and satisfactorily ascertained.

It appears, however, from an experiment of Steno, that a paralysis of the
lower extremities may be generally produced, by passing a ligature round the
aorta in its descent behind the abdominal cavity.

312.
Besides these common inherent energies of the muscles, which have hitherto
been the subjects of our consideration, they possess also certain specific and
adventitious peculiarities, arising from varieties in their figures,
situations, etc. by these peculiarities they are adapted, and rendered
completely adequate, to the nice performance of their several functions.

313.
From the contemplation of this circumstance, muscles are usually divided into
hollow and solid: the former of these, as we have already seen, not being in
immediate subjection to the command of the will, are particularly destined to
the performance of the vital and natural functions, and cannot, therefore, be
further treated of in this place, where we are considering what are called
voluntary muscles, which are more especially subservient to that order
denominated the animal functions.

314.
Between these last-mentioned muscles themselves, there occur again very
striking diversities. For to say nothing of the varieties in their relative
magnitudes, they differ extremely from each other in the disposition of their
lacerti and fasciculi, in the direction of their fibers, but more especially in
the habit and proportional relation of their fleshy and tendinous parts, and,
finally in their courses, their insertions, etc.

315.
Nevertheless, in by far the greater part of the fusiform or tapering muscles,
their figures are more or less oblong, so that their fleshy bellies terminate
at each end in tendinous cords. These cords, which are inert and perfectly
destitute of irritability, being attached to, and inserted in, bones, serve the
necessary purpose of moving them after the manner of levers.

316.
As there are, however, a few muscles in the body entirely destitute of
tendons, such as the latissimus colli; so there are, in like manner, a few not
attached to bones, namely, the muscle last mentioned, the cremaster muscle, as
it is generally called, the azygos uvulae, and most of those which move the
ball of the eye.

317.
By the cooperation and combined aid ^all those energies, (as well the common,
305, as the proper, 312), with which the muscles are furnished these
instruments of motion are fitted and completely qualified for the performance
of their several actions, which may, in like manner, be also divided into
common and proper.

318.
During their common action, which arises immediately from irritability, and
occurs in all muscles, their fleshy portions become shorter, more rigid, and,
for the most part, unevenly and somewhat angular. It also appears from the
celebrated experiment of Glisson, that they suffer at the same time a slight
diminution in point of magnitude.

We are indeed prevented from joining Jo. and Dan. Bernouille, and other
mathematical physicians, in an attempt to reduce the measure of this diminution
to common calculation, first, by the immense difference in this respect, which
is observable between the hollow and solid muscles, and secondly, by the
diversity which also occurs, on the same point, between these latter muscles
themselves; -- not to mention various other difficulties, which obstruct the
road to success.

319.
The proper or specific actions of the muscles, ( 317.), correspond precisely
to their specific energies; from whence it naturally and spontaneously follows,
that these actions are marked with such an infinitude of varieties, as to
render it literally impossible to reduce them to any general laws, or to
arrange them under any well-defined orders and genera.

With regard to the general principle, commonly taught and adopted on this
subject, viz. that every muscle while in action, draws the more moveable part
to which it is attached, toward that which is more permanent, it ought to be
considered, (as has been very justly observed by the sagacious Winslow) in a
relative point of view, and is indeed subject to a variety of limitations.
Thus, for example, the two parts to which a muscle is attached, may be
rendered, each more moveable than the other, in alternate vicissitudes,
accordingly as the one or the other is fixed and rendered stationary, by the
joint action of other cooperating muscles.

As to the action of the flexor muscles, it ought to be estimated on contrary
principles, and a different opinion formed respecting it. Although these
muscles, for the most part, predominate so much over their antagonists, the
extensors, that when the body is in a state of perfect quietude and rest, the
arms, fingers, etc. are under a gentle degree of flexion, yet these parts do
not appear to be drawn into this state and position by any actual force, but
rather in consequence of a voluntary relaxation of their extensor muscles, by
means of which, those muscles, subservient to the flexion of the parts, are
left at liberty to act without opposition or resistance.

320.
To all the foregoing considerations, it appears proper to add, in the last
place, that each muscle possesses a peculiar and specific mechanism, by means
of which it is adapted, in the most complete manner, to the performance of the
various motions of its immediate destination.

Besides the peculiar advantages which the muscles severally derive from their
determinate figures, their actions are also promoted by a variety of other
concomitant aids, such, for instance, as the annular ligaments by which they
are surrounded; the fat, in which a great number of them are imbedded; the
lymphatic dew with which they all abound; and, what ought to have been
mentioned in the very first instance, the conformation of the skeleton itself,
especially as far as the same relates to the structure of the apophyses, and
the articulation of the joints: under the same head of auxiliaries to the
muscles, may be also arranged certain entire bones, as the paetellae, and ossa
sesimoidea, of similar structures and uses, which nature appears to have very
wisely adapted and destined to facilitate the motions of particular muscles.

321.
By these diversified and numerous aids, has nature made compensation for, or
at least very considerably diminished, that inevitable loss of power, which
necessarily arises from the conformation and statute of the whole body. The
acuteness of the angles formed by the insertions of a great many muscles, and
the vicinity of these insertions to the centres of motion, may be brought
forward as incontrovertible testimonies in favor of such a loss of power,
which would not have been sustained, had the tendinous cords been inserted at
greater distances from the centres of motion, or in such directions, as to have
formed more obtuse angles.

322.
To our bodies, thus furnished with about four hundred and fifty muscles,
together with a few occasional supernumeraries, (arising from sexual and
individual varieties), two advantages of the utmost magnitude and importance
are very obviously derived. First, in consequence of this beautiful and
complicated system of organs, not only our individual members, but also our
whole bodies, are rendered capable of the most astonishing agility, in point of
motion; and secondly, from the same source, we derive such remarkable degrees
of strength, as qualify us to bear, without injury, the most arduous species of
labor and fatigue. These two momentous advantages depend, indeed, in part, on
a perfect state of the muscles, to which, no less than to a perfect state of
the bones, we arrive by degrees, as youth advances toward maturity; but they
are also, in part acquired by a frequency of use and exercise. The powerful
influence which those two latter circumstances possess and exert over the
muscles, in strengthening them and rendering them capable of the utmost agility
of motion, is strikingly demonstrated by numerous examples of rope-walkers, of
dancers, of runners, of wrestlers, of boxers, and of those robust barbarians,
who constituted the glory and boast of former ages.

SECT. XXV. OF SLEEP.
323.
THOSE two species of nervous action, (the history of which we have now
completed) that have for their ultimate ends sensation and motion, are so
reduced and debilitated by the diversified exercises of the day, that repose by
night becomes absolutely necessary, for the purpose of refreshing their
declining vigor and energy, which sleep alone, the image, or semblance of
gelid death, is able completely to restore.

324.
Sleep is a function perfectly periodical, which suspends, as it were, for a
time, all intercourse and communication between the mind and body. The various
phenomena of this function, some of which shall be immediately enumerated,
appear to declare, with no small force of evidence, in favor of the existence
of a nervous fluid.

325.
Besides a variety of other circumstances, we may here enumerate as precursors
and harbingers of sleep, a sluggishness and gradually increasing dullness of
the external senses, together with a relaxation of most of the voluntary
muscles, especially such as are of considerable length. To these may be added a
congestion of the venous blood in, and near, the heart, and an effort to remove
the uneasiness thence arising, by the aid of yawning. Finally, the only
additional precursor to be mentioned at present, which appears to constitute
the very isthmus, as it were, between the waking and sleeping states, and the
immediate transition of the former into the latter, is a peculiar species of
transient delirium.

326.
The following are what constitute the principal phenomena of sleep, when that
state has actually occurred: the animal functions are wholly suspended from
action, while almost all the others are at the same time performed in a more
sluggish and torpid manner; thus, in subjects buried in sleep, all other
circumstances being alike, the pulse is slower, and the heat of the body
somewhat diminished; perspiration is also less plentiful; digestion less
powerful; and (if the occasional discharge of the semen masculinum be excepted)
all the excretions are suppressed, etc.

327.
The remote causes which induce sleep are very plain and obvious. For to say
nothing of narcotic substances themselves, we may consider as very energetic
causes in the production of this state, all waste of the animal powers by means
of preceding fatigue, by watching, etc. To these we may subjoin the influence
of custom, together with darkness, silence, rest, etc. which appear indeed to
derive their somniferous powers from the same source; we may also further add,
gentle, uniform, and constant impressions acting on any of the senses, such,
for instance, as the soft murmurings of the rill, or the appearance of a
harvest field, agitated and thrown into wavy undulations, by the mild fannings
of the western breeze, etc. Under the same head of remote causes we may also
consider, full meals, and intense cold acting on the body, together with a
variety of other circumstances, tending to derive the blood from the
encephalon, as pediluvia, clysters, and profuse hemorrhages, etc.

327.
Those remote causes which we have mentioned in the latter part of the
preceding paragraph, are, of themselves, sufficient to conduct us to the
proximate cause, which appears, from the best evidence that can be collected on
the subject, to consist in a diminution of the column of blood that goes to
supply the encephalon.

That this is indeed the proximate cause of sleep, is powerfully illustrated
and confirmed, by a very singular and striking phenomenon, which I had once an
opportunity of observing in a living human subject, whose case has been already
mentioned on another occasion. As often, and as long, as this person indulged
himself in sleep, his brain subsided and continued in a state of considerable
collapse, but during his waking hours throughout the day, this organ became
again turgid and distended in consequence of a more copious afflux of blood.

As an additional argument in support of the same cause, we may observe, that
morbid watchfulness, on the other hand, usually arises from congestions of
blood in the region of the brain.

329.
The quantity of sleep necessary, depends in a great measure on varieties in
age, habit of body, temperament, etc. The general result, however, of all the
existing evidences on this subject, appears to be, that a longer indulgence in
sleep is either a concomitant of imbecility (as is the case in tender infants.
and subjects far advanced in years), or a very exuberant source of fatuity and
dullness.

330.
We rise from sleep with renovated powers, and our return into the living, and
completely waking state, is accompanied with symptoms and phenomena very
similar to those which attended our transition from this state into that of
sleep: we are attacked, for instance, by a yawning, accompanied for the most
part with more or less of a stretching, we are also affected by a certain
dullness and torpidity of the senses, etc.

331.
The causes which rouse into wakefulness, appear to correspond exactly with
those productive of sleep.

The proximate cause will be the return of a more copious column of blood into
the encephalon.

The remote causes, besides the power of custom, which is confessedly very
great, consist of an immense variety of stimuli, that may be divided into
external and internal. The external are calculated to excite the slumbering
senses, while the internal act either immediately on the body itself, as the
distension of the urinary bladder; or impress the nervous system through the
medium of the imagination, the mode in which dreams operate.

332.
Dreams are light sportings of the imagination, in which it recalls the images
of things formerly perceived, and appears to exercise and busy itself in
arranging and combining them into the most fantastical representations.

I have never been able to discover the slightest vestige of this faculty in
newborn infants previously to the third month after birth.

There are also various examples of adults who explicitly declare, that they
have no knowledge of dreams, having never been troubled by them.

Those visions of the night are, for the most part, indeed, confused and
irre^ular; but they are, notwithstanding, sometimes marked with astonishing
vestiges of reason.

The influence of stimuli acting on the body is truly great in the production
of dr^ams: thus the stimulus of the male semen gives rise to lustful ideas; the
stimulus of an excessive plethora calls up images of a frightful and terrifying
nature, etc. We have even received a well confirmed account of a man, to whom,
while asleep, his friends could suggest whatever visions they pleased, by
communicating to him the subject and matter of the dream in a soft and gentle
tone of voice. This appears however, to belong rather to a preternatural state,
consisting of somnolency and wakefulness, of which that truly m^rbid affection
of the somnambulantes. or those who walk in their sleep, constitutes also
another variety.

It is necessary previously to the final conclusion of this subject to observe,
that Lock and others have thought proper to consider all dreams as belonging
to this mixed or compound state.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
Elements of Phsiyology; BY JO. FRED. BLUMENBACH, M.D. PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN
ORDINARY AT GOETTINGEN, MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF SCIENCES AT GOETTINGEN,
AND OF SEVERAL OTHER SOCIETIES IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF EUROPE.

Translated from the Original Latin, AND INTERSPERSED WITH OCCASIONAL NOTES.

BY CHARLES CALDWELL.

TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, BY THE TRANSLATOR, An APPENDIX, EXHIBITING A BRIEF AND
COMPENDIOUS VIEW OF THE EXISTING DISCOVERIES Relative to the Subject of ANIMAL
ELECTRICITY.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET.

M.DCC.XCV.

ELEMENTS OF PHYSIOLOGY.
SECTION XXVI. OF FOOD, AND THE APPETITE FOR IT.
332.
AS the waste of the animal powers is again restored by sleep, so in like
manner the incestant loss of the natural powers, and even of the very
elementary parts of the body, is repaired by fresh and repeated supplies of
food.

333.
To the acquisition and use of this food we are forcibly led by the frequent
and irresistible calls of nature. These calls, though widely different from
each other in their natures, tend notwithstanding to the final accomplishment
of the same end: they consist, on one hand, of the insupportable torments of
hunger and thirst; and on the other, of the very pleasing, but no less
powerful, allurements of appetite.

334.
The stimulus of hunger, some physiologists have sought for in the mutual
friction between the rugae of the stomach when empty; others in that which
appears, indeed, to be of primary importance in giving birth to this potent
sensation, namely, not only in a more copious secretion and afflux of the
humors discharged into the first passages, more especially of the saliva, the
pancreatic juice, and the bile, but also in a certain degree of morbid
acrimony, with which these same humors are apt to be contaminated, unless such
a state be guarded against by regular supplies of nourishment.

335.
Thirst is a distressing sensation, arising principally from a very troublesome
dryness of the fauces and esophagus; and also from a peculiar impression
produced by taking in acrid, but more especially saline, substances.

336.
With respect to the absolute necessity of satisfying and removing these
stimuli, no fixed and positive rule can with propriety be laid down, as such
necessity is doubtless rendered more or less urgent by varieties in age, habit
of body, and more especially by the power of custom. From a general
consideration of this subject, however, the result appears to be, that an adult
and healthy person, who is under no undue impressions or influence, (in whom,
for instance, those assuasive calls of nature are neither silenced by the
louder ravings of enthusiastic fanaticism, nor by other preternatural causes)
cannot refrain from the use of food, for even one whole day, without a very
great prostration of strength; and can seldom fast for more than eight days
without incurring the utmost hazard of life.

337.
With regard to drink, although a desire for this appears to urge with the
greater vehemence and intensity of the two, it is, notwithstanding, much less
necessary to life and health than the article of food. This we infer, with
apparently strict propriety and truth, not only from numerous species of
warm-blooded animals, as mice, quails, etc. that are never impelled by
necessity to the use of drink, but also from actual examples of certain
individuals of the human race, who have continued, through a long series of
time, in the enjoyment of life, health, and spirits, without recourse to the
use of drinks of any kind.

338.
As to food, controversies have existed respecting the kind most proper to
satisfy the internal calls of our nature: whether, for example, the structure
and constitution of the human body correspond most perfectly with food taken
from the animal, or with that derived from the vegetable, kingdom; and which of
these two kinds of substances nature, therefore, designed to constitute the
aliment of man?

339.
That man is by nature an herbivorous animal, Rousseau attempted, with a great
degree of acuteness, to prove, not only by arguments taken from the figure of
his teeth, and the length of his intestines, but by the further consideration,
that woman is naturally uniparous, and furnished with two mammae, etc.; to all
which might be added, actual examples of rumination having been performed by
human subjects, a process well known to belong exclusively to herbivorous
animals.

Those, on the contrary, who, with Helvetius, consider man as a carnivorous
animal, attempt to support their opinion by the shortness of his intestinum
caecum, and other arguments of a similar nature.

340.
But from more accurate observation, and a more minute investigation of the
subject, it appears, that nature did not intend to restrict man to the
exclusive use of either the one or the other of those kinds of aliment, but
more indulgently destined him to a free participation of both. That this is
indeed the kind destination of man with respect to the nature of his food, we
very naturally infer from his teeth, especially the molares, and the
conformation of his intestines, briefly mentioned above, possessing a middle
state between the same parts, as they exist in carnivorous and in herbivorous
animals. This prerogative of man is, however, still more forcibly demonstrated,
by the nature of the articulation which connects the condyles of the lower jaw
to the ossa temporum in human subjects.

341.
If the observations be true (and they surely cannot be doubted) which we
stated on a former occasion, respecting the high privilege of man, in being by
far better calculated than other animals for traversing an extensive range of
climate on the globe we inhabit, it from thence spontaneously follows, that he
would have been indeed very illy accommodated, in being solely restricted
either to the one or the other of the above kinds of food: for as some regions
of the globe afford animal, and others vegetable food alone, the obvious and
unhappy result of such an exclusive restriction would have be^n, that man,
though calculated and destined to reside in all latitudes of the earth, must,
notwithstanding, in some of them, be denied the use of such aliments as nature
had rendered essentially necessary to the continuatio^ of his existence.

342.
Of all animals, with which we are in any measure acquainted, man may, with the
strictest propriety and truth, be said to be omniverous. As on the one hand he
is calculated to banquet in luxury, amidst the most profuse variety of
delicacies that art can prepare from the immense resources of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms, so, on the contrary, he is able to retain his health and
vigor when subsisting on the most simple and frugal fare.

Thus, to produce only a very few examples, a great many men even at the
present day subsist solely on a vegetable diet, such as potatoes, chestnuts,
dates, etc. which constituted also the food of the first progenitors of the
human race: for it appears highly probable, that those simple and hardy sons of
nature, supported life first by the fruits and roots of plants, and afterward,
by the more substantial and durable fare of grains and pulse.

Some of the Moorish tribes in Africa live almost entirely on the gum senegal.

The inhabitants of Kamschatka and of a great many other maritime situations
subsist on fish.

In Europe itself, the Morlachi are supported almost entirely on a diet of
flesh.

Some nations of Barbarians subsist even on raw flesh, a circumstance which is
undoubtedly true, with respect to the Samoids, the Esquimaux, and certain
tribes of people inhabiting South America.

Neither are the liquids made use of as drinks, in certain nations, less
singular and striking.

Thus the inhabitants of several islands, which lie between the tropics, more
especially those situated in the Pacific Ocean, are entirely destitute of sweet
and pleasant water, and therefore, as a substitute for this fluid, use the
delicious juice of the lactescent cocoa.

Others again drink the waters of the briny ocean; -- from all which facts and
circumstances, taken collectively, together with an infinitude of others that
might be adduced, we need not hesitate a moment to pronounce, that man is
literally an omnivorous animal.

SECT. XXVII. OF MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.
343.
FOR the purpose of masticating the more solid species of food, both our under,
and upper jaws, are armed with three different kinds of teeth.

These are first, the incisores, which, in most men, are chisel-formed, and
well calculated to bite off morsels of food.

Secondly, the canini, strong, conical and completely adapted for breaking
substances of greater firmness.

And lastly, the molares, of different sizes, exquisitely fitted for the
process of grinding.

344.
The mandible or lower jaw is connected to the other parts of the head, by
means of a very singular variety of articulation, which appears to be of a
middle nature between arthroida and ganglimus. Being furnished with a pair of
double concave cartilages, it thus unites, to a sufficient degree of strength
and firmness, a capacity of being easily and very considerably moved in all
directions.

The under jaw is drawn back, in opening the mouth, chiefly by means of the
musculus biventer, but in part also by the geniohyoidei and the mylohyoidei.

It is brought back again, when we attempt to cut any thing through with the
dentes incisores, and pressed with astonishing force against the opposite jaw,
during our efforts to crush any hard substances, by the masseter and temporal
muscles.

It is moved laterally in chewing, by the action of the internal and external
pterygoid muscles; the latter of which have also the power of moving it in a
forward direction.

345.
Substances taken into the mouth for the purpose of being chewed, are retained,
placed in a proper situation, and thus effectually subjected to the action of
the teeth, by means of the musculus buccinator, and the tongue, an organ of
extreme flexibility, and very capable of changing its form ( 233).

346.
During the act of manducation we emulge, as it were, a certain quantity of
saliva, which is an aqueous liquid, of a nature somewhat saponaceous; it
contains a small quantity of earthy matter, (which gives origin to tartarous
incrustations of the teeth, and to small sublingual calculi); this fluid, from
being in perpetual contact with the tongue, makes no sensible impressions of
taste on that organ, although it contains a small quantity of microcosmic salt;
it possesses antiseptic and resolvent properties, and has also a power of
speedily exciting the process of fermentation in vegetable substances
especially in those of the farinaceous kind.

347.
The sources from whence this fluid is derived are, small conglomerate glands,
of three several orders, the lateral and internal, of which are situated
beneath the lower jaw.

The most considerable of these glands, called parotids, (remarkable, on
account of being extremely subject to metastases), excrete their saliva through
the Stenonian duct, just behind the middle molar tooth of the upper jaw.

The saliva furnished by the submaxillary glands, is discharged through the
duct of Wharton.

That derived from the sublingual glands, which are the least of all, flows
through the numerous ducts of Rivinus.

348.
The excretion of saliva, (of which, in conformity to the opinion of Nuck,
about a pint is commonly supposed to be secreted in the space of twelve hours),
is considerably increased both by the application of any stimulating substance,
and also by mechanical pressure, the latter of which appears to act merely by
emulging the containing parts.

Thus, whatever hard substances we chew, become perfectly moistened and
macerated, as it were, by a copious afflux of saliva produced in consequence of
the pressure, to which the parotids are particularly exposed from, being
situated so near to the articulation of the lower jaw.

With regard to the operation of stimuli on the secretion of this fluid, it is
necessary farther to observe, that when acrid substances are taken into the
mouth, a plentiful afflux of saliva is immediately produced, which has the
effect of diluting and thus effectually counteracting the irritating acrimony:
an increase of the same fluid is also occasionally produced by the stimulus of
the imagination; to this cause must we refer that afflux of saliva, which so
frequently accompanies a strong appetite for food.

349.
With the saliva are blended a fine aqueous, dew-like fluid, which transudes
from the soft parts of the mouth, and also a mucus, secreted by small glands,
situated in the lips and cheeks: it is a portion of this mucus by which the
tongue is lubricated.

350.
The morsel during mastication, being thoroughly moistened by this mixture of
saliva and other animal juices, is thus, not only converted by degrees into a
soft pulpy bolus, more fit for the purpose of deglutition, but is likewise
prepared, at the same time, for further digestion and final assimilation.

351.
The actual business of deglutition, although it appears to be of a very
compound nature, and is indeed performed by the cooperation of a great many
different parts, may be considered as commencing and proceeding in the
following order; viz. the tongue being first retracted toward its basis, and
becoming therefore somewhat turgid and stiff, receives on its excavated dursum
or back, the lubricated and moistened bolus, which is from thence forced
onwards into the fauces, where it is received by the expanded infundibulum of
the pharynx, which appears, at the same time, to advance somewhat upwards; on
the reception of the food the infundibulum makes a singular and violent
exertion, which may be supposed to proceed from a species of vita propria; from
this funnel-like entrance, the bolus is again protruded onward, by a threefold
contraction of the pharynx, into the oesophagus. All the above motions succeed
each other with the utmost degree of rapidity, and are of extremely short
continuance.

352.
For the purposes of expanding this passage, and rendering it at the same time
steady and secure, nature has made the most ample provision by a variety of
auxiliary parts.

The motion of the tongue, in this momentous business, is regulated and
directed by the os hyoideum.

To prevent any of the substances swallowed, from passing, by mistake, either
into the internal nares, or into the eustachean tubes, the soft palate is very
wisely provided. This fleshy curtain, depending equally from the arched roof to
which it is attached, is capable of being rendered tense by the action of a
peculiar set of muscles, and thus the above passages may be completely closed.

The glottis is securely guarded by the tongue itself, because at the very
instant in which we attempt to swallow, the larynx, being drawn upward and
forward, is in a certain degree concealed beneath the retracted basis of the
tongue, and is so compressed by it, that the glottis, not only by this
constriction, but also by the additional security of the epiglottis, is thus
very effectually guarded against the intrusive entrance of any heterogeneous
substances.

353.
Finally, the business of deglutition is greatly facilitated by means of a
quantity of mucus, with which the whole of the passage above described is
lubricated; and which, besides the lingual glands already mentioned ( 235), is
chiefly furnished by the numerous sinuses of the tonsils, and by that
infinitude of mucaginous cryptae, so profusely bestowed on the larynx itself.

354.
With respect to the oesophagus itself, through which all substances swallowed
must necessarily pass, previously to their entrance into the stomach, it is a
fleshy canal, rather narrow in its diameter, and exceedingly firm and strong,
but at the same time pliable, dilatable, and possessed of a high degree of
sensibility: it is composed of tunics or coats, which, if we except the
difference in their thickness, bear no small resemblance to the coats of the
other portions of the alimentary canal.

Thus, the external covering is muscular, made up of fibers running both
longitudinally and in transverse or circular directions.

The middle coat is nervous, ending on each side in a very lax cellular
membrane, by means of which it is connected, as well to the preceding, as to
the subsequent tunic.

Lastly, the internal coat is lined by mucus of an exquisite degree of
lubricity.

355.
The following appears to be the mode in which this canal performs its office;
as soon as it has received either a draught or bolus completely within its
parietes, the parts immediately above presently contract themselves, thus
forcing downwards the substance to be swallowed; which, if it be a bolus, can
be protruded onward only by one uniform series of exertions in the surrounding
tube, till it has passed through the diaphragm, and been finally received into
the cavity of the stomach itself.

SECT. XXVIII. OF DIGESTION.
356.
THE chamber, or immediate seat of digestion, is the stomach, a viscus more
uniformly possessed than any other, by almost every individual throughout the
immense range of animated nature: if, therefore, we estimate the dignity of the
several viscera from this circumstance alone, the stomach is, doubtless, to be
considered as an organ surpassing all the others in utility and importance to
the animal economy.

357.
The human stomach resembles a leathern pouch, of very considerable dimensions,
sufficient, for the most part, in an adult, to contain three pints, or more, of
water, and furnished with two separate orifices or mouths:

These are, first, a superior orifice, called cardia, which is formed in the
place where the oesophagus, by a plaited and somewhat oblique aperture, opens
into the stomach itself, and points toward the bottom of this viscus, or that
extremity which regards the left side of the body.

Secondly, an inferior one, which constitutes the termination of the right, and
less capacious end of the stomach: this orifice is called pylorus, and descends
a short distance into the cavity of the adjoining duodenum.

358.
The situation of the stomach, when empty, is different from that of the same
organ, when full: thus, in the former state, it hangs loose and flaccid in the
abdominal cavity, in such a manner that its greater curvature looks in a
backward direction; and its pylorus, being turned somewhat upwards, forms a
plaited or twisted angle with the duodenum, to which it is connected.

But in the latter state, when distended with food, its greater curvature is
again turned, and looks in an anterior direction, so that the pylorus enters
now, by a more direct route, into the duodenum; whereas the cardia, on the
contrary, is so folded and bent as to be completely closed.

359.
The stomach is composed of four principal coats, distinguished and separated
by three others, of an entirely cellular nature, which lie between them.

The most external of these coverings is common to the stomach, with all the
rest (save a small portion) of the alimentary canal, and is continued over the
omenta, which shall be spoken of hereafter.

Next to this, lies that cellulo-muscular coat, so very striking in its nature
and properties, on which depend both the exquisite irritability of the stomach
( 306.), and also its peristaltic motion; the latter of which shall be a
subject of consideration in another place. This coat is composed of different
strata of muscular fibers, which are usually divided into three orders, one
longitudinal, and two circular; the circular fibers are again divided into
those that are directly, and those that are obliquely, circular. It must,
however, be observed, that so extremely variable and irregular are the fibers
of this coat, with regard to their direction and distribution, as scarcely to
admit of reduction to, and arrangement under, any determinate and general rules.

The third principal coat is called the nervous, an appellation extremely
improper, as it is composed wholly of condensed cellular membrane, becoming
gradually more soft and lax on each side; by which means it is connected
externally to the muscular, and internally to what we shall presently call the
villous, coat. It is, notwithstanding, so firm and robust, that it may be aptly
enough called the basis of the whole stomach.

Lastly, the internal coat, which has been very improperly called villous, is
exceedingly tender, somewhat spongy, porous, and folded into a very great
number of rugae or wrinkles, so that its area is much more extensive than that
of any of the other coats which we have just described: it every where exhibits
cells of the utmost minuteness, somewhat similar in appearance to those larger
ones, with which the reticulum of ruminating animals is very beautifully and
elegantly characterized.

The internal surface of this coat is lined with mucus, apparently secreted by
small mucaginous cryptae, some of which may be, indeed, readily enough
distinguished near to the pylorus, or lower orifice of this organ.

360.
The stomach is furnished with an astonishing apparatus of nerves, whence its
sensibility is so exquisite, that it is capable of being very readily affected
by stimuli of almost every kind, whether they be external, as cold etc. or
internal as food, and even by the inquiline humors themselves. From the same
source arises also that extensive, and truly admirable consent, which exists
between this important viscus and most of the other functions of the body; to
which head belongs, in a particular manner, the striking effects, produced on
the stomach, by all mental commotious, and also, on the other hand, the very
powerful influence of an entirely sound and healthy state of this organ, on the
cheerfulness and serenity of the mind.

561.
The number and functions of the blood vessels, belonging to the stomach, are
no less considerable and striking, than those of the nerves. The small
arteries, (of which an infinitude of different orders, are minutely
interspersed throughout the cellular coats of this organ), appear to constitute
the immediate sources of the gastric juice, a liquor which flows in perpetual
streamlets from the internal surface of the stomach.

362.
This juice bears, on the whole, no small resemblance to saliva, except that,
agreeably to the experiments of the illustrious Spalanzani, its powers are
counter to those which promote fermentation. As to the rest of its properties,
it is saponaceous, equally antiseptic with the saliva, and is indeed, a very
powerful menstruum, sufficient gradually to dissolve milk after it has been
gently coagulated in the stomach.

363.
The gastric juice appears to be the most powerful and active agent in the
great business of digestion. If the food be carefully masticated, and
sufficiently blended with the menstruum furnished by the salivary glands, this
fluid of the stomach completely dissolves, and finally converts it, into a soft
pultaceous chyme.

364.
This momentous function is also further aided and promoted, by a variety of
accessory and assistant powers: of these the most considerable is the
peristaltic motion, by means of which the food, now reduced to a pulpy
consistence, is thoroughly agitated, and kept perpetually in a state of wavy
commotion. Although the force of the peristaltic motion fall far short of the
chimerical calculations, formerly made on this subject, by mathematical
physicians, and although it be not itself the sole cause of digestion, it is,
notwithstanding, of the utmost efficacy and influence in this important process.

365.
Among the auxiliary powers, of this kind, may be also reckoned another species
of motion, which the pressure of the surrounding parietes of the abdomen,
communicates to the stomach: to these we may still farther subjoin, the extreme
warmth of the situation in which this viscus is placed; so very powerful was
this fotus or bath, formerly esteem^d, in cons^quence of the abundant quantity
of blood contained in the neighboring vessels and viscera, that instead of the
term digestion, that of coction, was used by the greater part of physiologists.

366.
To determine, with precision, the period of time requisite for the conversion
of our aliment into chyme by the joint cooperation of the foregoing powers (
361.), will appear almost impossible to any one, who may consider the great
variety of circumstances, on which such conversion must depend: these
circumstances are, the quality and quantity of the food taken in, the different
degrees of force in the digestive powers, the greater or less attention and
care bestowed on the preparation of the food for digestion, by previous
mastication, etc.

For in a healthy subject, the unimpaired stomach does not discharge such
alimentary matters as have been taken in, previously to the conversion of their
digestible parts into a perfect pulp. From whence it is evident, that different
periods of time are requisite, for the complete digestion of different kinds of
food. If, however, it be allowable to form any general conclusion on this
subject, it would appear, that from the third, to the sixth hour, after the use
of aliment, the stomach has, for the most part, discharged through the pylorus,
in a very gradual manner, the whole of its pultaceous contents.

367.
The pylorus is an annular rim, not formed, (like the other rugae on the
internal surface of the stomach), by the folding of the villous coat alone, but
consisting, in part, also of a few fasciculi from the subjacent nervous, and
also of certain fibers from the muscular, coat: all which parts are so
organized and arranged, as to constitute a coniform termination to the stomach,
that is extended into, and embraced by, the duodenum, in the same manner as the
os uteri is received and embraced, by the superior part of the vagina.

SECT. XXIX. OF THE PANCREATIC JUICE.
368.
SUBSEQUENT to the expulsion of the chyme through the pylorus, that pulpy mass
must be subjected, in the duodenum (a short, but remarkable portion of the
intestinal tube), to new and considerable changes, previously to the formation
and final separation of complete, alimentary chyle. These necessary changes are
effected in the chyme by the accession and admixture of various kinds of
inquiline humors, the most striking and important of which, are, the bile and
the pancreatic juice.

369.
Of these two humors, we will speak in separate sections. We proceed
therefore, to consider the liquor of the pancreas first, because it appears to
bear a very considerable resemblance, both in its nature and uses, to those
other two dissolvent humors, of which we have already spoken, namely, the
saliva and the gastric fluid.

370.
Although it be indeed a matter of no small difficulty, to procure the
pancreatic liquor of a sound animal, in a pure and unadulterated state, yet the
obvious and unequivocal result of all the facts, which the most attentive
investigation has been able to supply, with regard to its nature, is, that it
bears the strongest similitude to the saliva in all its general properties.
Were it not for the purpose of showing how mischievous, and even destructive,
the practice of medicine may become, unless directed by sound principles of
physiology, I should not think it necessary nor even proper, at the present
enlightened period, to mention the erroneous physiological hypotheses,
entertained by Franc. Sylvius, and his humble followers, Regn. de Graef, Flor.
Schuyl, and others, respecting the visionary or supposed acidity of the
pancreatic liquor, especially as those opinions have been long since very ably
refuted by Pechlin* Swammerdam, and Brunner, characters of the first celebrity
in the annals of medical science.

371.
The sources from whence the lymph and saliva are derived, bear no small
resemblance to that which constitutes the subject of our present consideration,
namely, the pancreas: this latter is by far the largest of all the conglomerate
glands of the human body, and exhibits, in the whole of its structure, a very
striking similitude to the glands, that give birth to the salivary fluid; with
these last mentioned bodies it also further agrees, in this particular, that
its excretory canals, arising from radicles of the utmost minuteness, run
together and unite by degrees, till they constitute finally a common duct,
which has received its name from Jo. G. Wirsung, who first discovered and
demonstrated it in the human subject, in the year 1642.

This duct passes through the coats of the duodenum, and by a constant
stillicidium, weeps into the cavity of that intestine, the fluid it had
received from the gland to which it is appended.

372.
Finally, the excretion of this fluid appears to be promoted by the very same
powers, which were formerly said to be subservient to the excretion of saliva,
namely, pressure and stimulus.

By means of the former, it is emulged chiefly when the stomach is distended
and rests immediately on the pancreas.

The substances that contribute most, by their irritations, to excite a
discharge of the pancreatic fluid are, first, the chyme itself, as it passes
through the pylorus in a crude and unassimilated state; and secondly, the bile,
which is discharged through the very same orifice with the liquor of the
pancreas.

373.
The use of this fluid is doubtless to dissolve the chyme, more especially that
part of it, which has not been sufficiently digested in the stomach: by its
abundant afflux, it contributes to assimilate this pulpy mass still more and
more to the nature of the inquiline humors, and thus finally mature it for the
further process of chylification.

SECT. XXX. OF THE BILE Doctor Maclurg, of Virginia, published in the year
1772, an experimental treatise on the formation, the nature and the uses of the
human bile, which has acquired for its learned and ingenious author, no small
degree of reputation both at home and abroad. That this elaborate publication
possesses an uncommon share of merit, not even the avowed enemies of the Doctor
are themselves able to deny. The author has shown himself to be, at least, a
very patient experimenter, and an extremely attentive observer. He appears to
have made himself perfectly master of the opinions of all authors of celebrity
and distinction, who had previously written on the same subject. With regard to
the literary merit of the composition itself, it is doubtless entitled to the
highest encomiums that even the most partial eulogist can bestow. The order is
inimitably lucid, the style is cha^^e, manly and nervous in the highest degree,
and as to closeness and propriety of argumentative arrangement, not even the
supercilious logitian himself, can find room to suggest the shadow of an
amendment.

All human compositions are, however, like the sources from whence they
originate, in some measure faulty and imperfect. To this general maxim,
humiliating as it may appear to the pride of the self-adoring philosopher, the
treatise of the illustrious Maclurg is by no means an exception. In several of
the Doctor's experiments there appears to be a want of sufficient accuracy and
definitude, in others a want of object and design. Over these faults, however,
considerable as they are in the works of an experimentalist, we feel inclined
to spread a kind mantle of palliation, when we recollect that our author
experimented and wrote in the early morn of scientific chemistry. Experimenters
had not yet become perfect adopts in their nice and momentous art; they had not
yet acquired sufficient circumspection and address to obviate every source of
fallacy, and to avail themselves of every circumstance that might pave the way
to satisfactory and unequivocal results.

But another change of a more weighty and important nature, lies against our
learned and ingenious author. He h^s certainly built, on nothing more
substantial than the ^limsy basis of deceptious analogy, some of the leading
principles of his favorite doctrine* Thus, for example, he supposes the bile
to be a fluid, the direct result of a putrefactive degeneracy in a portion of
the circulating volume of the blood. His most plausible reasons in support of
this opinion are, first, that the parts, from whence the incipient radicles of
the vena portarum immediately originate, contain, and communicate with, matter
already in a semiputrescent state. And secondly, that the bile is most abundant
in quantity and most active with regard to its quality, at that season, and
under those circumstances, which are most favorable to the commencement and
progress of putrefaction in the living system, as well as in all other physical
bodies.

Plausible as those arguments may, on first view appear, they are certainly, as
already observed, founded on nothing better than fair, but fallacious analogy.
The principle which they tend to establish stands in the most direct opposition
to the result of experiment -- sacred experiment! the only unerring guide to
conduct the candid enquirer to the everlasting temple of truth. Did our learned
author (I would beg leave to ask) ever faithfully experiment on separate
portions of the blood, drawn from different parts of the body, in order to
determine the comparative proximity of each portion, to the putrefactive s^ate?
I presume he never did, otherwise his opinion on this subject would have been,
doubtless, very diff^rent from what we find in his ingenious publication. For
it is a truth, nothing the less sacred and respectable on account of its
novelty, that if equal quantities of blood be taken from the vena p^rtarum, and
from the lungs or any part of the arterial system, and exposed to the same
incumbent circumstances, the pulmonic or arterial, will assume the putrefactive
process, much sooner than the hepatic, blood. The cause of this phenomenon must
be sufficiently obvious to any one acquainted with the late discoveries, in the
divine science of chemistry. We would attempt its solution in the following
manner.

Vital air (which is indeed the genuine septic principle, if any such principle
exist) is in all cases essential to the progress of putrefaction. This air, or
rather its base (termed oxygene by the ingenious chemists of France) is, as we
have the strongest reasons to believe, from the experiments of Goodwyn,
Beddoes, Girtanner, and others, intimately blended with the circulating blood
in its passage through the lungs. As the blood proceeds in its mazy route
through the different parts of the arterial system, it is gradually robbed of
its concommitant oxygene or base of vital air, by the mysterious action of the
animal system. The consequence of this spoliation is, that the florid arterial,
assumes a much darker color, and suffers finally a complete transmutation into
venous blood. In this latter state the putrefactive process is less apt to
commence, because the blood contains less oxygene in a state of intimate
mixture, or perhaps I might with more propriety say, in a state of combination.
For in proportion as the base of vital air is more intimately blended with, and
therefore more nearly approximated to, the constituent parts of the blood, the
more powerfully can it cooperate with other auxiliary agents, in inducing
these parts to assume that intestine motion, which constitutes the putrefactive
process. Although our learned author is decidedly of opinion, that putrefaction
commences more readily, if vital air be excluded altogether from the putrefying
substances, yet it is now well know^, that the very reverse of this is true.
Exclude vital air from a body, in the composition of which none of this
energetic fluid exists, and you thereby embalm that body in a deg^ equal, if
not superior to the embalmment of the unperishable mummies of the East.

No body, whatever, is capable of taking on the putrefactive process, that does
not contain in its composition more or less of those simple substances that
belong to the class of inflammables. Reasoning therefore a priori, or climbing
the arduous steeps of science by the more laborious steps of experiment and
observation, we are warranted in either case to conclude, that putrefaction
consists, in a very considerable degree, in the intimate combination of the
base of vital air to certain substances of an inflammable nature. Both the
primary elements of which putrefiable bodies are composed, and also the results
of actual putrefaction, cooperate in the establishment of the same conclusion.

It is certainly a truth, that vital air is as essential to the putrefactive
process as it is to the support of combustion, or the continuance of animal
life.

Upon the whole, we may without the smallest hesitation conclude, that the
former opinions of physiologists respecting the supposed putrescent disposition
of the hepatic blood, are wholly insupportable by argument or fact, being
indeed directly opposed to the literal result of positive experiment; and
therefore, that the pious eulogia so profusely bestowed on the powers of the
animal economy, in being able to form an antiseptic out of a highly putrescent
fluid, appear to be as visionary and hypothetical, as nature's final intention
in the preparation of this fluid was thought to be beneficent, and her process
itself beautiful, and interesting.


.
374.
THE secretion of bile is the peculiar destination of the liver, the largest
and most ponderous viscus in man. This superiority of size is more especially
observable, during the foetal state, in which, the younger the foetus the
greater is the proportional magnitude of the liver, when compared with that of
the other viscera of the body. The dignity and high importance of this viscus
in the animal economy may be fairly deduced, from the universality of its
presence; thus in all animals possessing red blood, it exists no less generally
and uniformly than the heart itself.

375.
The substance of the liver is of a nature, sol generis, and may be readily
distinguished, at first sight, from that of all the other viscera of the body:
it consists of a parenchyma of a well known color and very tender texture:
this parenchyma is abundantly supplied with nerves, with lymphatic vessels
(very visible on both surfaces), with biliferous ducts, and finally with
blood-vesse^^, from thence these ducts originate: with respect to these
blood vessels, some of which are remarkably large, we will immediately state a
few observations on each of their several orders.

376.
The first vessel which here presents itself for our consideration is, the vena
portarum, which differs very widely from every other portion of the venous
system, not only in its singular appearance, but also in the peculiarity of its
course and distribution, of which a few words were spoken on a former occasion
( 87). This large vessel is formed by the con^ux of by far the greater number
of the venous branches that originate and run from the viscera, situated in the
lower part of the abdomen, and is invested and strengthened by a cellular
covering, commonly known by the name of capsula Glissonii. No sooner does this
trunk make its entrance into the liver, than it is divided into several
branches, which as they run in various directions through its substance, suffer
still farther divisions, till they are finally increased to a countless number
of the most subtle ramifications, which pervade, with the utmost minuteness,
every portion of this viscus. This whole system of the vena portarum was
formerly compared, by Galen, to a tree, the roots of which are dispersed
throughout the whole cavity of the abdomen, while its branches are enclosed in
the more contracted volume of the liver.

377.
Another blood-vessel of a different kind, with which the liver is furnished,
is the arteria hepatica. This vessel originates from the caeliac artery, and
although far inferior to the vena portarum, both in its capacity and in the
number of its branches, is, notwithstanding, divided into ramifications of
astonishing subtility, and is also distributed with a great deal of minuteness
throughout every part of the liver.

378.
The extreme terminations of both the foregoing kinds of vessels, end in
genuine veins, which gradually uniting, form by their general conflux, certain
large venous trunks, that lose themselves finally in the inferior vena cava.

379.
Those extreme terminations, by which these small branches of the vena portarum
and arteria hepatica become radicles to the vena cava, form a very subtle
vascular texture, exhibiting a singular and striking appearance, as if the
vessels were convoluted, or wound up into globes of inconceivable minuteness.
These globular bodies imposed so effectually on Malpighi, as to induce that
illustrious physiologist to consider them as glandular, hexagonal, and hollow
kernels, destined to constitute the immediate chambers of secretion.

380.
From th^se same globular convolutions of blood vessels arise, lastly, the pori
biliarii. These are very tender ducts, which convey the gallish liquid from the
blood, and completely eliminate the same from the system of the liver, through
the ductus hepaticus communis, a canal which they form by their general conflux.

381.
It is common for physiologists to enquire, from what kind of blood the bile is
immediately secreted; whether from arterial, or from that contained in the vena
portarum?

Although the former of these opinions appears, on the first view of the
subject, to be rendered most probable from the analogy of other secretions,
which are evidently the result of arterial action, yet from a more accurate
investigation of the matter we will readily be convinced, that by far the
greater part, if not indeed the whole, of the biliary secretion, is derived
from the vena portarum: the blood of this vessel being lurid, and highly
impregnated with phlogiston, corresponds precisely with the nature of the bile;
but how extremely different, on the other hand, are the habit and constitution
of the florid and fiery arterial blood, which the caeliac artery transmits from
the aorta immediately to the liver!

With respect to arguments drawn from analogy we may observe, that as the vena
portarum is subjected to an arterial distribution, so it may, in like manner,
possess the power of performing an arterial function: this same opinion, for
which we contend, appears also to derive additional support from the analogy
which exists between the liver and the lungs: to perform the leading function
of these last mentioned viscera, is doubtless the immediate destination of the
large pulmonary arteries; whereas, on the other hand, the bronchial artery is
only subservient to the nourishment of the parts, o^ which it is distributed:
-- the discharge of an office, similar to this latter, is also, if we be not
greatly deceived, the more immediate destination of the arteria hepatica.
Notwithstanding what we have here advanced, we are still ready to acknowledge,
that the hepatic artery may possibly contribute somewhat toward the secretion
of bile; but, that its influence, in this respect, is indeed very
inconsiderable, and not yet sufficiently ascertained and demonstrated, are
positions to which we subscribe with the utmost confidence.

382.
The biliary hepatic liquor, when once secreted, flows in a gentle but
uninterrupted streamlet through the hepatic duct; and, when the intestinum
duodenum is empty, glides directly onward, through the common ductus
choledocus, into the cavity of that viscus; but when the duodenum is distended
with chyme, it becomes necessary for this fluid to pursue a different route,
whence it regurgitates from the hepatic, and flows through the cystic duct into
the gallbladder, where it is retained a certain time, and thence derives the
name of cystic bile.

383.
The gallbladder is an oblong sack, somewhat pyriform in its figure, attached
to the concave superficies of the liver, and composed of three membranes or
coats.

These are, first, the external, which does not invest the whole of the cyst,
and is derived from the peritoneum.

Secondly, the middle, usually called the nervous coat, which, as in the
stomach, the intestinal tube and the urinary bladder, constitutes here likewise
the principal part of the tone and firmness of the sac.

And, lastly, the internal, which bears a certain similitude to the internal
membrane of the stomach ( 359.); like that it is interspersed with an
infinitude of minute blood vessels, and like that it is also marked by rugae or
wrinkles, which form, here and there, fine net like checkerings, that exhibit
the appearance of the most exquisitely elegant lattice-work.

384.
The neck of the gallbladder is conical, and forms, by its termination, the
cystic duct, which pursues not a direct, but somewhat circuitous or serpentine
route, and is furnished with a few minute valves of a lunated or falciform
figure.

385.
The gallbladder retains the bile, when once received, till that liquor either
flows out spontaneously, in consequence of being favored by a reclined and
somewhat supine position of the body, or till it is emulged from the cyst by
the pressure of the neighboring intestines, namely, the jejunum and ileum, or
by the occasional passage of hardened faeces through the transverse colon.

Different stimuli acting on the duodenum have also the effect of soliciting a
more copious effusion of bile into the cavity of that intestine.

The remarkable contractility of the gallbladder, evidenced and satisfactorily
established by live dissections and certain pathological phenomena, (although
this sac be indeed completely destitute of all genuine irratibility), ( 307.),
will appear to contribute, not a little, to the excretion of the bile;
especially when we consider the stimulant impression which this fluid, after
retention in the cyst, must make on its surrounding parietes or walls.

386.
For although the cystic exhibits, in its general properties, the most striking
similitude to the ^^patic bile ( 382.), it is notwithstanding concentrated, as
it were, by rest and stagnation, and thence rendered more tenacious and bitter:
this effect appears to be owing, in a particular manner, to the lymphatic
vessels of the cyst, which slowly absorb the aqueous parts of the bile, while
thus enclosed and retained in a quiescent state.

387.
We proceed now to the consideration of the bile itself. This is an animal
fluid of the highest dignity and importance in the living system: its nature
and uses have, for twenty pears past, laid a foundation for more literary
controversies among physiologists, than have existed respecting any other fluid
that belongs to the body of man.

What we shall advance on this subject will relate immediately to the cystic
bile, as this is to be esteemed the more perfect of the two, and is therefore
in a state more favorable for successful investigation.

388.
Bile, taken from the recent corpse of an adult subject, who had not previously
labored under any disease, is a liquor somewhat viscid, of a faint green
color, inclining toward a brown, inodorous, and, if compared with the gall of
brutes, of a slightly bitterish taste.

389.
Although the constituent parts of this fluid neither separate from each other
spontaneously, nor yet by so simple a mode of treatment as is sufficient to
produce that effect on the parts that compose the blood, they may,
notwithstanding, be subjected, without much-difficulty, to such an examination
as will make it appear, that they doubtless possess and exhibit a certain
analogy to the elementary parts of the blood, though this analogy should not be
pursued to too great an extent.

The bile contains, in the first place, an aqueous menstruum, which has been
denominated by some late physiologists, its salivary part: this may be aptly
enough compared to the aqueous portion, and resembles also, though not in every
particular, the serum of the blood.

From the bile we can also separate and procure a small portion of a white and
grumous substance, which may be said to possess a certain, though remote
resemblance to the plastic lymph of the blood.

Finally, the most striking and important principle which the bile contains is
the matter of phlogiston, derived in large quantities from the blood of the
vena portarum, which is highly impregnated with this subtle element.

390.
This active inflammable part evidently manifests its existence in dried bile,
but more especially in gall stones, by bursting immediately into flame, when
placed in contact with a burning substance. To the action and influence of this
principle must we attribute those striking and singular qualities, formerly
enumerated, such as color, taste, etc. which serve to distinguish the bile
from the other inquiline humors belonging to the system; and from the same
source must we also derive the other remarkable properties of this fluid, which
shall be mentioned hereafter.

391.
The bile is not of such a nature as to possess, like soap, an equal affinity
to oil and water, and thus serve to mix and intimately combine these two
elements together. The contrary opinion (which was erroneously entertained on
this subject by Boerhaave, and afterward (...) Schroder) was formerly
invalidated and refu^^d by certain remarkable experiments of my own (since
confirmed and further increased by other writers), and is now entirely
repudiated by the greater number of physiologists. On the other hand, if bile
be applied to the two foregoing elements, i. e. oil and water, when in a state
of intimate mixture and combination, it produces an evident disunion and
separation of them from each other. This fluid possesses indeed no alkaline
properties, but is, notwithstanding, equally unfriendly to the existence of
acid acrimony, to fermentation, and to putrefaction.

392.
By considering with due attention the foregoing observations, we may easily
ascertain the true, the important, and the diversified uses of the bile, in the
process of chylification.

For in the first place, from that equable and uniform chymous pulp which the
stomach has discharged into the duodenum, which the pancreas has diluted by an
effusion of its own juice, and which moves spontaneously onward to the cavity
of the small intestines, it gradually precipitates the faeces, and thus
separates from them that cream-like fluid denominated chyle.

The bile itself suffers, at the same time, a division into two parts, the one
aqueous, the other phlogistic. The latter part adheres to the faece^, tinges
them, and is afterward discharged, along with them, out of the body; whereas
he former appears to be mixed with the chyle, and re-conducted back to the mass
of blood.

Thus the abundant phlogiston, now become troublesome and noxious to the blood,
is first directed to the liver, where it is rendered subservient to the
formation of a singular and very important humor: After this humor has fully
answered the end of its destination, its superfluous, or rather noxious part is
included among the excrements, and finally eliminated from the system.

A further use of the bile is, to evolve and exterminate from the alimentary
canal, the fixed air, which had been hitherto confined among the chymous mass:
it appears also to act on, and aid, the intestinal tube, by means of its
stimulus, thus exciting it to perform its peristaltic motion with greater
vigor and energy.

I silently pretermit a variety of other uses, commonly attributed to the bile,
which appear to me to rest on more doubtful and equivocal evidence, such, for
instance, as its power of regurgitating into the stomach when empty, and thus
exciting appetite, a phenomenon that, in my opinion, can very seldom occur in a
well formed and healthy human subject.

SECT. XXXI. OF THE FUNCTION OF THE SPLEEN.
393.
THE spleen is very intimately connected with the liver, not only by an
intercourse of vessels, but also by the affinity and subserviency of its
function: it is situated in the left hypochondriac region, opposite to the
liver; its figure is oblong, gener^lly, indeed, accommodated to the situation
of the neighboring viscera with which it lies in contact: it is subject
however, to multiplex varieties with regard to form, number, and other species
of lus^ naturae, or preternatural phenomena.

394.
Its color is livid, its texture altogether singular, being soft, friable,
easily lacerated, and therefore securely protected by two membranous coverings,
the internal of which belongs properly to the spleen itself, while the external
appears to be derived from the omentum.

395.
The situation and size of the spleen are now and then, no less than its
figure, subject to striking and singular variations, arising in a great measure
from the different states of the stomach, with respect to fullness and
depletion: thus, for example, when the stomach is empty, and hangs in a loose
and depending position, the spleen is distended with blood; but when the former
viscus becomes turgid again, the latter is emulged, and consequently diminished
in bulk by the pressure to which it is subjected.

The spleen is also agitated by another perpetual, though gentle and uniform
motion, in consequence of respiration, being subjected to the immediate action
of a primary instrument of that function, namely, the diaphragm.

396.
The texture of the spleen, physiologists formerly supposed to be cellular, and
uniformly compared it to the corpora cavernosa of the penis: this opinion,
however, is evidently founded in error, and has been very satisfactorily
refuted by a more accurate examination of the human spleen. For, from such
examination we learn, that almost the whole volume of this viscus is composed
of blood vessels, extremely large in proportion to its size; so that it is
supplied with a greater profusion of blood, than any other part belonging to
the body of man.

397.
The splenic artery, conspicuous (agreeably to the experiments of Wintringham)
on account of the astonishing fineness and strength of its coats, is divided
into an infinitude of minute ramifications, which constitute finally, by their
evanescent extremities, very small pulpy pencils: these pencils afford origin,
again, to fine filiform veins, that constitute by their gradual confluence,
large and lax trunks highly capable of dilatation.

398.
This vast congeries of blood vessels, is, however, knit together and supported
by a small quantity of cellular parenchyma, from whence the absorbent vessels
arise, the trunks of which run on the plain or flat side of the spleen, between
the two membranous coverings, of which we have already spoken.

399.
This texture of the spleen, so very lax and highly capable of admitting blood,
corresponds admirably with what we formerly said respecting the sanguineous
distension of this viscus ( 395): and we may further observe, that the
phenomena of the congestion, and tardy progressive motion of the crimson fluid
in the spleen, considered in conjunction with the nature of the surrounding and
contiguous viscera, tend not a little to illustrate the peculiar state and
condition of the splenic blood, which of themselves appear to shed considerable
light on the function of this mysterious viscus, a subject of such repeated
controversies among physiologists.

400.
The blood contained in the veins of the spleen is very fluid, dissolved,
coagulated with the utmost difficulty, and admits of but a slight and partial
separation of the serum from the crassamentum: its color is also livid and
obscure, as in the foetus; all which phenomena appear evidently to combine in
ascertaining and even demonstrating the presence of an abundant quantity of the
phlogistic element. That this element is, however, unequivocally present in
large quantities, I further ascertained to my entire satisfaction, by the
following simple and ^clusive experiment: to the action of pure
dephlogisticated air, I exposed recent sections and slices of the spleen of a
human subject; no sooner were these pieces brought in contact with this vital
fluid, than they were overspread with a very florid and beautiful crimson
blush, while the air itself, thus despoiled of its native fire, was on the
other hand, contaminated by the splenic phlogiston.

401.
When we contemplate the foregoing circumstances collectively, and consider in
the last place, that the spleen is the only viscus of a similar nature wholly
unfurnished with any vestige of an excretory duct, save those vessels which we
have already said run to the liver, we are obliged from the force of concurring
testimony to conclude, that the sole office of the organ now under
consideration, is to act in subserviency to the function of the liver, and
contribute toward the formation of bile by the cooperation of its phlogistic
parts.

402.
This opinion is still farther substantiated by a very curious and useful
observation, made on such individuals of the animal kingdom, as have been
deprived of the spleen by excision. It appears that in animals subjected to
this operation (which, however singular and seemingly barbarous, has been,
notwithstanding, very frequently performed from remote periods of time) the
cystic bile has been uniformly afterward found to be pale, weakly impregnated
with phlogiston, and disposed to a grume-like coagulation of its lymphatic
portion.

SECT. XXXII. OF THE FUNCTION OF THE OMENTUM.
403.
THE omentum gastrocolium, or omentum magnum, (so called to distinguish it from
the parvum or hepaticogastricum), is indeed a very singular production of the
peritoneum, originating immediately from the external coat of the stomach.

404.
For notwithstanding the continuations of the peritoneum, in the abdominal
cavity, be almost innumerable, and although all the parts contained in this
cavity, whether viewed collectively or individually, be so uniformly invested
by it, that, on opening the abdomen, it is impossible to discover a single
viscus which this membrane does not embrace, yet the modes in which it
furnishes this covering to the several viscera, are so diversified, as to merit
a division into different classes.

Thus, for example, the abdominal cavity contains certain parts, over which the
peritoneum is only spread in such ^ partial and simple manner, as to invest but
one of their surfaces; this observation may be applied particularly to the
kidneys, the intestinum rectum, the vesica urinaria, and in some measure also,
to the pancreas and gallbladder.

There are also other viscera, which, notwithstanding their attachment and
adhesion to the surrounding parietes of the abdomen, yet project also to a
considerable distance into the abdominal cavity itself, and derive from the
peritoneum a covering, which invests, by far, the greater part of their
external surfaces: of this description are the liver, the spleen, and even the
stomach and female uterus, to which we may add, finally, the testes of a male
foetus, previously to their descent into the scrotum.

Considerably different again, (in point of peritoneal covering), from both the
foregoing classes of viscera, is the whole of the intestinal tube, except that
portion which is denominated intestinum rectum. This tube passes through the
adominal cavity in such a manner, as to carry along with its two remarkably
broad processes of the peritoneum, namely the mesentery and mesocolon, to which
it adheres in a state of suspension: under the same class with the two
preceding processes, may we also arrange those singular peritoneal productions,
denominated the broad ligaments of the uterus.

405.
But finally, the most extensive of all is that peculiar continuation of the
peritoneum called the omentum. This production is a large empty sac of a very
delicate texture, that hangs in a depending position from the great curvature
of the stomach; it is spread over the region of the small intestines in
particular, nicely adapts itself to their irregular convexities, and dips down,
in some measure, into their numerous interstices.

406.
Besides the blood vessels by which the omentum is painted, it is also marked
by numerous striae or broad lines of adipose substance, which meet, intersect,
and thus form a variety of reticular intertextures, from whence the membrane
has received the name vernaculum. In persons disposed to obesity this adipose
substance increases now and then to such a size, as to become not only
troublesome but even dangerous: it is also this adipose portion that affords
origin to that oily ^tus by which the omentum is constantly surrounded and
moistened.

407.
It has been the opinion of certain celebrated characters, and a further
attempt was made by the illustrious Haller to prove, that the fat contained in
the omentum is destined to be taken up by absorption and conveyed to the liver,
for the purpose of supplying the bile with its oily portion, etc. With respect
to the truth of this opinion, however, I must still be permitted to entertain
and express a serious doubt, having never yet been convinced that sound,
uncontaminated, bile contains any oil; nor have I ever been able to discover
any orifices subservient to such an absorption, not even in frogs themselves,
where Malpighi alleged, and even attempted to prove, their existence; much less
in that part which is the subject of our present consideration, namely, the
omentum of man.

408.
What appears, from the nature and situation of the part, as well as from the
concurring belief of all physiologists of the present day, to be a much more
unequivocal use of the omentum, is, to lubricate the intestines, and by that
means aid and facilitate their perpetual motion. The same appear also to be the
use and destination of certain similar, but small, adipose bursae, by which the
colon and rectum are invested.

The omentum also further serves to prevent the occurrence of an adhesion
between the intestines and peritoneum, by which the whole office of the primae
viae would be subverted.

409.
That this adipose curtain is destined to serve as a defense against cold,
(though an opinion very generally received), appears, notwithstanding, to rest
on evidence of a more questionable nature: the omentum of a man in perfect
health, which ought by no means to be burdened with an accumulation of fat, is
indeed, but very illy calculated to answer such an intention.

When we consider, in the mean time, the singular structure of the two omenta,
more especially of that denominated omentum parvum or gastrohepaticum, it
appears sufficiently probable, that besides the uses already enumerated, the
latter is still destined for another, of, perhaps, even supreme importance,
which is as yet unknown to us, and which future researches in comparative
anatomy will be alone able to develope.

SECT. XXXIII. OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE INTESTINES.
410.
THE intestinal tube itself (before which the omentum is spread, and into which
we have already seen the chyme conveyed, in order to be further elaborated and
sufficiently fitted for the separation of chyle), is divided into two leading
portions, namely, the small and great; of the functions of which we will now
treat separately and in order.

411.
The small portion of intestines is again subdivided into three parts, namely,
the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.

The duodenum derives its name from the circumstance of its length.

The jejunum from that of its general habit, because, in a recent corpse, it
appears collapsed and empty as it were, even although it contain at the same
time a quantity of pulpy chyme. In the third division, called ileum, the chyme
deposits its faeces, and suffers an evolution of its air, which had been
hitherto fixed, so that this last of the small intestines, being at the same
time the longest, and deriving its name from its circumvolutions, appears more
turgid, somewhat inflated, and marked here and there with small bubble-like
eminences, after the manner of the large portion of this tube.

412.
The coats of the small intestines are perfectly similar to those composing the
stomach, of which we have already spoken ( 359.)

The external is a production of the mefentery.

The muscular coat consists of two orders of fibers, to wit, longitudinal,
which are interrupted in their course, and run rather externally, especially on
that side of the intestine that looks in a contrary direction from the
mesentery; and more internal, annular, or falciform fibers, which are
calculated to contract or narrow the diameter of the tube; whereas the former
are intended to diminish its longitudinal extent. On both the preceding orders
of fibers depends that exquisitely energetic and pertinacious irritability of
the intestines, of which we have spoken on a former occasion ( 306.)

The nervous coat consists of compacted cellular membrane; and may, by a very
simple mode of treatment, especially by blowing into it, be again reduced to a
spongy, foam-like tissue: throughout this coat a variety of blood vessels,
detached from the mesenteric, are distributed in the form of arborets or
branching shrubs, of inimitable elegance and beauty. As in the stomach, so
likewise in the intestines, the nervous coat is the principal seat of tenacity
and strength.

Finally, the internal coat (which merits more unequivocally, in the small
intestines, than in any other part of the alimentary canal, the name villous),
is continued here and there, in conjunction with the internal surface of the
preceding membrane, into wave-like productions and rugous folds, that in the
intestines, when inflated and dried, exhibit a falciform appearance, and are
denominated valvulae Kerkringii.

413.
Of the villi themselves, an immense number overspread, in the closest order,
the whole internal surface of the small intestines: their subtle and
exquisitely elegant vascular structure, was first discovered and demonstrated
by the labors of the indefatigable Leiberkuhn. While the intestines are
destitute of chyle, the villi may be compared in some measure to small purses
hanging in a loose and flaccid position, and consisting internally of a soft
spongy texture; but when they become turgid, in consequence of the absorption
of this milky fluid from the intestinal canal, their figure undergoes such a
striking change, as to bear no small resemblance to the phallus esculentus A
species of fungus, denominated phallus, from its striking similitude to the
male penis.
.

414.
Those villi are surrounded, at their bases, by an infinitude of small
glandular follicles, which are lodged principally in the nervous coat, and
communicate by very minute orifices with the intestinal cavity, into which they
discharge a mucus that serves to line and lubricate the whole internal surface
of that tube.

These minute glands are commonly supposed to consist of three orders. First,
the Brunnerian or larger glands, which are separate from each other, and
situated principally on that part of the duodenum, which lies next to the
pylorus.

Secondly, the Peyerian, which are considerably smaller, planted in clusters,
and lodged, in particular, on the other extremity of the small intestines,
which looks toward, and is contiguous to, the valve of the colon.

And, lastly, the glands of Leiberkuhn, the most minute of all, of which about
eight are said to belong to each vilius.

It ought to be observed, however, that this division of the sources of mucus
appears to rest on very equivocal evidence. For if I be not greatly deceived,
both the Brunnerian and Peyerian glands, as commonly exhibited in plates, are
the result of a vitiated and diseased state of the intestinal tube. I am
induced to entertain this opinion from having never been able to discover, in
the sound small intestines of subjects carefully examined in different periods
of life, the smallest vestige of such fungous papillae, perforated with
orifices; whereas, on the other hand, I have frequently seen, in cases of
aphtha, almost the whole intestinal canal planted with countless numbers of
them, partly standing alone, and partly arranged in crowded clusters. From
considering the foregoing circumstances, I feel a confidence in concluding,
that none can be accounted true muciferous glands, except those extremely
minute miliary bodies, which, on gently separating the villous lining, may be
readily detected on its averted surface, but cannot, without great difficulty,
be distinguished on the side next to the eye.

415.
It has been incontrovertibly established, not only from that well known
experiment first instituted (if I mistake not) by Pechlin, but also from
several others, that as the stomach, so in like manner the cavity of the small
intestines, is supplied with a constant influx of a liquid, denominated, from
the place into which it is discharged, intestinal juice. It appears probable
that this fluid is similar in its nature to the gastric liquor, although a more
accurate investigation of it is, certainly as yet, a desideratum in physiology:
neither can I venture to say any thing decisive respecting the quantity of this
liquid secreted: I am, however, fully of opinion, that Haller has been too
profuse in his estimate, where he alleges, that this ^retion amounts to eight
pounds in the space of twenty-four hours.

416.
Further, it is also common to the intestines with the stomach, to be agitated
by a similar, but far more lively and vigorous peristaltic motion, which, in
particular, while the chymous pulp is advancing, onward, throws the same into
gentle commotion, by a wavy and progressive constriction, and thus propels it
forward from the duodenum toward the great intestines. For although we cannot
absolutely deny the phenomenon of an anti-peristaltic commotion, in consequence
of which the intestines are subjected to a retrograde action, it must,
notwithstanding, be acknowledged, that this, in a healthy subject, is much
feebler than the former, that it occurs more rarely, and possesses a more
precarious and short-lived existence.

417.
In consequence of the cooperation of those energetic causes, hitherto
enumerated (viz. both the principles of motion, of which we have just spoken,
and likewise the solvent and alterative powers of the inquiline humors that
are every where blended in abundance with the chyme), the following remarkable
changes are produced in this heterogeneous mass: -- in the jejunum it exhibits
the appearance of a more liquid pulp, possessing a color somewhat gray, and an
odor slightly acid: after its entrance into the ileum it begins to separate
into two portions; these are, first, the faeces, marked by a pale yellow
color, inclining more or less toward a brown, and possessing a fetid odor;
and, secondly, a white milk-like fluid, denominated true chyle, which floats on
the surface of the faeces, and is separated from them by the action of the
hepatic liquor or bile. This chymous emulsion, designated by the name of chyle,
is destined to be received by absorption into the lacteal vessels, through
which mazy tubes we will accompany it farther in the following section; and
shall, in the mean time, close the present, by tracing, in as brief and
intelligible a manner as possible, the route pursued by the residuary faeces.

418.
These, therefore, after having become more and more inspissated, in
consequence of a tedious course through the ileum, are obliged at length to
pass the valve of the colon, and thus enter the tract of the great intestines;
for which purpose the neighboring extremity of the ileum is furnished, and
lubricated internally, by a more copious quantity of mucus, destined to destroy
the friction of the faeces, and consequently facilitate their transition
through the foregoing valve.

419.
The valve of the colon (denominated very justly in honor of its real and
illustrious discoverer, valvula Fallopii), is a short continuation or process
of the ileum projecting into the cavity of the great intestinal portion, by
which it is surrounded and closely embraced: the more exterior labia of this
process are so constituted, by means of a more prominent or extensive ruga of
the great intestine, as to consist not only of its internal and nervous coats
(as is the case with the greater number of such plicae), but to contain also in
its composition some fibers from the muscular coat. Hence the function of this
valve appears to be twofold, to prevent the premature passage of the faeces
from the small into the great intestines, and also to obstruct their
regurgitation from the latter into the former.

420.
The great intestinal portion, which in like manner with the small, is also
divided into three sections, begins from the coecum (to which is appended the
vermiform process, a part indeed of equivocal use in the economy of an adult
subject), and constitutes collectively a canal so capacious, as to admit the
inspissated faeces to be gradually collected and retained in its cavity, till a
convenient opportunity for their evacuation.

421.
As the great is superior to the small portion of the intestines in diameter,
so it likewise exceeds it in the thickness and strength of its coats. The
muscular coat, in particular, possesses this peculiarity, that its longitudinal
fibers (if we except the lower part of the rectum) are collected into three
fascic^li or bundles, called ligamenta coli; and the colon itself is thus
divided into distinct segments of a vesicular or cystiform appearance. The
internal coat in the great, is not of such a beautiful and elegantly floccose
appearance as in the small intestines, but possesses a nearer resemblance to
that which invests the cavity of the stomach.

422.
The peristaltic motion appears to be less vivid and active in the great, than
in the small intestines. On the other hand, the abdominal pressure is
considerably greater on the former than on the latter, in as much as the whole
colon is subjected to its immediate action and influence.

423.
The inspissated and hardened faeces contained in the large intestines, are
protruded slowly onward, till having at length reached the rectum, they excite,
by their stimulus on the internal surface of that tube, a propensity to an
evacuation. For the purpose of facilitating this evacuation, ample and wise
provision is made, partly by a defect or interruption in the transverse rugae,
but more especially by a profuse quantity of mucus, that lubricates the
internal surface of the rectum near to its extremity.

The evacuation of the faeces is, however, principally accomplished by a
downward direction of the abdominal pressure, overcoming the resistance of the
coccyx and both the sphincters, the interior of which is a very singular
fascisculus or bundle of annular fibers, but the exterior, a genuine cutaneous
muscle: these ends being quite completed, there succeeds an entire remission of
the abdominal effort, the intestine is retracted by the levator any in
particular, and finally closed again by the contraction of the sphincters.

SECT. XXXIV. OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE ABSORBENT SYSTEM.
424.
FROM observations delivered in a former section it is sufficiently evident,
that the chyle, which we left in the intestinum ileum, completely disengaged
from its faeces, is a compound of several different humors. Although it be
almost literally impossible to calculate, with accuracy and definitude, the
precise quantity of inquiline humors, such as saliva, gastric juice,
pancreatic juice, intestinal juice, bile, etc. that is mixed and blended with
the chyme, it appears, notwithstanding, a matter of the highest credibility,
that these several humors, taken collectively, very far exceed, in quantity,
the other constituent part of the chyle, which is derived immediately from
alimentary substances, recently taken as nutriment. Hence we may derive a
solution of that problem in physiology, by what means alimentary matters,
though of the most different and even opposite kinds, may, notwithstanding, be
converted into the same assimilized, homogeneous, and milk-like chyle, equally
adapted to the nature, and calculated to serve as the nutriment, of animals?

425.
The channels through which the chyle must flow, in its passage from the
intestines to the mass of blood, (the reservoir destined for its ultimate
reception), constitute a part of the absorbent system, which we have hitherto
mentioned only occasionally, and in a very cursory manner, but will now assume
as the professed object of our present attention. This system is divided
generally into four parts, viz. lacteal veins; lymphatic veins; conglobate
glands; and finally, the thoracic duct, each of which shall constitute a
subject of exclusive consideration.

426.
With respect to the nascent origin of the lacteals from the intestines, there
exists scarcely a doubt, but that this is constituted by the innumerable villi
of the internal intestinal coat, of which we have already spoken. It is,
however, still a matter of controversy, whether the lacteals originate
immediately from those villi themselves, or only preserve a more distant
intercourse and communication with them, by means of interjacent cellular
substance. As far as my information has extended, no one has hitherto been
able, more than myself, to trace the evanescent radicles of the lacteal vessels
to the villi themselves, with such clearness and definitude, as to discover an
immediate and unequivocal connection between the parts; on the other hand, the
lacteals appear here and there, throughout the coats of the intestines, to form
trunks of considerable size, immediately after their orgin, and, (if a
conjecture be allowable), to absorb from the cellular substance of the adjacent
parts, that chyle which had been originally taken up from the cavity of the
intestines by means of the villi themselves. This phenomenon I think I have
frequently observed, in young puppies, into which I had poured, according to
the celebrated experiment of Lister, a solution of Indian blue, one or two
hours before subjecting them to the operation of live-dissection.

427.
Those trunks, of which we have just spoken, frequently run the distance of
several inches, and sometimes even wind about in angling or meander-like
directions, immediately under the external coat of the intestine, previously to
their entrance into the mesentery.

428.
During their passage through the mesentery, these trunks make frequent
entrances into small mesenteric glands, which may be divided into two different
series or orders. Those of the first order are situated in the vicinity of the
intestinal tube, and resemble, in their appearance, small beans lying separate
from each other. The glands of the other order, lie nearer to the receptacle of
the chyle, are superior in magnitude, and planted in collective clusters.

429.
Both the foregoing kinds of glands appear to be in reality nothing else, than
round compacted convolutions of the lacteal vessels themselves, covered and
interspersed with an infinitude of minute blood vessels: their destination
appears to be, to retard the progressive motion of the chyle, in order,
perhaps, that, by such delay, it may be more fully and perfectly animalised and
matured, previously to its entrance into the thoracic duct, and subsequent
admixture with the circulating volume of the blood.

430.
It has been proposed as a physiological question, whether or not the large,
possess also lacteal veins, in common with the small intestines? The
affirmative of this has been zealously advocated, and its defense attempted by
arguments drawn from the influence and efficacy of specific enemas, of enemas
composed of nutrimental substances, of inebriating substances, etc. and also
from the following well known circumstance, viz. that the longer inspissated
faeces are retained in the large portion of the alimentary canal, the more
indurated and insucculent they are uniformly found. But although these
arguments do not satisfactorily demonstrate that any genuine chyle is absorbed
from the faeces after their transition over the valve of Fallopius, they
furnish, notwithstanding, additional evidence in confirmation of that, which
has indeed been long since established on the testimony of the sense of vision
itself, namely, that the great intestines abound with a sufficiently plentiful
apparatus of lymphatic veins, perfectly similar to the lacteals both in their
structure and functions: in testimony of this entire similarity, it may be
proper to observe, that when the intestines are destitute of chyle, the
lacteals of the mesentery are then engaged in the absorption of lymph.

431.
Another question, more important and difficult of solution than the former,
is, whether or not the whole of the chyle, absorbed from the cavity of the
small intestines, be conveyed to the blood through the same public, and royal
route, as it is termed, or whether there do not exist certain secret channels,
through which it may glide surreptitiously onward, to mingle its streamlets
with the general current of circulating blood?

It must indeed, be confessed, that most of the arguments, by which
physiologists have endeavored to prove a private absorption and conveyance of
chyle through the sanguiferous veins, do not appear to rest on a very solid
foundation: thus the assertion of Ruysch, that on the approach of old age the
mesenteric glands become so indurated and constricted, as to be rendered unfit
for performing their functions, has been long since refuted, and it has, on the
other hand, been satisfactorily demonstrated that, different affections of
these glands, such as swellings, etc. very erroneously pass under the common
name of obstructions, while, at the same time, their vessels remain in a state
sufficiently pervious to afford a very easy entrance and transition to
injections of quick silver. That well known phenomenon, from which it is
ascertained, that tepid water, thrown into the inert mesenteric veins of a dead
subject, transudes into the cavity of the intestines, appears to contribute but
very little toward the satisfactory elucidation of any function of the human
body while in a living state; much less can we repose confidence in the
evidence derived from that bicrural and two branched tube of copper, which was
invented by Lieberkuhn, for the purpose of confirming the same opinion. As to
the assertion, that chyle has been unequivocally detected in the red veins of
the mesentery, it appears to me to stand in need of farther evidence for its
unquestionable confirmation; on the whole, I have never yet been convinced,
that those veins convey any thing else than blood very highly charged with
phlogiston, destined for the secretion of bile.

432.
Finally, the ultimate trunks of the lacteal veins, (with certain other tubes
very similar in appearance and function, which are formed by the confluence of
a great number of minute lymphatic vessels), unite and constitute by their
junction, the receptacle or cistern of the chyle, which is a name given by
physiologists to the inferior and larger portion of the thoracic duct, called
also the duct of Pecquet.

433.
This duct is a membranous canal, of a delicate appearance and texture, yet
sufficiently robust and strong, more or less circuitous in its course, and not
unfrequently subject to very striking diversities with regard to the direction
in which it runs, and the divisions it occasionally undergoes: it is equally
destitute of muscular fibers and nerves, is furnished here and there with small
valves, and, after having passed over the left subclavian vein, is again
reflected toward, and finally inserted into, the same, and, at the very point
of insertion, has its entrance guarded by a valve of a peculiar structure.

434.
The powers which produce and continue the onward motion of the chyle, both in
the lacteal veins, and through the thoracic duct, are to be attributed, indeed,
principally to the contractility of these vessels themselves, but, in part
also, to the valves with which they are furnished, to a propulsive vis a tergo,
and to the uninterrupted pulsation of neighboring arteries.

435.
It appears probable, that the principal destination of the valve, which is
fixed, as has been already observed, in the entrance of the chyliferous duct
into the subclavian vein, is not so much to obstruct the lateral passage of
blood into this duct, as to regulate the necessary discharge of chyle into the
vein, and prevent its admission in any other manner than by a slow and gradual
stillicidium.

By this means, adequate provision is made against the simultaneous entrance of
too large a quantity of recent chyle, into the mass of blood. Such an excessive
influx of this crude fluid would necessarily stimulate the parietes of the
heart to exertions too violent and laborious, and would be blended and
assimilated by the same, with the utmost difficulty, and in an imperfect
manner; that this would be the result, we judge from the nature of recent
chyle, which is a compound of heterogeneous elements, derived not only from the
primae viae, by means of the lacteal, but also from all the other parts of the
body, through the avenues of the lymphatic vessels.

436.
The lymphatic veins themselves, which constitute a third part of the absorbent
system, and bear a very close resemblance to the lacteals, both in structure
and in function, are so considerable, in point of extension, as to pervade,
perhaps, every part of the human body; but originate, in particular, from the
common external integuments, from the pleura, the peritoneum, and viscera,
contained in the thorax and abdomen.

437.
The manner in which they arise, is similar to the origin of the lacteals from
the intestines, of which we have already spoken. Thus each radicle of each
lymphatic vessel, is destined to absorb from a neighboring portion of cellular
membrane, (as from a territory of its own), the moisture it contains, and
propel it onward to the general cistern of the chyle.

438.
These lymphatic vessels are furnished in their course, sometimes more
frequently, sometimes more rarely, with valves situated in bigae or pairs. By
far the greater part of them enter conglobate glands; those in the vicinity of
each other frequently anastomose; and such of them as overspread the surface of
certain viscera, as that of the lungs, the liver, etc. form exquisitely elegant
reticular expansions.

439.
To pass silently over certain other aids, sufficiently evident from former
observations, the function of the lymphatics is greatly promoted by their
remarkable contractility, and the strength of their delicate coats, which is
sufficient, in processes for anatomical preparations, to resist the pressure
from a ponderous column of quick silver: this function is also further aided,
especially in the joints, by muscular motion, in consequence of which, the
lymphatics being compressed and closely embraced on all sides, have their tone
remarkably augmented.

440.
With respect to the terminations of the lymphatics, various controversies have
lately existed among physiological writers. Thus, while some contend, that all
those vessels unite in the thoracic duct, (in like manner as the sanguiferous
veins unite in the venae cavae), others, on the contrary, exempt from this
general confluence, at least the lymphatics of the right arm, and right side of
the neck, which they allege are not inserted into the same duct, but into the
right subclavian vein: others again assert that in the conglobate glands, the
lymphatics communicate immediately with sanguiferous veins; and lastly, others
maintain (not indeed without an appearance of probability) that certain
lymphatic vessels For a great number of truly important observations and highly
interesting speculations on this subject, the reader is referred to a short
treatise, written by Charles Darwin, "On the retrograde motion of the
lymphatics," and published at Litchfield in the year 1780, a considerable
period of time after the premature death of its ingenious author. This young
philosopher and physician appears to have been peculiarly formed by nature, and
happily finished by education, to shed unequivocal light on subjects of a dark
and difficult nature in the science of medicine. He experimented with accuracy
and definitude, he observed with the utmost attention, and he speculated with
the highest ingenuity and force. Unhappily for the healing art, and (perhaps I
may add) for science in all its various branches, this amiable young
philosopher was hastily summoned away, ere yet his mind was perfectly expanded,
or his plenitude of merit announced to the world.
, actually exist, which form a direct and free communication between the
intestinal tube and uropoietic organs.

441.
Seeing therefore, the lymphatic vessels are extended far and wide throughout
almost the whole system, and, especially, in as much as an immense profusion of
them originate on the cutaneous surface of the body, and may consequently
absorb such fluids as are applied from without, it is sufficiently evident,
that the lymph, when recently absorbed, must be, indeed, a liquid composition
extremely heterogeneous and diversified as to its nature and elementary parts:
this diversity is fully ascertained and established, by a more careful and
accurate examination of dead subjects, where, for instance, the liquid
contained in the absorbents of the liver and spleen, appears to be evidently
different from that discovered in those which run to the uterus.

442.
Of the conglobate glands, (which constitute the last branch of the lymphatic
system), the principal use and destination appear to be, to assimilate to the
animal nature this subtle and heterogeneous fluid, especially that portion of
it which is absorbed by the lymphatics of the skin: this assimilation they
accomplish by retarding and in some measure obstructing the motion of the
lymph, and perhaps also by the addition of a new fluid, derived from the minute
arteries, with which they very plentifully abound. Hence a wise and adequate
provision is made, to prevent the humors, while in too crude a state, from
effecting a premature mixture with the blood, and thus the heart is guarded in
perfect security from their noxious impressions.

443.
With respect to those other glands of the same nature, which are minutely
dispread throughout by far the greater part of the system, and planted here and
there in collected clusters, as in the groin, beneath the axilla, etc. they
bear, in every respect, the most perfect resemblance to the mesenteric glands,
of which we have already spoken; like them they are composed, in a great
measure, of the mazy convolutions of absorbent veins; like them they are
furnished with a vast profusion of minute blood vessels; and finally, they are
subject to be readily invaded by the same diseases that attack the glands of
the mesentery.

SECT. XXXV. OF SANGUIFICATION.
444.
IT is scarcely necessary to observe, that by the term sanguification, we mean
the assimilation of chyle to blood, and the constant and uniform restitution
made by means of the former, for the equally constant and uniform loss which is
sustained by the latter.

445.
For on this principle depends that division of all the humors of our body,
into the three classes ( 4. 5.) of crude, sanguineous, and secreted; viz. that
the middle class embrace the whole circulating volume of blood, from which the
different secreted humors are derived in constant streamlets, and to which the
countless channels of the absorbent system convey their chyle, and the
infinitude of lymphatic tubes return their absorbed fluids in currents equally
constant and uniform.

446.
Seeing the blood is an animal humor of so very singular and exclusive a kind,
as to be wholly dissimilar to every other fluid yet discovered in any
department of nature, it is a proposition sufficiently self-evident, that there
must be a variety of assistant powers which contribute, by their joint
cooperation, to incorporate and assimilize with the blood, the heterogeneous
and adventitious humors, which it is constantly deriving from the thoracic
duct.

447.
The process of sanguification we may consider, then, as first commencing under
the action and influence of those mazy circumvolutions (frequently spoken of
already), which both the lacteal and lymphatic veins exhibit occasionally in
their courses (more especially in the mesenteric and other conglobate glands),
and which are, at the same time, furnished with considerable quantities of what
may be called animal and inquiline contagion.

448.
It is necessary further to consider, that a great part of the lymph, which
enters the subclavian vein (after having first effected a mixture with the
intestinal chyle in the thoracic duct), is derived from the interior recesses
of the viscera and other soft parts of the body, and was formerly secreted from
the blood itself; from whence it necessarily follows, that such portion of the
lymphatic fluid must doubtless possess, already, the animal nature entire, and
be very readily miscible with the mass of blood to which it is returned.

449.
To these we may add another circumstance, of which we spoke on a former
occasion, namely, the slow and stillicidious transition of the chyle into its
reservoir, the blood -- that fluid not being admitted to pass through the
ultimate valve of the thoracic duct into the subclavian vein, in any other
manner than by drops, in order that those minute portions may, by this means,
be more intimately mixed and incorporated with the circulating blood.

450
The internal structure of the heart itself appears also to contribute, not a
little, toward the important process of sanguification. Thus, by means of
those astonishing muscular papillae, with which the ventricles of the heart are
plentifully furnished, the blood and chyle (having recently met together), are
thoroughly agitated, and brought into state of more intimate combination.

451.
That the lungs, receiving the blood, recently impregnated with chyle, perform,
by the function of respiration, an important part in the further assimilation
of this crude fluid, will appear sufficiently evident to any one who considers
the astonishing vascular structure of these viscera ( 136.) in conjunction with
the equable alternate motion to which they are perpetually subjected, during
the continuance of human life.

452.
The remaining part of the process of sanguification is finally completed by
the more extensive circuitous journey of the blood throughout the whole body,
and by those powers which contribute toward the continuance of the same, more
especially muscular motion, etc.

453.
But although potent provision be made, by such powerful and diversified
apparatus, for blending and intimately incorporating the chyle with the blood,
it appears, notwithstanding, that there exists a certain similarity between the
constituent parts of those two fluids. It is very commonly asserted, that a
great many hours must elapse before the chyle can be completely divested of its
own milky color, and perfectly assimilated to that of the crimson fluid into
which it is destined to be converted: in testimony of the truth of this
assertion, medical philosophers usually adduce (besides other arguments) the
following singular pathological phenomenon, namely, that several hours after
the close of digestion, genuine chyle has been frequently observed to flow from
an orifice made in a vein of the human body: this phenomenon I have indeed had
an opportunity of observing myself; but it was at the same time extremely
evident, that the blood was then highly charged with phlogiston (a condition of
this fluid very unfriendly to the regular assimilation of chyle), so that from
hence scarcely any inference can be drawn relative to the healthy state of the
system, which is alone the exclusive subject of the science of physiology.

SECT. XXXVI. OF NUTRITION.
454.
BESIDES that function (which we attributed to the blood in a former section)
of distributing the element of fire throughout the whole body, and in its place
wasting that of phlogiston back to the lungs, two of its primary and leading
offices appear to be, to convey to the body nourishment, and to the secretory
organs the matter of those peculiar fluids which they are severally destined to
extract. Of this twofold function we will next treat; and first of the function
of nutrition.

455.
Nutrition is the supreme privilege of nature. It is a common and leading
prerogative of all organized bodies, whether animal or vegetable, by which they
are instantly discovered, on first view, to surpass, in an immeasureable
degree, all machines and automatons constructed by human artifice: because on
none of these latter has any artist ever been able to confer a power (I will
not say of actual growth, of progressing toward maturity, and of acquiring
gradually higher and higher degrees of perfection), but not even of preserving
themselves in a state of stationary existence by their own inherent powers, nor
of repairing the gradual losses to which they are subjected by attrition, by
incidental casualties, etc.

456.
Nutrition is that faculty of our bodies, on which all the sublime and
astonishing functions of our nature depend. By means of this faculty we
increase in magnitude from the earliest dawnings of our existence, we advance
through the expanding period of youth, and finally arrive at our ac^e, or point
of complete maturity. It is also through the instrumentality of this same
faculty that a competent remedy is applied, and sufficient restitution made,
for that uniform waste and loss of the body, by which (while in a living state)
it destroys and in some measure consumes itself, by its own necessary action.

457.
With respect to the nature and mode of this wasting or loss, various
controversies have existed among physiologists. The more immediate point of
disputation has been, whether such waste occurs in the solid parts of our
bodies, or whether it be not more probable, that those parts, when once formed
and completed, remain stationary, without being subject either to vitiation or
change? which latter is indeed an opinion embraced and taught by several
characters of the utmost acumen and ingenuity.

458.
With respect to some particular solid parts of the body, such, for example, as
the epidermis, the nails, etc. there exists indeed not a shadow of doubt, but
that they are gradually destroyed and again repaired; and with regard to the
destruction or waste and subsequent reparation of the bones themselves, the
testimony will appear equally plain and conclusive, to any one who may consider
with attention the result of the well known experiments made by feeding
warm-blooded animals, for some time, on the root of the rubia tinctorum, or who
may take the further trouble of contemplating attentively the phenomena
exhibited by certain large plain bones, especially those of the cranium, which
in extreme old age become remarkably attenuated, or diminished in thickness, in
consequence of the scanty nourishment with which they are supplied at that
period of life.

450.
Upon the whole, if I be capable of judging rightly, those solid parts appear
to be not only gradually consumed, and again repaired, by the faculty of
nutrition, but possess also a vis reproductiva, or power of re-production. This
latter is indeed a surprising faculty, destined not only to make restitution
for the uniform removal of minute atoms by the necessary action of the animal
economy, but also to repair the incidental loss of larger parts (suffered in
consequence of external injuries, wounds, etc.), by a perfect restoration of
the substance of which the body has been thus forcibly deprived. That such a
power does unequivocally reside in the bones, and a few other parts, of which
we have just spoken, is with me too well ascertained and substantiated to admit
of a doubt.

460.
But on the other hand, from a variety of observations and experiments which I
have made both on man and other warm-blooded animals, this power of
reproduction appears to reside in scarcely any other solid parts of the body
than such as are endowed with contractility alone, without possessing at the
same time any of the other vital energies, such as irritability, sensibility,
or finally, specific life.

461.
Of those parts of the system therefore (which possess the more exalted kinds
of vital energy), the staminal basis appears to me to consist of a perennial
parenchyma, which is subject neither to genuine mutation nor decay, but only
liable to certain vicissitudes in point of bulk, that are produced in the
following manner, namely, when the process of nutrition is conducted with
sufficient activity and vigor, the cellular interstices of the parenchyma,
being uniformly filled with the rich and plastic lymph of the blood, are, of
course, distended, and the parenchyma necessarily enlarged; but when, on the
other hand, nutrition goes on less favorably, these same interstices, being in
a great measure deprived of this nutritious lymph, fall into a state of
collapse, and the parts become consequently diminished in size.

462.
With respect to this plastic lymph (of the dignity and importance of which we
have spoken fully on a former occasion), as it assumes with great facility the
appearance and nature of genuine cellular membrane, so it appears to constitute
generally the principal nutritious matter of the whole system, and is conveyed
to every part of the body by means of that infinitude of minute blood vessels,
to which we have so often called the reader's attention.

463.
During the time of the body's advancement in growth, it appears to possess
certain peculiar or specific powers, by the aid of which the lymph, being
deposited from the evanescent extremities of the sanguiferous vessels, into the
surrounding cellular membrane, is duly arranged, and completely assimilated to
each particular portion, and kind of parenchyma. To the head of these specific
powers, must we in part refer that particular law of affinity, by means of
which the parts similares of the system attract and appropriate to themselves,
the homogeneous elements of the nutritious lymph, more especially such of them,
as possess reciprocal and kindred propensities; and to the same head may we
also in part refer that nisus formativus, of which we will have occasion to
speak more fully hereafter, and to which must be attributed, the just and
specific application of the rude, and hitherto formless, elementary matter, and
its subsequent organisation and arrangement into the form and figure of its
peculiar destination.

464.
It is, I presume, from the joint cooperation of both the preceding powers,
that we must principally derive the nutrition of those parts of the body, which
are not proximately supplied with any blood vessels at all; such as the nails,
hairs, etc. and which are, notwithstanding, generated at first, by a very
powerful and truly infallible nisus or exertion, are afterward advanced in
magnitude, and regularly supported by nutriment throughout the whole of life,
and, finally, if by accident removed, are again readily restored by the
astonishing efforts of the vis reproductiva.

465.
Although the preceding appears to be a general breviate account of the process
of nutrition, yet, on the other hand, it is evident that there exists, in
different individuals, a great many varieties, with regard to the degrees and
modes in which this function is discharged. Thus, for example, in proportion as
a more lax or more close apposition and union of the nutritious matter are
effected, the texture of the parts themselves is rendered more dense or
delicate, and hence also seems to originate the difference between the specific
weight of human bodies; in which respect it is well known, not only that man
differs from man, but even nation from nation: in testimony of this truth it
may be sufficient to adduce even a solitary example from among certain northern
tribes, namely, the Jukutae, the Buratae, etc. people highly conspicuous on
account of the remarkable and truly singular levity of their bodies.

SECT. XXXVII. OF SECRETION.
466.
BESIDES those juices destined for the important process of nutrition, there
are also in the animal system other humors, of a very different order and
character, which are extracted for various purposes from the exuberant fountain
of the blood. These humors owe their existence to the process of secretion,
than which no function is less understood by physiologists; a truth mentioned
as a subject of just regret, both by the immortal Haller and other preceding
writers.

467.
The secreted humors, appear, in one point of view, to be so extremely
diversified in their natures, and, in another, to bear so striking an affinity
to each other, that it is not possible to reduce them to any, save highly
arbitrary, classes. If, however, in treating of these humors, we found our
divisions of them on the less and greater changes to which their elementary
parts, (contained in the mass of blood), are subjected in the secretory organs,
they may be aptly enough enumerated in the following order.

First, the milk, a fluid which we think proper to place at the head of our
census or enumeration, because it may be considered, in some measure, as
renovated chyle, and appears to be secreted, by the most simple process, from
the blood, to which the chyle had been recently united.

Secondly, the aqueous fluids; such, for example, as the humors of the eye,
and the tears: to the same head must we refer in like manner, the sweat; and
also, (if our opinion be not unfounded), that halitus which is contained
generally in the interstices of the cellular membrane, as well as in the
cavities of the thorax and abdomen: this vapor appears to differ but very
little either from the liquor of the pericardium, or from that subtle halitus
by which the ventricles of the brain, and the pituitary sinuses of the cranium
are preserved in a state of perpetual humidity.

Under the same head of aqueous fluids, it is likewise common to arrange the
urine, although this is doubtless a liquid possessed of some singularly
striking and peculiar properties.

Of a less compound nature are the salivary humors, which, in office, are
subservient to mastication, to digestion, and to chylification.

Thirdly, the mucagenous fluids, which invest and lubricate the cavities of
most of the viscera, that are destined to the performance of the natural and
genital functions, and also the internal surfaces of all the aerial avenues
belonging to the system, such as the nares, the larynx, and the aspera arteria.

Of a nature not widely different from the foregoing, is that portion of mucus
which covers the internal segment of the eyeball; as well as that which is
spread immediately beneath the epidermis.

Fourthly, the adipose humors are, in particular, (besides the common fat
itself), the medulla of the bones, and the smegma or oily covering of the skin,
to which may be added the cerumen aurium, or waxlike substance investing the
external avenues of the ears.

Of a nature nearly related to the foregoing, is that unctuous secretion, so
evident on the glans penis of the male, and about the rima or os externum, in
the genital organs of the female.

Under the same class may we also arrange that oily substance, with which the
glands of Meibomius furnish and anoint the eyelids.

Fifthly, what are commonly denominated by physiologists gelatinous fluids,
examples of which we have in the liquor amnii, and unguen of the joints.
Respecting the nature of these fluids, however, we are not yet possessed of a
sufficient number of well authenticated facts to give birth to unequivocal and
satisfactory conclusions: a similar observation may also be made, respecting
that uninvestigated and anonymous humor, which the female uterus discharges
during the ardent glow of the venereal orgasm.

We remain also as yet, in a state of equal uncertainty respecting the nature
of that fluid, which is lodged, during the first months after conception,
between the chorion and amnios; of that which is contained in the umbilical
vesicula or pouch of the embryo in its tenderest state; and also of that which
is interposed between the three vessels that constitute the umbilical cord.

The liquid enclosed in the vesiculae grassianae of the female ovary, and also
the liquor of the prostate gland, appear to be of a truly s^rous or albuminous
nature.

Sixthlly, the male semen appears to be a humor so remarkably singular in its
nature, as not to admit of classification, nor even of comparison, with any
other.

And lastly, with regard to the bile, there is equal room for the admission of
a similar observation.

468.
That the foregoing secreted humors, so extremely diversified in their natures
and habits, can neither be derived from the mass of blood by the same
individual process, nor by organs of the same kind, is a proposition too
self-evident to stand in need of, or indeed leave room for, any farther
confirmation. Among these humors, there obviously exists this memorable
variety, namely, that while some of them are secreted and conveyed from the
blood through a shorter route, others again, are more elaborately prepared, by
being carried onward through tubes of greater longitudinal extension.

469.
Of all the modes of secretion, that must doubtless be considered as the most
simple, in which the secreted humor appears to transude immediately through
the coats of the arteries, by what physiologists call diapedesis. Instances of
this mode we have in the secretion of the fat, and of the medulla residing in
the bones, etc.; and, finally, it appears to be by a modification of the
secretory process, not greatly dissimilar to the foregoing, that the gastric
liquor, the intestinal liquor, etc. are prepared and discharged into the
cavities of their respective viscera.

470.
The mechanism of secretion appears to be more compound, where that process is
performed by mean of glands, under which denomination we generally include even
follicles and cryptae themselves; such, for example, as are easily discoverable
in the fauces; and which physiologists generally de^n^e by the name of
glandulae simplissia*

We bestow, with propriety, the denomination of secreting glands, on those
bodies which, (to distinguish them from the conglobate, belonging to the
lymphatic system), are called conglomerate; examples of which we have in the
salivary glands, in the pancreas, in the lachrymal glands, and in the mammae,
or breasts of females. The foregoing glandular bodies are furnished with
excretory ducts, which are composed of tubes or canals running immediately from
their larger lobes: these lobes, on being submitted to farther examination, are
found to be made up of smaller lobules, respecting the internal structure of
which, there formerly existed very warm controversies in some of the most
celebrated schools of medicine. Malpig^ considered the small miliary globules,
which may be readily demonstrated in the greater part of them, to be nothing
else than genuine aci^i or kernels, containing, each one, a minute cavity in
its center. While Ruysch contended, on the other hand, that those hypothetical
excavated kernels were nothing more than globular convolutions of extremely
fine blood vessels; which latter opinion, is doubtless founded on by far the
most unequivocal and substantial testimony, as we readily learn from well
conducted anatomical investigations, more especially from successful
injections, and the assistance of glasses.

471.
Nor does this structure (if indeed we keep out of view the peculiar parenchyma
of each particular viscus), differ much from, but appears rather to shed a
considerable gleam of light on, the structure of certain other secreting
viscera, particularly on that of the liver and kidneys, in which late
experimenters have been able to demonstrate, with the utmost perspicuity,
certain spherical bodies entirely similar to the globular convolutions of
Ruysch, or the kernel-like substances of the celebrated Malpighi. For, in what
is called the cortical portion of those viscera, minute ramifications emerging
from the sides of the small capillary arteries, become presently convoluted, in
such a manner, as to form little vascular balls, which thus appear to hang by
those ramifications of which they are composed* like so many small berries or
grapes supported by their footstalks. From these minute vascular balls
originate first, that very subtle and colorless order of vessels immediately
destined for the business of secretion. (respecting the origin of which, from
the evanescent terminations of arteries, we transiently spoke on a former
occasion, ( 79-81.); and secondly, the incipient radicles of veins, into which
the minute arteries are themselves continuously reflected, and which conduct
back to the venous trunks, the residue of the blood now deprived of those
elementary particles necessary to constitute the fluid recently secreted.

472.
Finally, certain other parts of the body, appropriated entirely to the
business of secretion, are distinguished again by different and remarkably
peculiar, species of organization; thus the male testes, for example, are
wholly composed of nothing else than close and mazy convolutions of very
lengthy and numerous blood vessels, etc.

473.
We come now to the consideration of the peculiar causes, by the operation and
efficacy of which those determinate and specific humors are secreted in these
corresponding determinate and specific organs: this is indeed the Gordian knot
-- this is by far the most difficult point of disquisition in the whole
doctrine of secretion -- that point which numerous doubts and difficulties yet
invest.

474.
It appears indeed to be a truth ascertained and established beyond the
faintest shadow of a doubt, that the leading, and what may be called the
proximate cause of most of the secretions, must be sought for in the internal
structure of the setreting organs themselves: under this head we must
particularly consider, in the conglomerate glands and other secreting viscera,
not only the peculiar distribution and direction of the extreme blood vessels,
from which the humors are secreted, but also the parenchyma, so uniformly
proper to each secreting viscus, that in many of them it can be instantly known
and distinguished at first sight from all other kinds or species of flesh ( 27).

475.
It is also an opinion extremely prob^ble (in support of which we have
advanced, on former occasions, several arguments not easily refuted), that the
secreting viscera, besides their peculiar parenchyma, possess also what we have
taken the liberty to call a vita propria, i. e. a specific or exclusive kind of
vital energy, essentially different from what we denominated the three common
energies, namely, contractility, irritability, and sensibility.

476.
But further, if my views of the subject be in any measure just, the absorbent
system appears to contribute also a very important part toward the promotion
of the several secretions: thus, from each of the secreting viscera certain
appropriate branches of this system absorb and re-convey to the blood vessels
larger or smaller portions of each of the several humors to which these
viscera give origin; the uniform consequence of which is, that the blood
becomes literally impregnated with the contagion of every humor secreted in
the different parts of the body, e. g. with bile from the liver, with semen
from the testes, etc.

Thus there appears to exist, in the system destined for the business of
secretion, a perpetual routine or circulation, so that the elementary parts of
the humors already secreted being incessantly conveyed from the secreting
organs themselves, are united afresh to the mass of blood, and on their
subsequent return to their parent organs, in conjunction with the sanguineous
current, are again more easily attracted by the secreting vessels, in
consequence of a peculiar law of affinity, and have also a power of drawing
along with them those parts of the blood that are most homogeneous in their
nature, and for which they consequently possess the highest degree of
attraction.

477.
To facilitate the secretion of certain humors of the body, adequate provision
is made by the production of specific qualities, in those particular portions
of the blood from which they are to be proximately derived: thus the bile is
secreted from the blood of the vena portarum, a portion of fluid highly
impregnated with phlogiston, furnished in profusion by the abdominal sources,
from which this blood immediately originates.

478.
I pass in silence over certain other cooperating aids, which act in
subservience to particular seeretions, as congestion and derivation, so
evidently efficacious in the secretion of milk, with other instances of a
similar nature.

479.
Among the humors thus secreted by the organs which we have just described,
and by the powers or causes just enumerated, it may be observed that the
following difference afterward exists, namely, while some of them drop
immediately from their secreting organs into the places of their ultimate
destination, in which they are to perform their specific functions, others
again are conveyed to appropriated receptacles, in which they are retained for
some time, and thus farther matured previously to their final elimination from
the system: of this last description is the milk which stagnates in the
lactiferous ducts, the urine, the bile, and the semen masculinum, which are
subjected to retention in their vesicular receptacles, and finally, the serum
contained in those vesicles which were first discovered by de Graaff in the
ovaria of the female.

SECT. XXXVIII. OF THE URINE.
480.
BESIDES the nutritious juices and the secreted humors destined for further
services in the animal economy ( 4.), the blood furnishes also materials for
the formation of certain useless and superfluous liquids, that are intended to
be entirely eliminated from the system, and are from thence vulgarly called
excrements of the second digestion. These excrementitious liquids are of two
kinds, one of which is exhaled by the process of perspiration, and has already
engaged our particular attention; the other is the urine, a liquid secreted in
those glands denominated kidneys.

481.
The kidneys are two viscera situated behind the peritoneum, on each side of
the spine, and in the upper part of the lumbar region: Although their figure is
generally somewhat flatted, yet it is proper to observe, that both in this
respect, and also in point of number, they are subject to more varieties than
any other viscus belonging to the human body: they hang by vessels commonly
called emulgents (remarkably large in proportion to the magnitude of the parts
on which they are distributed), and are cushioned round by fat of a sebaceous
consistence ( 38).

482.
They are invested by a proper membrane, of an elegant vascular structure: each
one of them, especially during the period of infancy, appears to be composed of
about eight, or somewhat more, kidney-form lobes or subdivisions; each of which
consists again (according to an opinion formerly entertained and taught by
Ferrein), of about seventy or eighty fleshy radii, which that physiologist
called white pyramids.

483.
If the kidney be dissected or divided from its unequal dorsum toward its
concave pelvis, it exhibits in its composition two kinds of substance; one
forming its circumference, and therefore denominated its cortical, the other
constituting its center, and hence called its medullary, portion.

Each portion abounds with sanguiferous arteries and veins; besides which, the
external cortex is also furnished with an additional order of very minute
colorless vessels, destined to secret the urine: while the medulla contains
also vessels of a similar description, intended to carry it onward when
secreted.

Those secretory ducts originate, in the manner already described ( 471.), from
the small globular convolutions of capillary arteries that are every where
interspersed throughout the cortex of the kidney: those ducts constitute indeed
by far the greater portion of the cortical substance of the kidney, and may be
very easily distinguished by their singular meanderings and intricate mazes,
from the small conducting tubes of Bellini, in which they finally terminate.
These tubuli Belliniani (as they are frequently termed) pass by a direct route
from the cortical, and enter the medullary substance, of which they constitute
by far the greater part; and uniting afterward by reiterated coalitions into a
small number of narrow trunks, finally perforate, by their extreme orifices, in
a sieve-like manner, the several papillae contained in the renal pelvis.

484.
The papillae correspond for the most part to the number of lobes, of which we
already said each kidney is composed. The urine that is secreted in the
colorless vessels of the cortex, and afterward conducted through the tubuli
Belliniani of the medulla, these papillae discharge into their corresponding
infundibula, which form by their subsequent confluence the common pelvis.

485.
The pelvis is continued into the ureters, which are membranous canals,
exquisitely sensible, and defended internally by a complete investiture or
lining of mucus; they are capable of extreme dilatation; in man they are here
and there uneven in the width of their cavities, and are at length inserted
into the posterior surface, not far from the neck of the urinary bladder. This
insertion is effected in such a manner, that the ureters do not immediately
perforate the parietes of the urinary cyst, but descend a short distance
between its muscular and nervous coats (which are here possessed of more than
ordinary thickness), and open finally into the cavity of this organ by oblique
orifices. By means of this structure, adequate provision is made to prevent the
urine, that has once entered the cavity of the bladder, from being forced to
return again into the ureters by an inverted or retrograde motion.

486.
In an adult subject, the urinary bladder is in general sufficiently capacious
to contain about two pounds of urine; its fundus or bottom, which in the faetal
state terminates in the urachus, and also its posterior side, are invested by
the peritoneum; as to its remaining membranes or coats, they bear a general
resemblance to those of the stomach, of which we have already spoken.

The muscular coat consists indeed of interrupted bands of fleshy fibers, that
surround the cyst, forming at the same time various irregular decussations or
intersections, which are different in different subjects: this muscular coat
physiologists denominated detrusor urinae, while they designate by the name of
sphincter vesicae, those orbicular fibers that partially surround the neck of
the bladder, though they are very inconstant and irregular, both with respect
to their figure and origin.

The nervous coat bestows on this membranous ^us also the principal part of its
strength and firmness.

Finally, the internal coat, which is considered by physiologists as a process
or continuation of the epidermis, is defended by a complete covering of mucus,
especially round the neck of the bladder.

487.
Besides those public and well known routes of the urine, of which we have
already spoken, it appears probable from several phenomena, that there exist
also certain secret avenues, which lead immediately from the intestines to the
uropoietic organs. For the speedy discharge of certain drinks from the urinary
emunctory, so frequently imbued with the odor, tinctured with the color, and
characterized by other specific qualities of the aliments recently taken in,
will scarcely admit the belief, that these liquids had performed, in so short a
time, the customary long and circuitous route through the thoracic duct and
sanguiferous system: to the foregoing circumstance we may add an account we
have read, of the urine having been found covered with oil, that entered into
the composition of an enema, which had been previously and recently thrown into
the intestinum rectum. It is, on the other hand, a circumstance well known to
physiologists of the present day, that very striking and numerous anastomoses
occur between the lymphatic vessels of the intestines, and those of the
kidneys. Lastly, it is now unequivocally ascertained and confirmed by live
dissections, that if both ureters of a dog be tightly enclosed in ligatures,
and his bladder perfectly evacuated of its contents, this latter organ will,
notwithstanding, in the term of three hours afterward, contain a certain
quantity of urine; while at the same time the usual avenues of this fluid,
namely, the ureters, are completely obstructed, as is evident from this
circumstance, that above the ligatures these tubes suffer vast distention from
the accumulated urine.

488.
But through whatever avenues the urine has been conveyed to the bladder, its
gradual accumulation in that organ excites an uneasy sensation, which becoming
urgent and troublesome ( 381.) potently solicits its final elimination, through
an emissary or sewer destined for that particular purpose, namely, the urethra.
This excretory canal is subjected to a variety in its conformation, founded on
the diversity of the sexes, of which we will speak more amply when treating
professedly of the sexual functions.

489.
In order to evacuate the bladder, it is necessary to overcome the contraction
of its sphincter, by the exertion of its own detrusor (of which we formerly
spoke) ( 486.), aided by the cooperation of the abdominal muscles, and those
subservient to the process of respiration; to which, in males of the human
species, we may add, lastly, the action of the musculi acceleratores, which
forcibly ejaculate, per saltum, as it were, even the residuary drops of urine
that may be occasionally lodged in the bulb of the urethra.

490.
As to the nature of the urine itself, it is subject indeed, to an infinitude
of varieties generated by the circumstances of age, and season, but, above all,
by the longer or shorter term of time, subsequent to the previous use of food
and drink, the discharge of this fluid occurs; to which may be also added, the
quality of the aliment previously used, etc. In general, however, when we
examine the urine which is discharged by a healthy human adult, immediately
after sound and tranquil sleep, we discover it to be a watery liquid, of a
nidorous smell, and citron color, containing in its aqueous medium, (as in a
common vehicle) various elementary substances, especially earthy and saline,
which bear different proportions to each other in different individuals, and
even in the same individual at different times and under the influence of
different circumstances. Of the terrene elements the most abundant is, in
general, calcareous earth, which is not unfrequently found in the urinary
passages under the form of calculi, but which is, notwithstanding, extremely
variable and inconstant in its quantity. Of all the saline matters, that most
worthy of being mentioned, is the essential and native salt of urine -- called
also, microcosmic salt, fusible salt, etc. This saline substance contains, in a
greater proportion than any other part of the human body, the celebrated
phosphoric acid chemically espoused to the volatile alkali.

SECT. XXXIX. OF THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE SEXES IN GENERAL.
491.
THOSE functions of the human body, in the consideration of which we have been
hitherto engaged, are indeed possessed, and exercised in common, by the
individuals of each sex: with respect to the mode, however, in which some of
them are performed, there occur between the two sexes no inconsiderable degrees
of difference. Of this difference, it may be proper briefly to enumerate the
leading points, previously to our entrance on the consideration of what are
denominated the sexual functions.

492.
To speak, then, in general terms, each sex possesses and exhibits its own
peculiar habit, which differs considerably from that of the other. In the human
subject after birth, this difference of habit is distinctly observable; but
during the tender foetal state, is scarcely to be distinguished, unless by more
close and pointed attention; neither indeed, in this state, can the external
organs of generation themselves be discriminated, on a transient and
superficial view, owing to the extraordinary magnitude and prominency of the
female clitoris, and the very diminutive size of the male scrotum.

493.
During the period of infancy this difference of the general habit, depending
on the diversity of sex, makes only a slight impression on the observer; but
becomes gradually more and more obvious and striking till the full completion
of the years of puberty, at which period, the general conformation of the
female body, its tenderness, its softness, and the usual inferiority of its
stature, contrasted with the athletic and robust body of the male, exhibit this
general habitual difference in the most striking point of view.

494.
Similar to the difference that occurs between the external habits of body,
that characterise the two sexes, is that which is observable in the bones
themselves. These solid portions (all other circumstances being alike) are
evidently much more smooth and round in females than in males; the cylindrical
bones, in particular, are more slender and delicate, and the plane ones more
attenuated or thin, in the former, than in the latter sex; not to mention the
peculiar diversities of certain remarkable bones, particularly those of the
thorax and pelvis, with the clavicles, the femora, etc.

495.
With respect to the soft parts of the body, we may observe in general, that in
females, the cellular membrane is more lax, more pliable, and consequently more
readily dilatable in the state of pregnancy: while the skin is more tender,
fair and beautiful, in consequence of the immediate substratum of fat.

The hair of the head is generally of a greater length in females than in
males, while at the same time, certain other parts of the body which in the
latter are rough and hairy, are in the former either perfectly smooth, as the
chin and breast; less hairy, as the perineum; or planted with only a very
tender and soft down, as the arms and legs.

496.
When speaking of the diversities of particular functions, we must not silently
pretermit the pulse, which (other circumstances being alike) is more frequent
in females than in males, ( 109). In the former, the thorax is subjected to a
greater degree of motion, (especially at its superior part,) than in the
latter; the os hyoides is much smaller, the larynx is less capacious, and hence
the voice more shrill.

497.
With regard to the animal functions, it is necessary to observe in general,
that in females the mobility of the nervous system is much greater than in
males, the irritability is more exquisite; and the propensity to commotions of
the mind, more prompt and spontaneous.

498.
As to the natural functions, the appetite for food is weaker in the female,
than in the male sex; while, on the other hand, the increase of the body is
more rapid in the former, and the state of puberty and mature growth attained
at an earlier period.

499.
But by far the greatest and most important distinction of the sexes is derived
from the genital functions themselves, the male being furnished with a power of
foecundation, and the female with that of conception. A farther investigation
of these powers shall engage the greater part of our attention, throughout the
remaining pages of this work.

SECT. XL. OF THE GENITAL FUNCTION OF THE MALE SEX.
500.
THE genital liquor of the male is prepared by the testes, two bodies suspended
in the scrotum by their spermatic cords, and (besides the lymphatic veins with
which they abound in profusion), composed chiefly of three kinds of vessels.

These are first, the spermatic artery, which in proportion to its slender
diameter is said to be the longest of all the arteries belonging to the human
body: it in general conveys the blood immediately from the abdominal portion of
the aorta itself, to the body of the testis.

Secondly, the ductus deferens, which carries to the visiculae seminales, the
semen when once secreted from the arterial blood.

And, lastly, what is commonly denominated the pampiniform plexus of veins, the
function of which is to receive and convey to the cava or emulgent vein, the
blood that remains after the process of secretion is accomplished.

501.
The testes are not, from the time of their earliest formation, suspended in
the scrotum, as represented in the above description: thus in the male foetus,
while yet in a very tender and immature state, those glandular bodies occupy
indeed a very different situation, the reason and successive changes of which
were first accurately investigated and detailed by Haller, at Gottengen in the
year 1749, but were afterward explained by other writers on principles so
different from each other, as to have given rise to various controversies of
some weight and importance. Of the situation and changes of the testes in the
foetal state, I am prepared to lay before the reader a brief, though
comprehensive account, -- the spontaneous result of numerous observations made
on nature herself, during a remarkable series of dissections of male embryo's,
in which I engaged for the express purpose of shedding light on this subject so
interesting to physiologists.

502.
On opening the lower abdominal region of an immature foetus, we discover in
each groin, near what is called the ring of the oblique muscles, a very narrow
orifice in the membrane denominated peritoneum; this orifice is the threshold
to a strait avenue or alley, as it were, that leads through the abdominal ring
itself, and terminates afterward in a peculiar bullous or bubble like sack:
this sack extends without the abdominal cavity, looks toward the scrotum, is
interwoven with cellular fibers, and destined for the future reception of the
testis.

503.
At the very posterior margin of this small abdominal orifice, the peritoneum
sends off another process, which mounts upwards, and in the tender foetus
represents, in the greater part of its course, a longitudinal fold: from the
basis of this process a slender cylinder, or rather inverted cone ascends, and
forms at its summit, which regards the inferior margin of the kidney, a small
blister or sack-like termination; in this sack the testis and epididymis are
enclosed; so as to resemble, at first sight, a small berry resting on its
footstalk, and appear, at the same time, to hang loosely into the abdominal
cavity somewhat like the liver or spleen ( 404).

504.
The vessels which are afterward to constitute the spermatic cord, are, at
this very early period, seen running behind the extremely tender and pellucid
peritoneum, so that the spermatic artery and vein run in a descending direction
along the sides of the spine, while the vas deferens bending somewhat inwardly
toward the neck of the urinary bladder, stretches along the loose cellular
membrane, which is situated behind the peritoneum, and both enter the body of
the testis in that peri^oneal plica or fold of which we have already spoken.

505.
From about the middle stage of pregnancy, the testes begin to sink downward by
degrees, so as gradually to approach the narrow orifice of the peritoneum,
which has been already mentioned. At the same time, the foregoing peritoneal
fold, with its cylindrical attachment, are wrapped up by degrees, till the
testis finally rests on the very mouth of the preceding canal.

506.
When in the foetus, now advanced to a higher stage of maturity, the testis is
fully prepared for a final descent, the orifice, hitherto so contracted or
narrow, suffers such a remarkable dilatation, that the testis is at full
liberty to enter with facility the opening that leads out of the abdomen as
well as the ring by which this opening is surrounded, to pass onward through
the whole length of the canal, and thus plunge headlong, as it were, into the
blister-like sac of which we have already spoken. The testis having finally
accomplished its descent, the peritoneal opening is soon after closed in the
most complete manner, and even subjected in a short time to a perfect adhesion
of its sides, so that in the stage of infancy, scarcely a wreck of it is left,
to point the enquirer to the place of its former existence.

507.
The more gradual and slow the movement of the testis (while yet in the
abdominal cavity) toward the orifice of its egression, the more sudden and
instantaneous appears to be its act of transition through the abdominal ring.
For in the dissections of mature foetuses, it is by no means uncommon to
discover the testis either as yet incumbent on the peritoneal opening, or else
stationary in the groin, after having recently passed the abdominal ring: but
once only was I so fortunate as to have an opportunity of observing the right
testicle of a twin-foetus (of which a complete drawing has been given), at the
very moment of its passage through the abdominal ring: the gland appeared to
have been very tightly embraced and strangled, as it were, by the surrounding
parts, and was apparently in complete readiness to emerge from the abdomen into
its destined sack; a transition already accomplished by the left testicle, that
had just escaped from the ring, the orifice of which had again resumed its
former impervious state.

508.
This r^markable descent of the testes along the groins, does not appear to be
exclusively confined to any particular period of time: it occurs for the most
part, however, about the last month of pregnancy: although these glandular
bodies are not unfrequently found either in the abdominal cavity itself, or in
the superior part of their inguinal route, even in infants after birth. For the
testicle, after its entire escape from the abdomen, has still a further stage
of its journey to perform, namely, its final descent along the groin into the
scrotum, in company with the small sac by which it is enveloped.

509.
That the foregoing is indeed a true account of the progressive movement of the
testes in their descent from the abdomen into the scrotum, I have had
sufficient opportunities of ascertaining from repeated observation. To develope
the causes and energies by which this astonishing descent is accomplished,
appears to be indeed attended with difficulties of the utmost magnitude. For I
am daily more and more convinced, that neither of those powers to which this
descent has been hitherto ascribed (such, for example, as the action of the
cremaster muscle, the action of the diaphragm, or the contractility alone of
that cellular and tendinous intertexture, which adheres to the processes of the
peritoneum, and is usually denominated gubernaculum Hunterii, etc.), is
sufficient to explain a movement of such extreme singularity, especially that
part of it relating to the immediate transition of the testis through the
narrow abdominal ring, to which the reader's attention has been so frequently
solicited: while I am impressed, on the other hand, by a thorough conviction,
that this whole process exhibits the most unequivocal and striking example of
what we have denominated specific life, without the peculiar operation and aid
of which, it is scarcely possible to solve the several phenomena of a
transition so extremely singular in its nature, and so widely dissimilar to all
other movements and functions that occur in the whole animal economy.

510.
The involucra by which the testes are invested, after their final completion
of the foregoing route, may be aptly enough divided into common and proper.

The only involucrum common to both these glandular bodies is the scrotum. This
is a sac, consisting of a tender portion of cutis expanded over a thin
substratum of fat, and possessing a peculiarity that does not reside in any
other part of the common integuments of the body, namely, a power of changing,
in a very remarkable degree, its usual habit and appearance: thus, it sometimes
depends loose and flaccid, and again (especially under the impression of the
venereal oestrum, or in case of exposure to cold), becomes constricted and
rigid, as it were, and is then particularly marked by furrows and diversified
rugosities.

511.
Of those involucra which are proper to each testis, that placed immediately
beneath and within the scrotum, is called the tunica dartos: this coat
possesses a very peculiar and vivid contractility, by which Winslow, Haller,
and other celebrated characters have been so far deceived, as to bestow on it
the nature and energy of a muscle.

512.
This is succeeded (after a voluminous and soft stratum of cellular membrane),
by three separate vaginal coverings, which were first accurately traced and
distinguished by the ingenious and indefatigable Neubauer.

Of these vaginal coats, the exterior is common to the testicle and spermatic
cord, and has the cremaster muscle attached to it by separate bundles of fibers.

But the two interior are proper, one to the spermatic cord, and the other to
the testis itself; of these the latter adheres, for the most part, by its
fundus to the common tunic, while its internal surface is moistened by a
lubricant fluid, somewhat after the manner of the pericardium.

513.
The origin of those vaginal tunics which has given rise to such a variety of
controversies among physiologists, can, (if I be not greatly deceived), be
without difficulty ascertained, from what has been already said, when treating
of the descent of the testes.

Thus, the tunica communis, for example, originates from the descending ( 502.)
blister-like sac or process of the peritoneum.

The propria testis, from that production of the peritoneum, which mounting
upward in the form of a cylinder ( 503.), invests the testis itself from its
earliest formation.

And, finally, the propria funiculi, from that fold of the peritoneum, of which
we have already spoken, and the short cylinder in which it terminates
previously to its embracing the testis itself.

514.
Immediately to the testis itself the tunica albuginea is very closely
attached, somewhat after the manner of a cortical covering. From this tunic,
blood vessels pass into the pulp or body of the testicle, which consists indeed
entirely of innumerable vessels, about a span in length, wound up into small
conglomerate lobules: these vessels, of which the substance of the testicle is
composed, are both sanguiferous and secreting, the latter of which conduct the
semen, when prepared, through the vascular network of Haller, and the vasa
defferentia of Graaf, into the beginnings of those cones that form the
epididymis.

515.
That body which ranges along the side of the testis, namely, the epididymis,
consists indeed of a single vessel, about thirty feet in length, which at one
end (that for instance denominated its head), is distinguished into about
twenty small rolls or cones, and at its other (inferior) extremity, called
therefore its tail, increases gradually in thickness, and thus forms by its
continuation the vas deferens.

516.
The two vasa deferentia ascending toward the neck of the urinary bladder, and
forming a junction beneath, or near to, the prostate gland, are from hence bent
backward, and expanded into the vesiculae seminales; in such a manner, however,
that these vesiculae, and the vasa deferentia themselves, open by two common
orifices into the urethra, just behind the caput gallinaginis.

517.
Finally, the vesiculae seminales themselves, are attached to the posterior
surface of the urinary cyst, near to the inferior extremity, or neck, of that
organ: they are imbedded in a profuse quantity of fat, and from their
diversified flexuosities and numerous blind appendiculae that shoot off
somewhat in the form of ramifications, resemble, in their general appearance,
two small intestines.

These vesiculae consist of two coats, almost of the same kind with those that
enter, as formerly mentioned, into the composition of the gall bladder; thus,
the first or external coat is more robust, and similar in its nature to such as
are commonly denominated nervous; while the second or internal abounds with
minute cells and pits, and is every where divided, by means of projecting
eminences, into minute purse-like cavities, perfectly similar to those that are
so conspicuous about the neck of the gallbladder.

518.
In those organs and vessels hitherto enumerated and described, there is, even
from the earliest years of puberty, a certain fluid secreted slowly, and
retained in small quantity, namely, the semen masculinum; a liquor extremely
singular in its nature, and of the utmost dignity and importance in the animal
economy: it exhibits to the eye a milky color, emits an odor entirely
peculiar, possesses a mucoid viscosity, and is of such remarkable specific
gravity, as to surpass, in this respect, all other secreted humors belonging
to the animal body.

519.
A peculiarity of this fluid, which must not be passed over in silence, is, (as
was first observed by Lud. Ham at Dantzic, in the year 1677), that it is
peopled by a countless multitude of microscopic animalculae, belonging to the
same order with those called infusoria, and possessing different figures, as
they appear in the seminal fluids of different animals. In man (and also in the
male ass) the seminal animalcules exhibit oval figures, furnished with tails of
extreme minuteness: these animalcules are said not to be found in any, save
sound and prolific semen, so that they appear to constitute a certain
adventitious criterion of the fertilizing maturity of this important fluid: we
have called the criterion derived from these animalcules adventitious, and
presume it is scarcely necessary, at this enlightened period, to repeat, that
they should not be accounted the reservoirs of the fecundating principle, much
less should they be considered as the germs of future homunculi, since so many,
and such weighty arguments and observations have been lately advanced in
support of a different doctrine.

520.
This genital liquid being gradually collected in the vesiculae, which we have
already described, is there retained till a future act of excretion. By such
retention it suffers changes very nearly resembling those to which the bile is
subjected in consequence of a state of stagnancy in its cystic reservoir; thus,
being gradually robbed of its aqueous portion, it is more and more inspissated
and approximated, as it were, toward a state of concentration.

521.
For as the testes generally, together with the cords by which they are
suspended, abound with an astonishing assemblage of lymphatic vessels, which
serve to re-convey from thence to the blood a portion of fluid, impregnated
with the spermatic contagion, and by this means aid and facilitate the further
secretion of semen, on the principle, and in the manner formerly laid down (
476.), so are the vesiculae seminales themselves also provided with vessels of
the same kind, which by absorbing the subtle, though inert water, render the
residue of the seminal fluid more active and efficacious.

522.
On this subject I doubt much whether or not, in a healthy man, any genuine
semen be ever absorbed from the vesiculae seminales: -- more still, whether or
not, as is sometimes alleged, semen thus absorbed could be carried immediately
into the neighboring sanguiferous veins: -- but most of all, whether or not
such a seminal absorption (admitting its real existence) could possibly act as
an antidote against excessive venereal propensities, since it appears
evidently, on the other hand, that this same absorption would necessarily
operate as an exciting cause of unbridled and almost infuriate lust: in quest
of testimony to establish the truth of this latter proposition, we need only
attend to the phenomena of such animals as experience the venereal propensity
only at stated seasons of the year, and compare them with the constitution of
those that have been reduced to the state of castration.

523.
To me indeed it appears probable, that, for the purpose of moderating
libidinous desires, man is endowed with a far different prerogative (not
conferred on any other species of animals with which we are hitherto
acquainted), namely, that of nocturnal pollutions: these evacuations I
therefore consider among the natural excretions of man -- evacuations by which
(as they occur at longer or shorter intervals, according to the varieties of
temperament and constitution), he is relieved from a troublesome and otherwise
urgent impression produced by an abundant accumulation of semen.

524.
It must be observed, however, that the semen masculinum is never excreted in a
state of entire purity, but is always blended with more or less of what is
usually denominated liquor prostatae (i. e. the liquor of the prostate). With
regard to the external habit and appearance of this last mentioned liquid, it
bears a very striking similitude to the albumen or white of eggs. This peculiar
liquor derives its name from its immediate birthplace or source, which is a
body of considerable magnitude, and of a singular and very compact
parenchymatous texture, situated between the vesiculae seminales and the bulb
of the urethra, and is usually designated by the name of glandula prostata. The
excretory avenues of this liquor have not yet been satisfactorily investigated
and ascertained, unless (as appears probable) they communicate with the duct of
the caruncula seminalis, the orifice of which opens into the urethra between
the two mouths of the avenues leading from those minute vesicles destined for
the reception and temporary retention of the fertilizing semen, ( 516).

525.
The urethra in man is destined as a common conduit or emissary duct, to three
different kinds of fluids, namely, the urine, the semen, and the liquor of the
prostate gland. It is lined internally with a mucus which originates from an
immense number of sinuses, that are every where dispersed throughout its canal.
It is surrounded by a substance of a spongy texture, to which are subjoined two
other bodies, similar in structure but far superior in size, (called corpora
cavernosa), that constitute the principal part of the male penis; an organ
which is terminated anteriorly by the glans, and wholly invested by a very
tender and pliable portion of skin entirely destitute of all appearance of fat.
This skin forms the prepuce by its attachment round the corona, or circular
base of the glans, and plays over this body with a free motion, somewhat like
the palpebrae over the ball of the eye. The interior duplicature of the
prepuce, having assumed a different appearance, is reflected over the glans
itself, (somewhat like the adnata over the eye) and is furnished around the
corona, with an immense number of the small glands of Littrius, (analogous to
the Meibomian glands of the palpebrae) that give birth to a matter of an
unctuous but very singular nature.

526.
The male penis, thus organized and constructed agreeably to the preceding
description, possesses a faculty of erection, i. e. in consequence of an
increased congestion and impetuous effusion (for congestion alone will not
explain the phenomenon) of blood into the corpora cavernosa, the penis swells,
becomes rigid, and changes its former position, but suffers again a
detumescence and collapse by a reabsorption of the superfluous portion of this
distending fluid.

527.
When the penis resumes its flaccid condition, it suffers a singularly
circuitous flexion, at the place where it originates from the neck of the
bladder. In this state it is, indeed, extremely well calculated for the
excretion of real urine, but quite unqualified for the emission of semen, as
the beginning of the urethra forms now a more acute angle with the small
orifices of the vesiculae seminales.

528.
When a gradual intumescence of the penis commences, there occurs first an
effusion of the liquor furnished by the prostate gland, which is oftentimes
eliminated unmixed, but scarely ever along with the urine. Of this liquor the
primary destination is, to be ejected, in conjunction with the seminal fluid
itself; either, that it may, by its albuminoid lubricity, qualify the sluggish
tenacity of the latter fluid, and thus facilitate and promote its ejection; or
that it may itself contribute, in a certain degree, toward the process of
generation.

529.
The emission itself of the male semen is excited as well by the immediate
impression arising from an abundant accumulation of this fluid in its
appropriated receptacles, as by the genuine sexual instinct; it is
accomplished, first, by a very strong erection of the penis, which, while it
obstructs the passage of the urine, paves as it were, on the other hand, a more
direct and ready way for the transition of the semen; to which we may subjoin,
as cooperating causes, a certain spasmodic contraction of the vesiculae
seminales, a convulsive action of the levator any, and acceleratores urinae,
and finally, a general succussion, of the whole nervous system, gentle indeed
in degree, and transient in existence, but yet of an epileptic nature, and
considerably depressing, in its effects, on the energies of the system.

SECT. XLI. OF THE GENITAL FUNCTION OF THE FEMALE SEX IN GENERAL.
530.
AS the male organs of generation are naturally calculated to give, so are the
female to receive, and in the two sexes these organs are, in a general point of
view, widely different from each other. It must be observed, however, that in
the general structure of certain parts, these two kinds of organs exhibit no
small degree of reciprocal similitude. Thus beneath the pubes (the structure of
which has been already a subject of transient attention ( 36.) the clitoris
which lies concealed in the superior commissure of the labia, resembles the
male penis in more respects than one, but is not furnished with a urethra, is
therefore imperforate, and, (when not of a preter-natural proportion,) is
remarkably small. It is said, however, that this organ preserves, occasionally,
even in adults, the same proportional size, which, as formerly observed, is so
extremely conspicuous in the clitoris of the female embryo, ( 492.) Hence
appears, in all probability, to have originated most of those obscene and
fabulous stories, respecting the existence of hermaphrodites. This organ
consists also, like the male penis, of corpora cavernosa, like it, is capable
of erection, like it, is invested by a prepuce, and furnishes, finally, an
unctuous matter not dissimilar to that of Littrius, ( 525).

531.
From the clitoris descend the nymphae, acquiring, also, occasionally, an
enormous and preternatural magnitude, (which excess has, in like manner, not
unfrequently given rise to extraordinary and fabulous reports): they possess,
in common with the clitoris the most exquisite degree of sensibility; and
appear to give direction to the stream of urine when discharged, as the orifice
of the urethra, (a tube extremely short in the female sex, and, in the most
highly finished and perfect examples, ciliated or fringed in a very singular
manner), lies hid, as it were, in a fossa formed by their two bases.

532.
Beneath this orifice is situated the opening of the vagina itself, environed
by cryptae of various kinds, such, for example, as the urethral lacunae of
Graaf, and the mouths of what are improperly and even absurdly termed, the
prostate glands of Casp. Bartholin, etc. with the unguen-like mucus of which,
these obscene parts are moistened and lubricated.

533.
Over the very threshold or entrance of the vagina is expanded a weblike
production denominated the hymen. This is a membrane, the existence of which in
an unlacerated condition, is considered as a sure badge of spotless virginity
-- a membrane bestowed exclusively on the female of the human species, and of
which no physical destination has been yet unequivocally ascertained.

The fringes or residual fragments of this membrane, after laceration, are
gradually converted into what are denominated carunculae myrtiformes, bodies
quite indefinite in point of number.

534.
From the immediate seat of these minute myrtiform bodies ascends, between the
urinary cyst and intestinum rectum, the vagina, a tube composed of a cellular
parenchyma, interspersed with an infinitude of small blood vessels. At its
inferior extremity the vagina is encircled by a muscle denominated constrictor
cunni; more internally it is lined by a very soft and delicate coat, which is
characterised by two extremely elegant columns of rugae or wrinkles, namely,
the anterior and posterior; from these columns a fine mucus is constantly
discharged, destined to lubricate the cavity of this highly important canal.

535.
The vagina, at its upper and interior end, receives and embraces, finally, the
uterus, an organ attached on each side to, and thus suspended by, the ligamenta
lata.

The cylindrical neck of this organ being thus embraced, as it were, by the
vagina, is perforated by a narrow canal, which, like that of the vagina, is
impressed by a singular apparatus or arrangement of rugosities, designated by
the name of arbor vitae: of this canal the two extreme orifices, more
especially the superior or internal, are overspread, for the most part, with a
quantity of tenacious mucus.

536.
The substance of the uterus is altogether singular in its nature, consisting
of a peculiar parenchyma, very dense and compact, and interwoven with an
infinitude of blood vessels (running in serpentine mazes of astonishing
intricacy) of which, the veins are wholly destitute of valves. This organ is
doubtless furnished, in like manner, with an apparatus of lymphatic vessels: it
abounds with a countless number of nerves, through the medium of which, it
preserves such an astonishing sympathy with the other parts of the system.

537.
Externally the uterus is invested by the peritoneum, while its minute internal
cavity is lined, especially at its fundus, by a very soft and tender membrane,
of a spongy texture, which, as some physiologists allege, consists of
colorless vessels, while others pronounce it to be composed of lymphatic
absorbents.

538.
With regard to the muscular texture attributed to this organ by some
physiologists, and strenuously denied again by others, I must take the liberty
of observing, that notwithstanding the number of uteri which I have examined
with the utmost care and attention, both in an impregnated and an unimpregnated
state, (in each of which I have had repeated opportunities of examining this
organ, not only in a prepared condition, but also in subjects recently dead), I
have never yet been able to detect, in them, any portion that exhibited obvious
and unequivocal signs of muscularity. On the other hand, I am daily more and
more persuaded, that the uterus, possessing no muscular fibers, is destitute
also of true irritability ( 307), and owes entirely to a vita propria, or
specific life ( 47.), all its peculiar motions and functions, which cannot,
indeed, with the smallest semblance of propriety, be derived from any of those
energies that are common to what we formerly termed the parts similares, or
similar parts of the body ( 43, 46). So very singular and unaccountable did the
motions and functions of the uterus appear to the physicians and philosophers
of ancient times, that they were led to consider this organ as a smaller animal
contained within a larger.

539.
From the angles on each side of the lacunar, or fundus uteri, arise what are
called the Fallopian tubes. These are two very narrow and tortuous canals, that
run in the superior duplicature of the ligamenta lata: they are similar in
texture to the vagina itself, except, that being internally destitute of
valves, they are lined with a kind of spongy flesh, of a very soft and tender
consistence.

540.
The extreme orifices of these tubes, that regard the abdominal cavity, besides
being much more capacious than those which open into the uterus, are also edged
round by fringe or finger-like fimbriae, of a truly singular and elegant
structure. The offices which these fimbriae are destined to perform, in the
business of conception, appear to be indeed of no small degree of importance;
thus being rendered, during the venereal orgasm, equally turgid with the tubes
themselves, they evidently embrace, in this state, the ovaria that are situated
in some measure beneath them.

541.
The ovaria themselves, or the female testes, as they were called previously to
the time of Steno, besides a tenacious and somewhat tendon-like involucrum,
consist also of a dense and decussating cellular membrane, which incloses in
each ovarium about fifteen of those minute bodies denominated the ovula, or
little eggs of Graaf: these ovula contain each a small vesicle, or rather drop
of serum, faintly yellowish in its color, and of an albuminous nature, which,
if the recent ovarium be immersed in boiling water, is reduced, like the
genuine white of eggs, to a state of complete coagulation.

542.
An albuminoid drop of this kind appears to be indeed the principal fluid which
the female contributes toward the process of conception; for it appears
extremely probable, that, throughout the progressive course of what are termed
the prime or better years of life, these small drops arrive at complete
maturity in gradual succession, so that each one, in its turn, looks as it were
through the involucrum, by which the ovarium is enveloped, till it is able
finally to burst the parietes of its prison, and thus be received by the
abdominal orifice of the Fallopian tube.

543.
But besides this minute albuminous drop that thus bursts from the volume of
the ovarium, it appears that there occurs also, during the venereal oestrum, an
effusion of another liquor, which ancient physiologists very improperly and
erroneously denominated the female semen. Respecting the nature, however, the
sources, and the universal presence of this humor, we are able to propose
nothing more determinate or satisfactory than we can advance with regard to its
destination and uses.

SECT. XLII. OF MENSTRUATION.
544.
A VERY frequent and highly important function of the uterus in the female of
the human species is, to discharge monthly a tributary effusion (called
therefore catamenia), during the tedious and momentous term of about thirty
years. This is a painful condition of existence, to which nature has not
subjected any other genus of her subjects, throughout the wide and diversified
range of the whole animal kingdom; so that to use the words of the eloquent
Pliny "the only menstruous "animal in nature is woman." From this condition, on
the other hand, painful as it is, nature has not exempted the females of any of
the known nations of the globe, but has stamped it with the sacred character of
an essential requisite -- of a genuine sine qua non, in rendering the female
sex competent to the propagation of their species.

545.
The commencement of this singular function generally takes place, in our
climate, about the fifteenth year of life, and is, for the most part, preceded
by various and unequivocal symptoms of plethora, such as congestion and anxiety
about the breast, sense of tension and weight in the lumbar region, lassitude
or weariness of the limbs, etc. On the first appearance of the catamenia, the
genital organs, in the beginning of the attack, usually discharge a humor of a
pale reddish cast; this is gradually succeeded by a liquid of a more intensely
florid and sanguineous color, which terminates, at length, in an effusion of
genuine cruor or red blood. This spontaneous, though gentle discharge of blood,
is kept up for the term of several days, and is, in the mean time, accompanied
by a gradual cessation of all those distressing symptoms of which we have just
exhibited a partial detail.

546.
From the time of its first occurrence, this constitutional hemorrhagy (as it
may, with sufficient propriety, be denominated) becomes regularly periodical:
thus its future paroxysms return uniformly about the expiration of every fourth
week, and at each recurrence, the evacuation continues, at a mean calculation,
about six days; during which term, a healthy female is supposed to discharge
from eight ounces to an entire pound of blood.

547.
It is proper, however, to observe, that this function is subject, for the most
part, to an entire intermission, during the state of female pregnancy, and the
term of maternal lactation.

The final cessation of the catamenia occurs after their discharge has
continued, at stated periods, about the space of thirty years, which term of
time is completed, in our climate, about the 45th year of life.

548.
The sources of the catamenial discharge have been referred by some to the
vessels of the vagina, and by others (with superior weight of evidence on their
side) to those of the uterus: for with regard to those examples commonly
adduced in support of the former opinion, where women, although pregnant,
possessing an imperforated uterus, or distressed by a prolapsus of that organ
in an inverted state, have notwithstanding menstruated with uniform regularity,
they tend to prove nothing else than the powerful efforts of the vis medicatrix
naturae, which in cases where the main street is obstructed, is (to adopt a
vulgar mode of expression) fortunately acquainted with the routes through lanes
and alleys. There are on record, on the other hand, numerous diss^ctions of
females who died during the term of actual menstruation, from which it was
unequivocally ascertained, that the catamenial discharge had been wept out of,
or discharged in a stillicidious manner from, the uterine cavity of these
subjects: not to mention the arguments drawn a priori (as metaphysicians
express themselves), from which it appears highly probable, that the end and
destination of the ^enses are, to prepare the uterus for a state of future
pregnancy and render it more fit for the regular nutrition of the foetus. For
the very same reasons also this hemorrhagy appears to be attributed, wi^h more
propriety, to the arterial than to the ^enous vessels of the uterus.

549.
With regard to the causes of this periodical and perennial hemorrhagy, they
are shrouded by so thick a curtain of obscurity, and their investigation is
attended with such momentous difficulties, that in the prosecution of this
subject, we have not a sufficient power of evidence to conduct us over the
arduous mound which divides the twilight-region of probability from the more
luminous realm of demonstration, and certainty.

The proximate cause physiologists suppose to be a certain topical congestion
or plethora, to which opinion, indeed the symptoms of the impending catamenia,
together with the profusion and nature of the uterine blood vessels fitly
enough correspond, and in favor of the truth of which they exhibit a degree of
testimony sufficiently respectable.

Among its remote causes it will be proper to enumerate, the erect position of
the body (a position that serves as a characteristic distinction between the
human species and most other descriptions of animals); to which we must add,
the singular parenchyma of the uterus itself, and, finally, the vita propria or
specific life of that important organ.

With regard to the cause of the periodical recurrence of the catamenia, it
will here be better, much better to acknowledge our ignorance, than to indulge
ourselves in vague and visionary conjectures, and sportively range through the
fair but fallacious fields of mere speculative hypothesis. For I am, indeed,
persuaded, that all those periodical phenomena which occur in the animal body,
whether in health or disease, (provided their interval extend beyond the term
of 24 hours) must be ranked with those latent mysteries of animal nature, which
nothing but time, talents, and industry, will be ever able to develope.

SECT. XLIII. OF THE MILK.
550.
BETWEEN the female mammae and uterus (the former of which were, by the
philosopher Favorinus in his communications to Gellius, elegantly and
emphatically denominated, the sacred fountains that nourish the human race,
there exists such an extremely potent sympathetic connection, that these two
organs may be said to be indissolubly associated, or to accompany each other
hand in hand, in their phenomena and functions. Thus, during the tender period
of infancy, so great is their imbecility and want of action, that they are
capable of performing scarcely any function at all: as the years of puberty
advance, they begin, at the same time, to acquire vigor and activity, so that
on the first eruption of the catamenia, a swelling of the mammae or breasts
becomes also evident to the senses. Throughout the subsequent periods of life
those two organs are either subjected to simultaneous and similar changes, as
when the breasts become turgid and discharge milk during the progress of
pregnancy; or experience alternate and opposite affections, instances of which
we have in the suspension of the catamenia during the term of lactation, a more
copious effusion of the lochia when the secretion of milk does not commence at
the usual period, etc. And, lastly, on the unwelcome accession of old age, both
the preceding functions fail at the same time, so that when the catamenia
finally retreat, never again to return, the uterus and mammae become equally
flaccid, inert and wholly incapable of their former action. A great variety of
pathological phenomena, easily observable in cases of irregular menstruation,
in f^uor albus, and other similar affections, shall be in silence pretermitted,
although they furnish the most potent and unequivocal testimony in confirmation
of the sympathy now under consideration, namely, that which exists between the
uterus and mammae.

551.
Nor will this intimate sympathetic connection, which subsists between the
uterus and mammae, appear in any measure extraordinary or surprising, when we
consider, that all those diversified sources of physiological consent,
particularly enumerated on a former occasion ( 54), jointly cooperate in the
establishment of such connection between these organs of the female thorax and
abdomen.

552.
The anastomosis observable between the internal mammary and epigastric
arteries, was formerly esteemed a circumstance of the highest importance in the
explication of the foregoing consent. Although physiologists have hitherto
attributed by far too much to this remarkable anastomosis, yet that it ought
not to be entirely excepted from the number of cooperating causes will appear
extremely probable to any one who considers the obvious and wide difference
which exists between the diameter of the epigastric artery in a state of
pregnancy, and that of the same vessel during the period of lactation.

553.
The two preceding organs, namely, the uterus and mammae, possess also, in
common with each other, this further property, that they both retain and
exhibit a friendly affinity or attraction for the chyle, by which means they
solicit that fluid to themselves, especially during the term of pregnancy, and
thus convert it to peculiar uses.

554.
The female mammae consists of a placentoid congeries of small conglomerate
glands, distinguished by numerous sulci into lobes of considerable magnitude,
and completely embedded in a mass of adipose substance. On the anterior part,
in particular, a protuberance is formed by a more firm sebacious cushion, which
is covered and protected by a cutis of a very tender and delicate texture.

555.
Each one of these lobes is composed of a number of inferior lobuli, and these
again of what are denominated acini or kernels, in which the incipient radicles
of the lactiferous ducts originate, and from the extreme ramuli or branches of
the internal mammary artery extract a chyliform fluid, which they are
particularly destined to convey.

556.
The fine filiform radicles uniting successively in their onward passage,
terminate finally in leading trunks, corresponding in number to the principal
lobes; so that they generally amount, in each mamma, to about fifteen or
perhaps a few more. These trunks are frequently dilated into more spacious
sinuses, but never appear to be connected by genuine anastomoses.

557.
These trunks terminate in excretory canals of exquisite delicacy and
tenderness, which, being collected and closely approximated toward the center
of the mamma, form, by the cooperation of cellular membrane, the papilla or
nipple. This projecting papilla being interspersed and minutely pervaded by an
infinitude of blood vessels and nerves of extreme fineness and subtlety, is
subject to a very singular species of erection on the accession of certain
external stimuli.

558.
The nipple is surrounded by an areola or small circle, which is conspicuous,
as well as the papilla itself, on account of the singular color of the
reticulum mucosum expanded immediately beneath the epidermis or cuticle. This
areola is further distinguished by small sebaceous follicles, and likewise by a
few minute lactiferous ducts with which it is in some instances pervaded.

559.
The human milk which is secreted in the glandular organs hitherto described,
is a fluid of a well known color, somewhat watery, and containing also a small
portion of oil: this liquid is sweetish to the taste, extremely mild, and
resembles, in its general properties, the milk of domestic animals belonging to
the class mammalia, except that it is not, like the latter, subject to
coagulation from the action of acids, nor does it exhibit, to the most
attentive observation, the slightest vestige of volatile alkali.

560.
When coagulated, however, by the influence of spirits of wine, it exhibits the
same component elements of which the milk of those other animals already
mentioned is known to consist. For besides the watery halitus which human milk
emits when recently drawn, and yet in a tepid state, its serum, separating from
the caseous or cheezy portion, contains also the sugar of milk, which is
composed of the saccharine acid united to a calcareous earth, together with
certain additional parts oily and mucaginous in their natures. Lastly, it
contains also a cream or butter-like portion, the globules of which are
extremely various and changeable in their magnitudes, thus vibrating in their
diameters from the 1/^00th to the 1/^00th part of a line.

561.
The analogy which is observed to exist between chyle and blood, and between
each of these liquids and milk itself, renders it sufficiently probable, that
this last humor, (which constitutes at present the more immediate object of
our consideration), is a species of chyle renovated from the volume of blood,
or rather separated from this crimson fluid (with which it had just formed a
junction) previously to its final and complete assimilation. This opinion,
besides other arguments which might be advanced in its favor, derives powerful
testimony from the specific tastes of several kinds of aliment being not
unfrequently perceptible in the milk of nurses; and also from the chyle-like
habit and constitution of that watery milk, which not unfrequently exudes from
the breasts of females during the term of pregnancy, and for a short time after
the period of parturition.

562.
The reason why, during the progressive continuance of lactation, this bland
food of the foetus becomes gradually more and more inspissated, rich and oily,
must be referred chiefly to the lymphatic veins, with which the mammae
plentifully abound: Thus the more profuse the afflux of milk, and the greater
length of time this afflux has continued, with the more power and uniformity do
these lymphatics absorb its serous parts, and convey them back to the mass of
circulating blood, by which means they furnish the most effective aid to the
whole process of this secretion ( 476).

563.
During the first days after parturition, a very profuse secretion of milk
occurs, and (provided the mother lactates, i. e. suckles her child) is promoted
and kept up by the suction of the infant itself, until the catamenia return,
which had for a long time ceased to flow ( 547). The existence of milk in the
breasts of virgins truly inviolate, in the breasts of newborn infants of each
sex, and even in the breasts of men themselves, as well as in those of other
male animals belonging to the class mammalia, is a phenomenon which not
unfrequently presents itself to our observation.

564.
A profuse quantity or accumulation of milk in the breasts effectually solicits
its own final excretion, whence a spontaneous discharge of that fluid is
observed frequently to occur; this discharge is further promoted by the
external pressure of the mammae, as well as by the suction of the tender infant.

SECT. XLIV. OF CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.
565.
HAVING hitherto considered the structure of the genital organs peculiarly
belonging to each sex, we come now to treat of those functions or processes
which constitute the immediate end and destination of these organs, namely,
conception and the propagation of the human race. In the order and progress of
our enquiries into these abstruse and interesting subjects, we will first give
a plain and simple narrative of the several phenomena observable in this
admirable and truly divine process; and then attempt an investigation of the
energies from which these phenomena appear to originate.

566.
It is, in the first place, necessary to observe, that the subjects of the
human race have not, like most other animals (all those, if I be not deceived,
belonging to the class mammalia, man alone excepted), any peculiar season of
the year in which they are unusually prone to venereal enjoyments, but are
equally liable to experience, at every period and under every varying
temperature, the gentle glow of love's diffusive fires.

567.
When therefore, the female of the human species admits the embraces of the
male, and while they are thus mutually enwrapt in the ardour of that animal
instinct which far surpasses every other both in the universality and the
potency of its sway, the uterus (if we be not greatly deceived) being rendered
turgid by a species of inflammatory orgasm, and animated at the same time by
its own specific life, ( 538.) drinks in, as it were, the seminal fluid emitted
by the male, and effects a synchronous discharge of that which is proper to
itself ( 543); the fallopian tubes become at the same time rigid, and with
their fimbricated extremities embrace the adjacent ovaria: in one or the other
of these ovaria one of the vesiculae Graaffianae is lacerated or burst,
somewhat after the manner of an abscess advanced to a state of complete
maturity, and the albuminoid liquid which this ruptured vesicula contained,
being absorbed by the orifice of the embracing tube, is thus conveyed onward
into the cavity of the uterus.

568.
This liquid being discharged from the ovary, the external lips of the small
and recent wound through which it was emitted, are again united by a fine
cicatrix, while the remaining delicate vascular membrane in which the liquid
had been enclosed, constitutes what is called corpus luteum. This body appears
to be at first hollow and filled with a quantity of plastic lymph, that in
process of time is converted into a fleshy nucleus, invested by a firm cortex
or membrane, which is interspersed by a variety of minute, yet remarkable
blood vessels.

569.
The uterus being thus impregnated, the canal leading through the cervex or
neck of that organ, especially toward its superior or internal orifice, (
535.) is completely obstructed, in such a manner, that according to the common
course of nature there is no room left for superfoetation.

570.
The internal superfices of the uterus appears to be invested with a slight
inflammatory crust of plastic or coagulable lymph, ( 19.) which forms the
membrana caduca, (called also membrana decidua), of Hunter.

This membrane-like crust physiologists distinguish into two laminae or layers;
one of which, denominated lamina crassa, invests the whole internal cavity of
the uterus, except the immediate openings into the fallopian tubes, and the
internal orifice of the cervical canal; while the other is the growth of a
later period, and appears to be generated in the following manner, viz. after
the formation of the ovulum is fairly commenced, and this minute body begins to
strike its roots into the decidua, already mentioned, this second lamina begins
gradually to expand, and is thus continued from the place where those minute
roots begin to pullulate, over the remaining superficies of the ovum, whence it
has been distinguished by the name of caduca reflexa.

571.
Although the ovulum be formed itself at an earlier period than the embryo
which it is destined to contain, yet the real organization of the former seldom
commences earlier than the termination of the first week after conception. For
I very much doubt, whether or not, at an earlier period than this, any
unequivocal vestige of an organized body has been ever observed in the
impregnated uterus of the human subject.

572.
This ovulum, or little egg, is composed of two proper membranes, besides that
external adventitious covering, which it derives from the caduca of Hunter.

The proper membranes are, first, an external one, apparently destitute of
blood vessels, which forms the chorion of modern writers. From the earliest
origin of this membrane a great part of its external superficies is beautifully
set with knot-like flocculi or minute piles of inconceivable elegance, from
whence it has been called, chorion muscosum seu frondosum, i. e. the moss-like,
or leaf-like, chorion. By means of those delicate piles, which constitute the
rudiments of the foetal part of the future placenta, the ovulum is inserted (as
if by roots) into the decidua uterina. ( 569.)

The other membrane, lying interiorly, is denominated the amnion, which is also
destitute of blood vessels, ( 5.) it is indeed delicate and tender, but yet of
remarkable tenacity and strength.

573.
For a few weeks after the first formation of the ovulum, its two proper
membranes differ very widely from each other in point of size, the chorion
exhibiting the appearance of a larger bladder, to the inside of which the
amnion adheres under the form of a smaller one, and is attached in particular
to that part which is opposite to the center of the external floccose
superficies of the chorion.

The interstice which then exists between the chorion and amnion is filled with
a very subtle chrystaline water, of doubtful origin, and transient continuance.

For when the amnion begins, during the first months after conception, to
increase with greater rapidity than the chorion, and to gain on the latter
membrane in point of magnitude, this chrystaline liquor must necessarily
undergo a synchronous, and perfectly correspondent, diminution.

574.
The internal membrane of the ovum, from the earliest period of its formation
(. 570), till the final close of parturition itself, is constantly filled with
a fluid, denominated by physiologists, liquor amnii. This liquid is aqueous,
and of a pale yellowish color; it emits scarcely any odor, and is to the
taste bland, with a slight saline impregnation hardly perceptible;
physiologists generally suppose it to be a source of nourishment, and compare
it to the white of an egg, from which it notwithstanding, differs in a very
obvious and essential manner, as may be easily demonstrated by an attentive
experimental investigation.

The sources of this fluid are as yet doubtful: It is certainly, however,
neither deriv^d from the foetus nor the umbilical cord, as it is not
unfrequently found in abortive ovula, which contain neither of these bodies.

The quantity of this fluid is in an inverse proportion to the bulk of the
foetus. Thus the smaller and more tender the embryo, the more profuse is the
volume of liquor amnii, and vice versa.

Hence we are at liberty to hazard a conjecture respecting the primary use of
this liquor, which appears to be subservient, not so much to the nutrition, as
to the protection and defense of the minute body of the tender embryo, as yet
in a gelatinous state, and, therefore, wholly unable to bear the violence of
external injuries. With respect to that small portion of the liquor amnii,
which has been sometimes (though so rarely as to deserve to be esteemed a
preternatural occurrence) found in the stomach of the foetus, it cannot
possibly be destined for the purpose of its nutrition, as will be obvious to
any one who considers how extremely inert and empty the chyliferous system of
even a more mature foetus appears, how unfit for, and even how averse from, the
arduous and important process of chylification. To the foregoing circumstances
we might (if necessary) subjoin various examples of foetuses destitute of
heads, with diverse other arguments of a similar nature, and tending to the
establishment of a similar result.

575.
The embryo itself, which (suspended by the umbilical cord, as fruit appended
to its foot-stalk), floats in this liquor, begins to be formed about the third
week after conception: it appears first under the very simple globe-like figure
of a small bean or kidney, to which the rudiments of the extremities are
gradually subjoined, the symmetry and specific form farther completed, etc.

576.
According to the usual course of nature, the female of the human species is
uniparous, and conceives only one foetus at a time. She not unfrequently,
however, bears twins, the proportion of which to solitary births is, according
to the calculations of Sussmilch, as one to seven. In a case of twins each
foetus has its own amnion, but they are both enveloped in a common chorion.

577.
That medium, by the aid of which a reciprocal intercourse is preserved between
the embryo and mother, are the umbilical cord, and the placenta through which
this cord is minutely distributed.

578.
The umbilical cord, which appears to be coeval with the embryo itself, is
indeed very strikingly diversified, not only in point of length and thickness,
but also with respect to the place of its insertion into the placenta, its
varicose protuberances, etc. In general, however, it is formed of the spiral
contortions of three blood vessels, namely, a vein running to the liver of the
foetus, and two arteries which originate from the internal ilia^s or
hypogastries. These vessels are separated and distinguished from each other by
cellular partitions, running in various directions, and have their lights or
diameters frequently straitened by the small nodes or valve-like bodies of
Hoboken.

These vessels are collected and compacted together into a cord by means of
cellular membrane, which being filled with a singular and very limpid humor,
exhibits the appe^rance of jelly, but is invested externally by a continuation
of the amnion.

579.
At the place where the foetus is attached to this cord, the latter is joined
by a peculiar body, which originates from the bottom of the vesica urinaria (
486.), and pursues a middle course between the two umbilical arteries, namely,
the urachus. This body is, in the human species, pervious, for at least a short
space, and afterward totally disappears; but in other animals belonging to the
class mammalia, leads onward to what is called the allantois. Of this allantois
the human foetus appears to be entirely destitute, unless we be inclined to
designate by this name that mysterious and transient vesicu^a umbilicalis,
uniformly observable in the human ovula, between the chorion and amnion, which
(if I be not greatly deceived) Isbr. de Diemerbroek first discovered long
before it was seen by Albinus or Zinn. But in more modern times it is
discovered too frequently, and with too uniform an aspect in unvitiated and
fruitful human ovula, (even to so late a period as the third month after
conception), to be any longer considered as an accidental, a morbid, or a
monstrous conformation of the part.

580.
The blood vessels of the cord, of which we have already spoken, pass into the
placenta, which was formerly said to originate from the leaf-like superficies
of the chorion, a membrane attached to, and even inserted in, the decidua
crassa: Hence we perceive that the placenta is a body composed of two different
kinds of substance, received from an equal number of sources. Thus, for
example, one kind called the uterine, from its immediate apposition to that
organ, is derived from the decidua, and constitutes the spongy parenchymatous
portion of the placenta; while the other belonging to the foetus, and therefore
called the foe^al part, is derived from the umbilical vessels distributed
throughout the chorion.

At this time the increase of the tender ovum is unequal, so that the growth of
the smooth portion of the chorion is greater and more rapid than that of the
muscosum or moss-like; hence it is evident, that the relative magnitude of the
placenta to that of the whole volume of the egg, is greater in proportion as
the conception is more recent, and less, on the other hand, accordingly as the
period of parturition is nearer.

As pregnancy gradually advances, the placenta becomes more and more close and
compact in its texture; it is impressed with grooves, and distinguished into
lobes on its external surface which respects the uterus, but is smooth and
highly polished on its internal, which, looking toward the foetus, is invested
or lined by the amnios. With regard to magnitude, thickness, figure, and
situation or point of cohesion to the uterus, it is subject to a multitude of
diversities; it is attached, however, for the most part, to the fundus or
bottom of that organ; and is, upon the whole, equally destitute of both
sensibility ( 205.) and genuine irritability ( 307).

581.
Although all physiologists uniformly concur in this, that the placenta is the
principal organ through the medium of which the tender foetus is supplied with
nutriment, yet various controversies have latterly existed among them
respecting the genuine mode of its official action, and its reciprocal
relation, as well to the uterus as to the foetus. From an attentive and
impartial consideration of all the testimony that can be collected on this
subject, the result appears to be, that there exists no direct anastomosis
between the blood vessels of the maternal uterus and those of the umbilical
cord; but the arterial blood which passes by a continuous route from the uterus
of the mother to that portion of the placenta that owes its origin to the
decidua crassa, is there absorbed by the inc^^ient radicles of the umbilical
veins, that are distributed throughout the moss-like portion of the chorion,
and thus conducted into the venous trunk of the funis umbilicalis: while, on
the other hand, the blood which is conveyed back from the foetus by the
umbilical arteries, being in like manner effused into the parenchyma of the
placenta, is taken up by the venous radicles of its uterine portion, and thus
finally re-conveyed into the substance of the uterus itself.

The foregoing opinions receive additional confirmation from the many well
guarded but fruitless attempts that have been made by different physiologists
to inject the vessels of the umbilical cord through those of the uterus, or, on
the other hand, to fill the vessels of the latter organ by injections forced
through those of the former. As a further evidence in support of the same
principles, we may mention the difference which is observed to exist between
the pulse of the mother and that of the foetus before their final disengagement
from each other; and lastly, it may not be improper to add, as a circumstance
tending to the establishment of the same result, the observations which we
formerly delivered respecting the difference between the nature of the foetal
and that of the maternal blood ( 147).

But further, it appears probable that a portion of chyle is also conveyed to
the foetus along with the blood of the mother. For besides the consideration,
that the blood of the mother is not at all times equally pure and unmixed, but,
for some hours after every meal, carries along with it, in an unassimilated
state, that portion of chyle recently received from the thoracic duct, it has
been demonstrated, on a former occasion, that the uterus itself possesses a
singular and strong affinity to the chyle and milk ( 550.553.); and there are
also on record a great variety of observations, from which it appears, that a
milky juice has been actually discovered in the uterine portion of the placenta.

582.
During the progressive advancement of pregnancy, while the foetus and
secundines increase so very remarkably in magnitude, it is obvious that the
uterus must be also subjected to striking and remarkable changes. Besides the
augmentation of its bulk, so extremely evident at first view, those changes
respect also its situation and figure, but affect more especially the texture
of this singular and important viscus. Thus, in consequence of the uniform and
weighty congestion of humors which the gravid uterus is obliged to sustain, it
is likewise subjected to extreme alteration, both with regard to the state of
its blood vessels, and also with respect to that of its parenchymatous portion,
throughout which those vessels are interwoven.

On the present occasion it may not be improper to observe, that in proportion
as the impregnated uterus advances in magnitude, its blood vessels lose that
mazy and convoluted appearance, for which they are at other times so very
remarkable, and assume courses much more rectilineal or direct; while at the
same time they are subjected to a considerable extension of their diameters,
and a consequent increase of their real capacities. Thus, even the uterine
veins have become so extremely capacious and prominent, as to have been
mistaken by numerous anatomists for true sinuses.

With regard to the parenchymatous portion of the impregnated uterus, it
becomes gradually more and more lax and spongy, especially where it is in
contact with the ovum contained; so that toward its fundus or bottom it
becomes considerably thick, and in a living and healthy female, is greatly
distended with blood, and possesses the powers of life in a very high degree.
This organ is, notwithstanding, soft at the same time, and very widely
di^^erent in its general habit and appearance from the firm and compact flesh
of the uterus in an unimpregnated state: this difference is still more striking
if the subject containing the gravid uterus be dead, in which case, provided
pregnancy be considerably advanced, this organ falsely assumes in its texture
(as was formerly well observed by Arantius), a lamellated appearance.

It may not be amiss, on the present occasion, briefly to enumerate a few more
of the most important changes to which the gravid uterus is subjected, together
with the most remarkable ones that occur in the ovum and foetus. These changes
we will consider in the successive order in which they appear throughout the
series of ten lunar months, which period of time is now, with sufficient
propriety, supposed to constitute the most natural term of pregnancy.

583.
As we uniformly observe the uterus beginning to swell shortly after the time
of impregnation, ( 567.) so being from that period increased both in bulk and
weight, it descends a little deeper into the superior part of the vagina;
notwithstanding this descent it still retains its former figure in all, except
the following, respects, viz. its fundus becomes a little more unequal, its
anterior paries or wall, recedes a little farther from the posterior, and its
cavity, which was before very narrow and almost triangular, now accommodates
itself to the globose figure of the ovulum it encloses.

About the end of the first month, the ovulum itself amounts to the size of a
pigeon's egg, and has the two deciduae separated from each other, and also the
small amnion situated at a distance from the larger chorion: about the
termination of the third month it attains the size of a goose's egg, the caduca
re^lexa becomes approximated to the crassa, and the amnion approaches nearer to
the chorion. The amnion abounds, at this time, with a profuse volume of fluid
denominated liquor amnii. In this liquor the embryo, as yet very tender, and
extremely small in proportion to the quantity of the surrounding fluid (being
at this time scarcely equal in magnitude to a small mouse) appears to fluctuate
in a loose and unsteady manner, and is even now in a precipitate position.

584.
About the fourth month after conception, the uterus begins to assume more of
an oval or somewhat globe-like appearance; its neck being more and more
softened, gradually shortened, and as it were, destroyed, or rather latterly
distended, it again protrudes upwards, and begins to ascend from the smaller
into the larger pelvis. At the same time the fallopian tubes themselves, with
the unequal bottom of the uterus being elevated or borne upwards, are thus
extended and elongated; these tubes are, however, attached and connected so
closely to the sides of the uterus, that they cannot recede from them, more
than one half of their own length; hence, when only viewed superficially, they
appear to originate and proceed from the middle of the uterus, which has given
birth to a very erroneous opinion respecting the astonishing increase of the
fundus uteri.

From this time also the foetus acquires by degrees such an increased
magnitude, as renders it more proportionate to the capacity of the ovum, and
begins about the same period to fix itself in a more steady and firm position,
which it preserves till the very close of parturition: in this position its
head is placed in a downward direction, and and its face turned toward the
lumbar region of the mother, inclining, for the most part, somewhat obliquely
toward the left side.

585.
In the middle stage of pregnancy, which occurs about the end of the fifth
month, the uterus has attained such a magnitude, that its fundus is elevated to
a point halfway between the pubes and umbilicus, and the pregnant state
becomes now observable from the external appearance of the abdomen.

About the same time, the foetus becomes more perceptible to the mother from
the agitative motion of its body, though we are not able to determine, with
accuracy and definitude the precise period of time at which this motion takes
place. It appears now, however, to be more vigorous and active, so that,
according to the common use and acceptance of speech, it may be said to be the
unequivocal action of life.

586.
Throughout the five remaining lunar months the uterus, with the foetus which
it contains, make gradually still farther advancements in point of magnitude.
Thus, at the end of the sixth month they reach nearly to the umbilicus or
navel; and about the termination of the eighth approach even the scrobiculus
cordi^, in consequence of farther protrusion upwards. The cervix uteri is in
the mean time more and more obliterated, reduced nearer to a level with the
adjacent parts of that organ, and its parietes or walls considerably diminish
in thickness.

587.
Finally, about the end of the tenth month after conception, the uterus being
oppressed and overpowered as it were, by its own bulk and weight, (its
longitudinal axis, amounting in general to 11, and its transverse to 9 inches
in length) begins again to subside, and as the period of parturition
approaches, its ostium or mouth is gradually expanded, and thus exhibits an
orbicular or ring-like opening.

Each membrana caduca, more especially the reflected one, which adheres to the
chorion, having been gradually attenuated for several months immediately
preceding, exhibits now a kind of net-like appearance distinctly marked by
short fibers of a whitish color.

Such is the size of the placenta at this advanced period, that its greatest
diameter or breadth amounts to about 9 inches, its least diameter or thickness
to about one inch; and its weight to about one pound, and sometimes more.

The length of the umbilical cord for the most part equals, and sometimes even
exceeds, eighteen inches.

The weight of a mature and well grown foetus is nearly seven pounds, its
length about twenty inches.

The quantity of the liquor amnii is so extremely variable, that it cannot
possibly be ascertained with any degree of definitude; in general, however, it
scarcely amounts to a pound, provided the foetus be healthy and robust.

SECT. XLV. OF THE NISUS FORMATIVUS.
588.
HAVING thus enumerated and described, in a plain and simple manner, the most
obvious and unequivocal phenomena of conceptions, together with such changes as
are discovered by attentive observation to succeed each other, during the
progressive course of pregnancy, not only in the human ovum itself, but also in
the foetus which it embraces, and contains, we now proceed to an investigation
of those physical powers, by the influence and efficacy of which the sublime
and truly astonishing process of generation appears to be most probably
accomplished.

589.
There are not wanting certain characters of high celebrity and distinction who
attempt, even in our own times, to explain the divine process, in the following
brief and summary manner; they contend that the genuine work of actual
generation has not, at the present time, any real existence at all; on the
contrary, they allege, that the whole human race possessed, under the form of
original germs, a joint pre-exstence in the genital system of one or other of
our first parents, and that these germs have ever been, and are yet, subjected
to gradual evolutions, according as the progressive lapse of time, aided by the
cooperation of specific causes, has contributed to awaken them to the
enjoyment of open and actual life.

Unfortunately, however, for the advocates of the foregoing hypothesis, an
essential difference of opinion prevails among them on a point of considerable
magnitude and importance; thus, while some of them are anxiously in quest of
those original germs among the animalculae that people the semen of the male;
others are searching for those microscopic animals with no less industry and
zeal in the ovaria of the female.

590.
To the latter of these sects in physiology, I must acknowledge that I myself
was formerly an adherent. I was lead to adopt the opinion of this learned body
not only by the respectable authority of its numerous advocates, but also by
the want of another more rational and satisfactory. At present, however, I am
obliged to repudiate this doctrine entirely, to confess my errrors, and
endeavor if possible to correct them; having been fully convinced, from a more
close and minute attention to the phenomena of generation, that nature performs
this process in a manner quite different from that contemplated and embraced in
the theory now under consideration.

591.
For I am indeed daily more and more convinced, that all living organized
bodies possess, from their earliest effort at organization to the closing glass
of their existence, a peculiar power perpetually active, perpetually
efficacious, the immediate ^estination of which is, first, to mould the bodies
in which it resides into their native and specific forms by the mysterious
process of generation, to preserve them afterward from destruction by the
ceaseless function of nutrition, and, in case of a^cidental mutilation, to
restore their parts again, as far as consistent with the regular establishments
of nature, by the process of reproduction. That this energy may not be
confounded with the other kinds of vital energy, let it be distinguished by the
name of nisus formativus. By this name, however, we mean to designate not so
much a cause as a perpetual and uniform effect, the existence and reality of
which are deduced from actual observations made on the constant and universal
occurrence of certain physical phenomena. It is thus, with views, and on
principles entirely similar, that we make use of the terms attraction and
gravitation, to denote certain energies or sources of action, the causes of
which are notwithstanding still involved in more than cimmerian darkness.

592.
To me it appears, indeed, highly probable, that a stated period of time is
requisite for accomplishing the intimate mixture, the union and complete
concoction or maturity of those various inquiline humors, belonging to each
sex, ( 518. 524. 542. 543.) which are doubtless discharged into the cavity of
the uterus, during every act of fruitful coition. This term of preparation
having at length elapsed, and the liquors being fully matured and brought into
the most perfect state of union and reciprocal influence, the nisus formativus
is forthwith excited into action, by means of which the spermatic mass,
hitherto formless and chaotic, is partly arranged and organized into the
elegant and beautiful envelopes of the nascent ovulum, and partly molded into
the figure of the living embryo which this minute bodies encloses. From this
theory we can assign a satisfactory reason, why the uterus, for the two first
weeks after conception, appears to contain a mass of crude and shapeless
humors alone, and does not exhibit, even to our best glasses (now brought to
very high perfection), the smallest vestige of an organized embryo, which,
notwithstanding bursts into view almost instantaneously about the end of the
third week, and is, even on its first appearance, of considerable magnitude.

593.
Of the nisus formativus we are presented with more remote vestiges throughout
every department of natural bodies, not excluding even the most simple elements
of matter, where original germs cannot possibly be supposed to have the shadow
of an existence. Thus, the clouds themselves assume their own determinate
forms, and even the streaming torrents or veins of the electric fluid preserve
specific figures. There are, again, in the mineral kingdom, specimens of
metallic chrystallization, which, if indeed the form alone be considered, and
the prerogative of life kept entirely out of view, bear the most striking
resemblance to truly organized bodies.

In testimony of the truth of this, we need only mention the curious hypniform
crystals into which refined or depurated copper shoots when first reduced to a
state of fusion, or that exquisitely beautiful specimen of native peruvian
silver which they call filicinum or fern-like, from the resemblance of its
figure to that of the plant denominated fern.

594.
In like manner both the animal and vegetable kingdoms afford numerous examples
of organized bodies, in which, from their magnitude being sufficient to render
them visible, from their beautiful and unclouded transparency and from the
extreme rapidity of their progressive growth, the whole process of generation
is completely unmasked as it were, and may be subjected to the examination of
the naked eye. The result of attentive and minute observations made on this
process in such subjects as these, will be sufficient to evince, on the
authority of the most indubitable testimony that, at least in these bodies, no
germs pre-exist. In illustration of the above position it will be sufficient to
mention from among the different individuals of the vegetable kingdom, the
conferra fontinalis. And from those of the animal, the hydra viridis.

595.
I should far exceed the limits prescribed to these institutions were I to
attempt a minute and circumstantial detail of the various arguments which, in
my view, nature herself furnishes to prove the potent influence of the nisus
formativus in the process of generation. It may be proper, however, briefly to
state a few of them, the force and efficacy of which will appear sufficiently
evident on the slightest examination.

596.
The first argument I shall further propose on this subject is taken from the
history of those curious and interesting subjects of organized nature
denominated hybrids. From a very beautiful and celebrated experiment it
appears, that, if prolific female hybrids be successively through several
generations impregnated by males of any given species different from the
species of the females, the new offspring will gradually deviate so widely from
the original form of the mother, and make such evident and effectual strides
toward that of the father, as to lose at length every vestige of similitude to
the former, and become finally, (by a species of arbitrary metamorphosis)
completely assimilated to the external figure and appearance of the latter.

597.
There exists a phenomenon or fact relative to the history and production of
monsters, (the truth of which is too well ascertained and established to admit
of a doubt), that merits our attention while on the consideration of the
present interesting and intricate subject. It is a circumstance well known to
naturalists, that those animal productions denominated monsters (most of which
are supposed, by the advocates for the celebrated doctrine of evolution, to
have pre-existed in a monstrous germiform state from their original creation)
-- it is, I say, well known, that such preternatural productions, though very
frequent among certain species of animals in a subjugated or domestic state
(more especially among swine), are notwithstanding very rarely found among the
original and freeborn animals of the very same species, that have never been
reduced to an humble state of domestication, but still range the commons and
wilds of nature, wholly exempt from the tyrannic control of man.

598.
It is necessary further to observe, that not only monstrosities co-eval with
the birth of animals, but also subsequent adventitious mutilations and other
species of deformity, whether produced on the animal system by accident or
design, become now and then completely hereditary; and thus, what was at first
the effect of art alone, may be said to become at length the actual work of
nature herself.

599.
The phenomena of re-production in general are much more easily and rationally
accounted for, by considering them as the result of a nisus formativus, than by
referring them to the pre-existence of partial or local germs. This observation
is more fully and clearly illustrated, and its truth more forcibly exhibited by
an application of it to some particular instances of re-production, as that of
the nails, for example, which after the entire loss of the first, are well
known to be frequently regenerated on the second phalanx of the fingers.

600.
Again, in certain parts of the body where no pre-existence of germs can
possibly be suspected, we not unfrequently see organic parts of a preternatural
order produced by the vis medicatrix naturae, when roused into action in
consequence of accidental diseases: As an example, and in illustration of this,
we may mention those small ossifications known by the name of ossicula
Wormiana, which, in cases of hydrocephalus internus, are formed by the
provident powers of the animal system, for the purpose of arching over and thus
completely closing the enlarged fontanel.

601.
Finally, on comparing with candor, and weighing with impartiality, the
various arguments on each side of the question, it very evidently appears, that
besides a power of exciting to motion and action, which the advocates for the
pre-existence of germs attribute to the male semen, in order to render their
favorite theory more specious and plausible, they must also bestow on that
fluid plastic or formative powers of the utmost extent and influence: Whence it
is obvious, that the doctrine for which they so zealously contend, is of itself
wholly inadequate to the explanation of the numerous and intricate phenomena of
generation, unless it be aided by the powerful concurrence of a nisus
formativus: Whereas, on the other hand, the system which we have just proposed
on the subject is, without the bold presumption of pre-existent germs, fully
sufficient to explain all the multiplicity of phenomena attendant on this
divine process. Let us then on the present, as we should on every other point
of controversy, adhere to that doctrine which is most simple in its nature, and
most conclusive in its end, from a thorough conviction, that an unnecessary
multiplication of entities or causes is no less repugnant to real and practical
utility, than to the tenor and spirit of sound philosophy.

SECT. XLVI. OF PARTURITION, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
602.
THE foetus being regularly formed and fashioned by the energies of which we
have hitherto treated, and advanced through the progressive stages of its
subsequent growth, till it be brought to a state of foetal perfection, must,
after arriving at this particular period of maturity, be finally ushered into
the enjoyment of light and entire life, by the painful business of parturition.

603.
This critical and important period arrives, agreeably to the usual order of
spontaneous nature, (which is the only object contemplated in physiology),
about the termination of the tenth lunar month, i. e. about the 39th or 40th
week after conception.

604.
When a pregnant female finally arrives at this eventful crisis, she is
forcibly impelled to the labor of parturition by an insuperable necessity,
already said ( 295.) to be less subject to the control of the will than that
which urges to the performance of any other function belonging to the human
body.

605.
With respect to the causes of a revolution so determinate and sudden,
different and even opposite opinions have been entertained by different
physiologists. When we view, and take into attentive consideration, all the
attendant circumstances, it appears necessary to refer the cause, which
immediately impels to parturition, to an eternal law of nature, which has
hitherto received no better explanation than has been given to a great many
other physical phenomena, which take place in like manner at regular and stated
periods; such, for example, as the metamorphosis of insects, the progressive
stages of eruptive fevers, their crises, etc. etc. Without subjecting
themselves to the just charge of fancifully entering on an absurd speculation,
certain physiologists have compared a mature ovum, in the uterus of the human
subject, to the healthy fruit of vegetables, which when completely ripened,
fall spontaneously from their parent plants, in consequence of a
self-constriction of the vessels through which their nourishment was conveyed.
It has been in like manner observed, that as the period of parturition
approaches, the human placenta suffers a slight degree of constriction, and
becomes thus prepared, as it were, for its impending separation from the
surrounding uterus.

With regard to the opinion entertained on this subject by physiologists in
general, namely, that the amazing expansion to which the impregnated uterus is
subjected, with a multitude of other impressions or impulsive powers of a like
nature, act as the genuine exciting causes of parturition, it appears to be
very clearly and effectually invalidated by a great variety of arguments, which
may be fairly deduced from the unequivocal phenomena of the animal economy
itself: of these arguments we think proper to mention the following, namely, in
numberless genuine cases of extra-uterine conception, where the foetuses have
been contained, for example, in the Fallopian tubes, or in the ovaria, the
uterus has notwithstanding been attacked by painful and convulsive throws,
about the termination of the tenth lunar month after the occurrence of such
preternatural conception.

606.
Besides the exciting, it is evident that there must be also the joint
cooperation of very powerful efficient causes, arising from the nature and
properties of the uterus itself, and of the contents which it encloses.

The proximate or immediate and primary cause must be doubtless referred solely
to the vita propria, or specific life of the uterus itself ( 47.)

Of the remote causes the leading and most considerable appear to be, the
powerful efforts which are made by the assistance of the process of
respiration, and the extensive consent or cooperation of the intercostal nerve
with the other portions of the nervous system.

607.
When finally the labor of genuine parturition is excited, its phenomena
observe a determinate and regular order with regard to their commencement and
subsequent progressive course. In consequence of this, they have been divided
by accoucheurs into different stages, of which four have been enumerated by the
latest writers on the obstetric art.

608.
In the first stage, the parturient patient experiences a ^^ght attack of those
peculiar and well-known pains, called in that state precursors or warnings,
which shoot in a direction from the loins to the lower parts of the uterus, and
which are indeed felt at intervals, (though with diminished frequency and
force), throughout the whole period of parturition: the orifice of the uterus
begins, at the same time, to be considerably dilated, the abdominal tumor
subsides, an inclination to pass urine becomes urgent and troublesome, and a
copious discharge of mucus takes place from the genital organs, now in a state
of distension and laxity.

609.
In the second stage, the pains increase, and are now distinguished by the name
of preparantes, or preparatory efforts: the inferior segment of the coverings
or membranes of the ovum are, at the same time, protruded through the uterine
orifice into the vagina.

610.
In the third stage the pains still continue greatly augmented in their
violence, and are now denominated dolores ad partum i. e. The genuine pains of
parturition.
. They act against the uterus with a more violent impetus, and thus potently
protrude it downwards, while, at the same time the uterus presses with such
astonishing force on the encarcerated foetus, as to occasion a rupture in the
membranes by which it is enclosed.

611.
During the fourth and last stage of parturition, while the patient is agitated
with convulsive throws, and tortured with the most excruciating pain, she
makes, at length, a violent exertion, (not unfrequently accompanied with
horripilation, grinding of the teeth, trembling of the knees, etc.), by the
impulsive force of which, the head of the emerging infant is urged forward, and
finally protruded quite through the external orifice with its face foremost: in
this unlooked for position it is forced to advance, in consequence of the
vertex or crown of the head becoming lodged against the arch of the pubes,
while its other parts are urged onward, and obliged to revolve on the
stationary vertex, as on an axis, or center of motion. Thus, amidst a profuse
discharge of blood, the infant is finally excluded from its place of
confinement, and introduced to the enjoyment of light and life.

612.
The foetus being thus happily excluded, the birth of the secu^^ines succeeds,
after a short interval, accompanied, in like manner, with painful, though much
less violent, throws: this latter birth is, as well as the former, followed by
a discharge of blood, from that part of the uterine cavity to which the
placenta adheres by means of the crassa or gross membrana decidua.

613.
The uterus, being thus, at once delivered of its twofold birth, by which it
had been encumbered and oppressed, is now contracted by little and little, till
it is finally restored to its former figure, and reduced almost to its former
size.

614.
During the first week after the birth of the child, there exists, from the
genital organs of the mother, an uninterrupted effusion of the lochia, a
discharge very much resembling the catamenia, except that it is more profuse in
quantity, especially when not in any measure checked or diminished, by the
commencement of lactation. The bloody or florid color of the liquid discharged
by this evacuation is, notwithstanding, changed about the fourth day to a pale
red, and from thence passes on to assume a white appearance.

As soon as the uterus is thoroughly cleansed of all remaining fragments of its
deciduous membrane, and has thus finally completed the painful and tedious task
of propagation, it may again resume the natural process of menstruation, or
even return to the performance of fresh immolations on the altar of conception
itself.

SECT. XLVIII. OF THE DIFFERENCES BY WHICH THE HUMAN SUBJECT IS CHARACTERISED
BEFORE AND AFTER BIRTH.
615.
FROM what has been already said respecting the mode of life enjoyed by the
foetus, while yet encarcerated within the parietes, and immersed in the
warm-bath of the maternal uterus, it is extremely obvious that an immense
difference must exist, between the functions of the animal economy in this
state, and that which shortly succeeds, when the infant is finally introduced,
by birth, into entire life, and is possessed of a power of spontaneous motion.
An enumeration and statement of the leading points or circumstances of this
difference, constitutes the design of the present section.

616.
To begin then with the circulation of the blood, it must be observed, that the
route of this crimson fluid is different in the foetal state, from what it is
in that which immediately succeeds paturition or birth. During the continuance
of the former state, the foetus is connected, and preserves a circular
intercourse with the uterine placenta, by means of the umbilical cord; it has
never, as yet, inspired air for the purpose of supplying the blood with that
vital pabulum, a process which immediately commences and is uniformly continued
after birth, when this reciprocal connection between the mother and child, is
finally destroyed.

617.
The umbilical vein originating from the placenta of the mother, and passing
through what is called the umbilical ring of the foetus, directs its course
toward the liver, where it discharges its blood into the sinus of the vena
portarum; from thence the blood is distributed in part, by the ramifications of
this memorable vein, throughout the liver, and in part, conveyed by a direct
route through the ductus venosus Arantii, to the inferior or ascending vena
cava.

The two foregoing canals, namely, both that portion of the umbilical cord
which is contained in the abdomen of the foetus, and also the ductus venosus
mentioned above, suffer after birth an entire obliteration of their cavities,
and assume the nature and appearance of solid cords, insomuch that the former
constitutes what is denominated the round ligament of the liver.

618.
When, in the foetus, the blood is conveyed from the inferior vena cava to the
right side of the heart, the greater part of it is denied a passage from thence
through the lungs, and is therefore directed toward the left or posterior
auricle of the heart, by the valve of Eustachius, and admitted into that cavity
through the foramen ovale.

619.
For over the mouth of the inferior vena cava, after its ascent from the cavity
of the abdomen in the foetal state, a valve of a lunated figure is extended,
which, in honor of its immortal discoverer, has been called the valve of
Eustachius. This luniform body is, for the most part, gradually obliterated as
life advances, although in the foetal state it appears to perform the important
office of directing the blood, emerging from the abdominal cavity, toward an
orifice to be spoken of presently, which penetrates the septum situated between
the two auricles of the heart.

620.
The orifice referred to in the preceding paragraph is called the foramen
ovale, through which by far the greater part of the ascending column of blood,
derived immediately from the inferior vena cava, is conducted into the left
auris of the heart during each diastole of the auricles: of this blood the
regurgitation is effectually prevented, by the elegant falciform valve formerly
mentioned, which is closely spread over the foramen, and appears to close that
orifice completely, during each systolic motion of the auricles. During the
first years of infancy the foramen ovale is in part closed by means of this
small valve, and partly obliterated by the gradual but slow adhesion of its
sides: in correspondence to such adhesion, the valve of Eustachius itself
undergoes also a slow and gradual diminution in point of size, till scarcely a
wreck of it is left behind.

621.
Of that blood which, at the same time, enters the right auricle of the heart
from the superior vena cava, a very small portion only can be received by the
lungs of the foetus, as yet in a weak and inactive condition: it is therefore
taken up by the ductus arteriosus, from the trunk of the pulmonary artery (of
which this duct is indeed the leading branch) and conveyed by a direct and
speedy route to the arch of the aorta, without passing through the lungs at
all. Within the course of a few weeks after the birth of the infant, the cavity
of the ductus arteriosus is, for the most part obliterated, and its parietes or
walls converted into the nature and appearance of a dense and firm ligament.

622.
The blood being propelled through the trunk of the aorta, that portion of it,
destined to be re-conveyed to the system of the mother, enters the umbilical
arteries ( 578.) which pass through the annulus umbilicalis, on each side of
the urachus, and are, in like manner, after the birth of the infant, converted
into solid imperforated cords.

623.
As the lungs perform in the foetus scarcely any function at all, their general
habit and appearance differ very materially from those which they assume after
the infant has commenced the process of respiration. Thus, their bulk is
proportionably much less, their color more dark, their substance more compact,
and hence their specific gravity so much greater, that when immersed, recent
and free from putrefaction, into a vessel of water, they sink instantly to the
bottom; whereas, on the other hand, if ^he infant has been born in a living
state, and taken in air by inspiration, these viscera, for the most part, float
on the surface of water, or of any other fluid equally ponderous. The right
lobe of the lungs appears to possess the peculiar prerogative of being dilated
a little sooner than the, left by the incipient influx of air in the first act
of inspiration. With regard to the other phenomena of this new function of
life, they were enumerated formerly, when we were treating particularly of the
process of respiration.

624.
From the observations which were formerly proposed on the nutrition of the
foetus ( 574, 581.), it may be very easily perceived that the state and
condition of the alimentary tube and chylopoletic system, are extremely
different before, from what they are after, the birth of the infant, these
viscera being in the first case inert and wholly incapable of action. Thus, for
instance, in the tender embryo of only a very few months existence, the larger,
are perfectly similar in habit and appearance to the smaller, intestines; but
during the closing months of pregnancy the former portion of the intestinal
canal (being considerably distended with meconium) appears to merit
unequivocally that name by which it is afterward distinguished from the latter.

625.
The meconium is a peculiar species of saburra, of a green color, shaded with
more or less of a brownish cast. It is doubtless derived from the inquiline
humors of the foetus itself, more especially from the bile: that it is indeed
of a bilious origin we are induced to believe from the following
considerations: -- First, because the earliest appearance of this excrementious
substance corresponds exactly, in point of time, with the commencement of the
biliary secretion; and, Secondly, because we learn from accurate observation,
that such monsters as are destitute of a liver, have their intestines supplied
with nothing else but a small quantity of colorless mucus instead of the more
common and natural meconium.

626.
In the newborn infant the form of the coecum is also very widely different
from what it is in the future periods of life; and this intestine is then
continued in a direct line with the appendicula vermiformis.

627.
Several other differences and peculiarities, of a similar nature, we have
already spoken of on particular occasions, and shall here, therefore, only
glance on them in the most brief and transient manner:

They are the Urachus ( 579.) the membrana pupillaris ( 259.) and, in the male
foetus, the descent of the testes ( 501.)

A few additional peculiarities will be spoken of with more propriety in the
following section. Others, as being of less importance, we voluntarily
pretermit in perfect silence.

628.
The present appears to be indeed a very fit and favorable opportunity for
calling the attention of the reader to three parts of the human body,
altogether peculiar in their nature and obscure in their destination, which are
of a greater proportional size in the foetus than in the adult, and appear to
be in a special manner subservient to the economy of the former. The true and
unequivocal uses of the parts now in contemplation have not as yet, however,
been clearly and satisfactorily ascertained, although, anxiously sought after
by the combined labors of numerous and very respectable anatomists. These
parts are designated by the name of glands, although their parenchyma is far,
very far, different from the glandular, and they have never been discovered to
possess the faintest vestige of an excretory duct. They are denominated the
thyroid gland, the thymus, and the renes succenturiatati.

629.
The thyroid gland is situated on the anterior side of a cartilage of the same
name, which enters into the conformation of the larynx. It consists of two
lobes, and is of a lunated or falciform figure; in the foetus it is distended
with a lymphatic fluid, but, as life advances, becomes gradually more and more
spoliated of its distending liquid.

630.
The thymus consists of a mass of shining and very tender flesh, is, in like
manner with the preceding substance, bilobular, now and then divided into two
distinct portions, and contains also occasionally a cavity of considerable
dimensions. This body is situated beneath the middle and upper part of the
sternum, and ascends on each side even to the throat itself; in the foetus it
is large, irregular in its figure, and abounds with a juice of a milk-like
nature; but as youth advances it gradually diminishes in size, until, finally,
on the accession of old age, it is so completely obliterated as to exhibit
scarcely a shadow of its former existence.

631.
Lastly, The Renes succenturiatali, (called likewise glandulae suprarenales,
capsulae atrabiliariae, etc.) are situated beneath the diaphragm, resting on
the upper extremities of the kidneys. In adults they are not only diminished in
size, but are also removed to a small distance from the contact of the kidneys,
and contain a dark colored fluid, which in the foetus is more inclined to a
pale red.

SECT. XLVIII. OF THE INCREASE, MATURITY, AND DECLINE OF MAN.
632.
HAVING hitherto minutely considered the human economy, in detail, agreeably to
the several classes into which its physical functions are divided, nothing
further remains at present than to take a general, brief, and comprehensive
survey of man in his transit over the diversified stage of life, and thus
accompany him, from his earliest vital pulse in an embriotic state, throughout
the leading revolutions and aeras in his economy, down to the final termination
of his existence.

633.
First, then, about the third week after conception, the rudimental
organization of the embryo appears to take place ( 575.): about the fourth week
afterward, while the embryo still enjoys an extremely low and languid degree
of life, bordering even on that of a vegetable, it is supplied with the first
portion of genuine red blood ( 13.) The motion of the corculum or minute heart,
has been but very seldom observed by physiologists in the incipient human
embryo, but was long since discovered by Aristotle in the incubated chick, and
has been, from that period, designated by the name of the punctum saliens.

634.
About the seventh or eighth week after conception, the momentous process of
osteogeny, or the generation of bone, commences in the human subject. Those
parts where osseous, or bony matter makes the first depositions for the
formation of its nuclei, are the clavicles, the ribs, the vertebrae, the long
cylindrical bones of the extremities, the mandible or lower jaw, and certain
other bones of the face, etc. Those parts again where the osseous depositions
are secondary in point of time, are some of the plain bones of the skull, such,
for example, as the frontal and occipital: -- while the bones of the neck, etc.
are formed at a still later period.

The younger the embryo is, in particular, or to proceed on a more extensive
and general scale, the younger the human subject is, whether before or after
birth, with the greater rapidity does its growth advance, and vice versa.

635.
About the middle period of pregnancy, the foetus becomes what may be called a
genuine subject of vitality or life, agreeably to the rule of discrimination
laid down on that particular point in a former part of this work ( 585.) About
the same time, the secretion of certain humors make their first appearance,
such, for example, as the fat ( 38) and the bile.

636.
As the foetus advances toward maturity the tender hair begins to pullulate,
the nails emerge into view, the membrana pupillaris gives way ( 260), and in
the male sex the testes begin to descend ( 505).

637.
About the close of the tenth lunar month, the infant is finally released from
its imprisonment by means of parturition ( 603); after which, besides the
astonishing revolutions in almost the whole economy of its system, detailed
more amply and minutely above, it is also subjected to various changes in its
external habit and appearance; thus, for instance, that delicate lanuginous
hair, with which the face of the newborn infant is overspread, disappears by
degrees, its wrinkles are gradually obliterated, its anus retires within the
nates, which now begin to be slowly protruded, etc. etc. etc.

638.
The infant also learns, (though indeed by very slow degrees), the exercise of
the various faculties of the mind, such, for example, as those of perception,
of attention, of reminiscence, of desiring, etc. etc. from whence, in a very
few months after birth, it is subjected to dreams, etc.

639.
The organs of the external senses undergo also gradual or progressive
improvements, and are advanced to still higher and higher degrees of
perfection, such as the external ears, the internal nares, also the coverings
of the eyes, such as their supra-orbital arches, their supercilia, etc.

640.
The bones of the cranium acquire, in the mean time, an augmented degree of
firmness. The fonticuli or chasms between the different bones are gradually
arched over, and about the eighth month the process of dentition commences.

641.
The infant is now ready to undergo ablactation or weaning, being furnished
with teeth for the express purpose of subduing more solid food, and not to
injure the papilla, or nipple of the mother.

642.
About the close of the first year, the infant learns to stand alone, and
support itself in an erect position, the greatest and most enviable prerogative
with which the human body is dignified.

643.
The infant being thus removed from its mother's breast, and possessing the use
and command of its feet, makes daily advances in growth, and improves in the
power of spontaneous motion, while it acquires, at the same time, another very
important privilege conferred on the human race, namely, the use of speech.
Ideas which have become familiar to its mind it now begins to make attempts to
express by the aid of that important organ the tongue.

644.
About the seventh year of life, the milk-teeth, or first set, being twenty in
number, drop out by degrees, and are replaced in a series of years by a second
dentition, consisting of thirty-two perennial or permanent teeth.

645.
During this period of infancy the memory far surpasses in strength and
perfection the other powers of the mind, and appears to be indeed in a very
peculiar manner adapted for receiving and retaining the signs of things;
whereas after the fifteenth year of life, the glowing powers of the imagination
usually gain the ascendency.

646.
This superior strength and activity of the imagination very happily manifests
itself throughout those years of life in which the human subject is, by a
variety of striking and very important changes in the body, gradually prepared
for the future performance of such functions as constitute the characteristic
distinctions between the two sexes.

647.
Shortly after this period the mammae or breasts of the female subject begin to
swell, the chin of the male becomes clothed in a mantle of coarser down, and a
variety of other phenomenon occur in each sex, which serve in like manner to
announce the gradual approach of puberty: thus, in the female the catamenia
begin to flow; while in the male the secretion of a true semen commences, which
is uniformly accompanied by a more luxuriant crop of beard, and a very striking
change in the voice from a shriller to a graver tone.

About the same time the sexual instinct ( 289.) that spontaneous and potent
call of nature, is first awakened into action, and man, now in the blossom of
life, is fitted and inclined to venereal enjoyments.

648.
The crisis or precise period of puberty cannot by any means be accurately
ascertained. It is much varied by diversities of climate and of temperament. In
general, however, it occurs earlier in the female than in the male sex; thus,
in our climate females may be said to have arrived at this interesting period
against the fifteenth, but males not before the twentieth year of life.

649.
Shortly after the above period the human body finally ceases to increase in
stature; this particular is also influenced and greatly diversified by
difference of climate, not to mention the countless varieties that are
exhibited relative to this point, not only by different individuals, but even
by whole families.

650.
About this period also the epiphyses, which had been hitherto distinguished
from the bones to which they were attached by very visible lines of separation,
become so intimately united to, and so completely coalesce with these bones,
that not a vestige is left to serve as a memento of their former distinction.

651.
With respect to the term of perfect manhood, which constitutes indeed the most
lengthy, as well as most useful and important period of human life, we find it
characterised by the highest degrees of vigor and uniformity, when we examine
the functions of the body, and by that most invaluable prerogative, maturity of
judgment, when we take into consideration the faculties of the mind. Throughout
this interesting period the lamp of human life blazes with the highest degree
of intensity and splendour.

652.
The heralds which unerringly announce the intrusive approach of old age are,
in females, the cessation of the catamenia, ( 547.), in males, a languid
propensity to venereal gratifications, and in both an invasion of what is
called the rigidity or a^ of old age, with a slow but sensible declination of
the vis vitae, or aggregate power of performing the various functions of life.

653.
Finally, the frigid reign of the ultimate degree of old age is strongly
characterised by the following concomitant phenomena, namely, a sluggishness
and increasing dullness of the senses, both external and internal, an
irresistible call for longer indulgence in sleep, and a torpidity and languor
in all the functions of the animal economy. The hairs assume a silvery gray,
and fall in part from their exalted situation. The teeth themselves drop
spontaneously from their declining sockets. The neck is no longer able to
support the head, nor the tottering legs to sustain the weight of the incumbent
body. Even the bones themselves, those indispensible fulcra of the whole
machine, are obliged to bear a part in this irremediable and universal decay.

654.
We have thus arrived at length to the remote ultimatum of physiology, namely,
death without disease, or the euthanasia of old age. To conduct and protract
human life to this only natural termination (the causes of which are
sufficiently obvious from what has been already laid down) constitutes indeed
the alpha and omega, i. e. the sole and exclusive end and object of the healing
art.

655.
The phenomena of this natural death (as observed in man when about to resign
himself to its potent grasp), are, a coldness of the extremities, a loss of the
brilliancy of the eyes, a very small and slow pulse, accompanied with
intermissions progressively increasing in frequency, and lastly a slow
respiration, which by a more forcible act of exspiration, is at length closed
for ever.

In the live-dissections of animals belonging to the class mammalia, there is a
convenient opportunity for observing the last exertions of the heart, from
which it appears, that the right ventricle and auricle of that viscus resist
the encroachments of death longer, and continue the motions of life to a later
period, than the left.

656.
Coldness accompanied by rigidity, a cadaverous stench, but more especially a
flaccidity of the cornea, and a hiatus or gaping of the anus ascertain in the
most unequivocal manner the complete death of the body. When in the corpse an
aggregate collection of all these signs occur at once, not even the skeptical
Pliny himself could find room to interpose the shadow of a doubt respecting the
complete extinction of animal life.

657.
To ascertain with definitude the natural term of the life of man, (or to point
out that period which may be considered as the more frequent and regular goal
or ne plus ultra of human existence), is, indeed, a matter attended with the
utmost difficulty. I have notwithstanding learnt, from examining with care and
comparing with accuracy, a great number of bills of mortality, that a
considerable proportion of such Europeans as are advanced in years reach, but
that very few of them pass, the eightieth and fourth year of life.

658.
We may observe upon the whole, that in consequence of the weakness and tender
susceptibility of infancy and childhood, the intemperance and irregularity of
an infinitude of adults, the incontrolable violence of diseases, and a
countless multitude of fatal casualties, not more of mankind than seventy eight
in a thousand resign their lives to that species of death now under
consideration, namely, death without disease. Notwithstanding the truth and
authenticity of the preceding observation, yet on making a genuine estimate of
human longevity and comparing it, under similar circumstances, with that of the
other subjects belonging to the class mammalia, whose natural term of existence
is known to us, it will evidently appear, that, except the baseless
declamations of sophists regarding the miseries of human life, nothing can be
more unfounded and irrational than their splendid and verbose effusions
respecting its brevity.

APPENDIX, IN WHICH IS EXHIBITED A Condensed and Summary View OF THE EXISTING
DISCOVERIES AND SPECULATIONS Relative to the Subject of, what is usually
denominated, ANIMAL ELECTRICITY.
STEADY and uniform as the lapse of time itself, are the exertions made by the
enterprise and industry of man, to shed light on the arcana or secret processes
of nature. In proportion as such laudable attempts are prosecuted with boldness
and crowned with success, revolutions and improvements take place in the
various branches of physical science. Revolutions derive birth from the
detection of error, while improvements result from the discovery of truth. On
the repudiation of false principles in science, as well as on the developement
of new ones deduced from the reciprocal concurrence of numerous and unequivocal
facts, it is not without the sanction of reason and propriety that new systems
are forthwith compiled, digested and ushered into the world.

For, to be complete and satisfactory, a system in any branch of science,
should embrace and arrange in order all the well authenticated principles
spontaneously resulting from facts already ascertained and observations already
made, relative to that particular branch. A system less general and
comprehensive in its scope than this, should be deemed, at best, but defective
and partial, and received as the abortive production of a mind deficient in
point of information.

Of the former description was the famous physiological system of Baron Haller,
at the time its illustrious author first submitted it to the eye of the world.
That excellent physician and philosopher grasped in his acute and comprehensive
mind, and detailed at large, in the work to which I here allude, all the
authentic and well defined principles resulting from the infinitude of facts
with which the science of physiology was at that time enriched.

But all systems are stationary and have been as yet imperfect, while, happily
for the interest of man, improvements in science are progressive and advancing
toward perfection. In the course of a few years, such a blaze of physical
light was diffused abroad by the industry and ingenuity of philosophers in
general, but of physicians and chemists in particular, that the deficiencies
and errors of the Baron's elaborate system were rendered obvious to the most
weak and inattentive observer. In the important doctrines respecting the causes
of animal heat and the nature and purposes of respiration, in particular,
entire revolutions were effected by the numerous and ingenious discoveries of
chemists in that branch of science denominated aerology.

To supply, as far as possible, the deficiencies of this system of Haller, and
to circumvent the errors which the authority of so celebrated a character might
tend to diffuse throughout the minds of his numerous readers, became desiderata
of no small moment in the science of physiology.

The most effectual method of accomplishing these desirable ends was too
obvious to escape discovery. For as violence is most effectually repelled by
counter violence, and one disease not unfrequently removed from the animal
system by the impetuous invasion of another, so in like manner, in science, the
defects of one system are most advantageously supplied, and its errors most
effectually controverted and exposed, by the plenitude and unequivocal
certainty of the principles of a rival system.

This truth did not escape the observation of that learned and acute professor,
of Goettingen, who now fills the chair which was formerly rendered vocal by the
eloquence of the immortal Haller. Need I add, that professor Blumenbach is the
man to whom I allude -- a man, for the completion of whose greatness and
utility in physical science, nature and art appear to have all but exhausted
their abundant resources! For industry and perseverance in the collection of
materials, for powers to combine and arrange materials when thus collected, and
for ingenuity and acumen to deduce and speculate from such combination and
arrangement, the present age certainly boasts few -- too few physiologists who
may be set in competition with the illustrious Blumenbach.

For this physician and philosopher was reserved the honorable and important
task of collecting, digesting and consigning to publicity, a system of
physiology destined to supply the deficiencies and correct the errors of that
which had already resulted from the labors of his celebrated friend and
predecessor. The system of professor Blumenbach was, like that of Baron Haller,
perfect and complete at the time in which it was handed to the world. There
existed not, at that period, an established principle, nor scarcely even a
probable conjecture in physiology, with which he was not minutely acquainted,
and which he did not draw into the extensive and powerful vortex of his system.

Had the science of physiology been finally complete at the time in which
professor Blumenbach wrote, the industry, the immense resources and the
comprehensive talents of that philosopher would, no doubt, have quite precluded
the necessity of future systems in this branch of science. But in the
unfathomed depths of the animal economy more arcana yet existed -- more terra
incognita lay yet unexplored, and further researches of enterprise were
therefore essential.

By the combined labors of experimental physiologists in different parts of
the world, this branch of science was at length matured for giving birth to
another discovery, which will probably be found of equal importance, in
explaining the phenomena, and in removing the diseases of the animal system,
with that which consigned to immortality the name of the illustrious Harvey.
The discovery to which I wish at present to direct the attention of the reader
is that of, what is usually called animal electricity, or, of the existence and
operation of a fluid extremely similar to electricity in the living animal
system. For the fortunate Galvani professor of anatomy at Bologna, was reserved
the honor of lighting by accident on this beautiful and divine discovery -- a
discovery which entitles its author to be ranked with the great promoters
science and the essential benefactors of man.

That such a fluid did actually exist in the bodies of animals, had been long
suspected by physiologists and other speculative philosophers. The matter
rested however on pure conjecture alone, and was yet unsanctioned by the tests
of experiment and observation. The apparent intricacy of the subject depressed
the hopes of the boldest experimenters, and the subtlety of the investigation
seemed to throw an insurmountable bar in the road to success. But accident not
unfrequently does more for the real advancement of science, than boasted genius
and industry are able to accomplish. It was accident that first suggested to
the celebrated Gallileo the construction and use of that optical instrument
denominated the telescope -- It was accident which first led the immortal
Newton to the original conception of that principle of gravitation, by which he
afterward explained, with such facility, the movements and exquisite balance
of the material universe. And it was, in like manner, accident -- fortunate
accident, that first suggested to the industrious and acute Galvani the mode of
experimenting, with effect, on the intricate subject of animal electricity -- a
subject which may possibly be destined as the only proper clue to conduct
future physiologists to the genuine springs and principles of life itself.

"Whilst the professor (alluding to Galvani) was engaged in dissecting a frog
in a room where some of his friends were amusing themselves with an electrical
machine, one of them drew a spark from the conductor, at the same time that the
professor touched one of the nerves of the animal. In an instant the whole body
of the frog was shook by a violent convulsion. The professor was astonished at
the phenomenon, and believed it owing to his having wounded the nerve; to
assure himself whether this was really the case, he pricked it with the point
of his knife, without any motion of the body being produced; he now touched the
nerve with the instrument as at first, and ordered a spark to be taken from the
machine, on which the contractions were renewed. The experiment was repeated a
third time, but the animal remained motionless; however, upon perceiving he
held his scalpel by the handle, which was of ivory (a bad conductor), he
changed it for a metallic one, and re-excited the movements, which he
constantly failed of doing whilst using an electric substance.

"After having made a number of experiments with the elect^ical machine, he
resolved to prosecute the subject with atmospheric electricity. To this end he
raised a conductor upon the roof of his house, from which he brought an iron
wire into his room, and to this attached metal conductors, connected with the
nerves of the animals destined to be the subjects of his experiments, and to
their legs he tied wires, which reached the floor. Considerable movements were
observed in the animals, whether of cold or warm blood, whenever it lightened.
These preceded thunder, and corresponded with its intensity and repetition, and
even when it did not lighten the movements took place when any stormy cloud
passed over the apparatus."

"Professor Galvani one day suspended some frogs, perhaps with similar views,
on metal hooks, fixed in the spine of the back, upon the iron railing of his
garden; several times he remarked that these animals contracted, and appeared
to receive shocks; at first he conceived the movements were owing to changes in
the atmosphere, but a more scrupulous examination undeceived him^ Having placed
a prepared frog That the reader may not be entirely ignorant of what is meant
by a prepared frog, I take the liberty of presenting him with the following
brief extract from the first experiment detailed in Dr. Valli's publication:
"My first experiment was made on a frog, in the following manner: I opened the
abdomen in order to lay bare the spine of the back, and discover the crural
nerves which issue from it; a few lines above this point I cut the animal in
two, and by passing my scissars immediately under the origin of these nerves,
removed the remaining portion of the vertebral column, so as only to leave the
vertebrae which united the bundle of nerves. Having enveloped this portion of
the vertebrae with a piece of sheet lead, with one end of a metal conductor, I
touched the coated part, and with the other the surface of the thighs, which
had been previously stripped of the skin. The movements were violent, and
continued for a long time," etc. In general, throughout the whole of this
physician's expertmental treatise, when one or more of the nerves of an animal
are coated with sheet-lead or any other metal, that animal is said to be
prepared.
upon an iron plate in his room, and happening with his dissecting forceps to
press it against the plate, he observed the movements to take place. This
experiment succeeded with all metallic bodies, but more particularly well with
silver; non-conducting substances were not proper for it. From this period our
author began to suspect the animal possessed an electricity of its own; and in
this suspicion he was further confirmed by the following circumstance: -- He
held a prepared frog by a hook with one hand, so as to let its feet rest upon
the bottom of a small silver cup, which he happened unintentionally to strike
with the other; at the instant the body of the animal fell into violent
convulsions. If one person held the prepared frog, and another touched the cup,
no movements were excited. The professor being now aware of the necessity of a
communication, undertook a series of experiments for the farther investigation
of this subject. He first placed a prepared frog upon a non-conducting surface,
and brought one end of a conductor in contact with the hook which secured the
animal, and with the other touched its feet, on which the contractions took
place. When the conducting arch was interrupted by a non-conducting substance,
the frog remained motionless, etc."

No sooner had professor Galvani published to the world his experiments on
animal electricity, than their same dispread, swift us the intangible fluid
which they regarded, throughout the different parts of Europe. Animal
electricity became, in a short time, a subject of very interesting speculation
to medical philosophers. Among the several physiologists who entered the lists
in this investigation, the most distinguished whose writings have fallen into
my hands, are Dr. Valli, an Italian physician, from whose publication the
preceding account respecting the first discoveries of Galvani is extracted, and
Mr. Fowler, a native of ^he island of Great Britain.

Doctor Valli appears to have led the van of those philosophical characters who
first co-operated with the celebrated Galvani in investigating that animal
fluid, the existence of which had been so long suspected, but so lately
realised by actual experiment. After repeating most of the experiments of his
predecessor in this branch of physics, the Doctor proceeded to a series of new
experiments, mostly conceived and instituted by himself.

The objects which he appears to have kept steadily in view throughout the
whole course of his experiments and observations were, to ascertain the nature
of the animal fluid discovered by the professor of Bologna, and to determine
its influence and medium of operation in the animal economy. In the prosecution
of these ends the Doctor has doubtless displayed all that industry and patient
perseverance, so essentially requisite in the character who would successfully
inquire of nature, through the medium of experiment. I am sorry, however, to
observe, that all his experiments were not conceived and instituted with equal
ingenuity, and perhaps I may add, not executed with equal accuracy and
definitude. Many of them appear to have been instituted without a direct
reference to any specific or particular end -- Equally unhappy with regard to
conception, indefinite with respect to their nature, and inconclusive in point
of result, they leave no impressions on the mind of the reader, save those of
disappointment and regret -- regret that a character of such learning and
industry should, notwithstanding, interrogate nature with so little meaning,
and (I am sorry to add) with so little success.

The preceding observations must be considered only in the light of general
rules, and as such, are liable to numerous exceptions. Many of the experiments
of Dr. Valli are, doubtless, both ingenious and valuable; and I even entertain
the utmost confidence, that the period will yet arrive, when the whole of them,
that are ascertained and related with justness and definitude, will be made
subservient to the establishment of general and useful results. At present,
however, they stand in an insulated state, completely detached from practical
conclusions, and disconnected from all known principles in physical science.

After a series of experiments sufficiently lengthy and tedious, the Doctor
conceived himself unequivocally authorized to conclude, that the animal fluid
of Galvani, was entirely the same with the subtle matter of electricity. This
conclusion he alleges to be the spontaneous and necessary result of the
following positions, which he delivers as substantiated and confirmed by actual
experiment.

"First, substances which conduct electricity, are conductors likewise of the
nervous fluid."

"2 dly, Substances which are not conductors of electricity, do not conduct the
nervous fluid."

"3 dly, Non-conducting bodies, which acquire by heat the property of
conducting electricity, preserve it likewise for the nervous fluid."

"4 thly, Cold at a certain degree, renders water a non-conductor of
electricity, as well as of the nervous fluid."

"5 thly, The velocity of the nervous fluid is, as far as we can calculate, the
same with that of electricity."

"6 thly, The obstacles which the nerves, under certain circumstances, oppose
to electricity, they present likewise to the nervous fluid."

"7 thly, Attraction is a property of the electric fluid, and this property has
been discovered in the nervous fluid."

Having enumerated and detailed the foregoing arguments, the Doctor, in an
effusion of triumph, subjoins, "We here see the greatest analogy between these
fluids; nay, I may even add, the characters of their identity."

As an additional support to the same opinion, Dr Valli adduces the peculiar
and striking phenomena exhibited by the torpedo, the gymnotus electricus, the
silurus, etc. which proceed, as he alleges, from a fluid in every respect the
same with that which was discovered in frogs, by the professor of anatomy at
Bologna. As the Doctor, however, has advanced nothing in confirmation of such
entire sameness, save a certain remote analogy which he says he has discovered
between the muscles of animals, and the electrical apparatus of the torpedo,
the gymnotus, etc. it is obvious that this latter argument will but very
slightly impress the philosophical physiologist, who founds his belief of
principles on facts, rather than on vague and visionary conjectures.

Having thus, as he supposed, satisfactorily ascertained the identity of the
nervous with the electric fluid, he next proceeds to speculations on its
influence in the diversified movements and functions of the animal economy. To
me, however, I must confess, the greater part of this speculative
investigation, appears to be rather the effervescent effusions of an
imagination, heated to excess in a favorite pursuit, than the solemn decisions
of a tranquil and unbiassed understanding. I acknowledge myself unable, in many
instances, to discern the necessary nex^s or affinity between his conclusions,
and the facts from which they are deduced: -- or perhaps I may speak my
sentiments more fully when I say, that the learned author appears not
unfrequently to have substituted mere hypothetical allegations, for fair and
logical conclusions -- the vacant results of his own conjectures, for genuine
principles developed by experiment, and ascertained by observation. It very
often happens, that by attempting to embrace too much under a single cause, we
extend the tortured principle beyond its natural limits, and thus, to
appearance, weaken or render doubtful its influence, even on those phenomena
which it immediately regards. This observation applies with too much propriety
and force, to the speculations of the indefatigable Valli. By attempting to
explain all, he has in fact explained none, of the phenomena of the animal
economy, by that subtle fluid on which he so patiently experimented. Many of
his physiological facts and speculations are indeed ingenious and interesting,
but, in my view, they are equally deducible from any other series of
experiments, as from that by which they are preceded in the Doctor's
publication. Many of the learned author's facts may be, no doubt, true and well
defined, and some of his principles and results to a certain degree interesting
to the physician and philosopher, but, taken in the aggregate, they are too
disjointed to constitute any thing like a system, too disconnected to form a
regular chain of investigation. On my mind, his speculations on the causes of
muscular motion, sensation secretion and nutrition, impress no more solid
conviction than do those of Stahl on the subject of his anima medica, of Van
Helmont respecting his subtle Archeus, or of the airy Paracelsus with regard to
his planetary influence. Notwithstanding the apparent severity of the foregoing
observations, I am still obliged to declare it as my opinion, that the novelty
and importance of the subject on which Dr Valli has experimented and written,
entitle his work to the particular attention of the learned and ingenious of
every nation.

For the want of system and requisite decision in the writings of the preceding
author, compensation is, in a great measure, made by a subsequent publication
of the accurate and ingenious Fowler. The experiments and speculations of this
young philosopher, on what he terms, the " influence discovered by Galvani,"
made their first public appearance at Edinburgh, in the course of the year
1793: they are not, indeed, so numerous as those of the Italian physician, but
they appear to have been conceived with more design, and executed with more
judgment. Mr. Fowler seems to have been among the first who controverted the
opinion of Galvani and Valli, respecting the identity of the nervous and
electric fluids: and he has, doubtless, controverted it with ability and effect.

Mr. Fowler prelimina^es his observations, with a lucid and forcible statement
of a certain previous combination of circumstances, which he alleges, must have
strongly prepossessed the mind of professor Galvani, with a belief of the
sameness of the preceding fluids.

That such a prepo^ssion must have had, indeed, a powerful effect on the
subsequent deductions and conclusions of the Professor, will be readily
acknowledged, by every one who has experienced the influence of preconceived
opinions -- an influence pregnant with error, and leading countless evils in
its train.

Mr. Fowler proceeds then to mention the first object which engaged his
attention, in the commencement of his interesting inquiry, and which appears
well calculated to pave the way, for the more easy and effectual accomplishment
of his experimental course. This, to make use of his own words, was, "to
ascertain, as well the various circumstances, essentially requisite to the
production of these new phenomena, as those in which they can be rendered most
obvious." The issue of his enquiry on this subject, I will also lay before the
reader in his own words. "After" says he, "a great variety of experiments, of
which it would be unnecessary here, to relate more than the result, I found,
that I could not excite in an animal the appearances described by Galvani, with
any substances whatever, whether solid or fluid, except the metals: and that
the mutual contact of two different metals with each other, so far as I was
able to determine, was in every case necessary to the effect."

After a satisfactory attainment of this object, the ingenious author next
proceeds to a judicious series of experiments, with a view to discover the
genuine nature of the animal fluid, first realised by the fortunate professor
of Bologna. Of those experiments he does not give us a minute specification,
but only furnishes statements of their most obvious and striking results. These
statements he also occasionally intersperses with interesting and important
remarks, and some very ingenious speculations.

Having finished his series of experiments, (a series sufficiently numerous and
diversified for the stablishment of general principles) relative to the nature
of the nervous fluid, and its affinity to the matter of electricity, Mr. Fowler
at length favors us on this subject with the following conclusions, which I
shall take the liberty of presenting to the reader in the words of their
ingenious anther.

After having stated a few analogies between the animal fluid of Galvani, and
that possessed by the torpedo, he then reverses the comparison, and lays down
several points of essential difference, not only between the two preceding
fluids, but also between the former of them, namely the fluid of Galvani, and
the matter of electricity.

"This influence, (says he, referring to the nervous fluid of animals) differs,
both from that of the torpedo, etc. and from electricity, in producing no
sensation (in man at least) at all similar to that of an electrical shock."

" -- That some kind of disagreeable sensation is occasioned by it, even in
frogs, independent of that which must necessarily arise from irritation and the
contractions of their muscles, is evident from their restlessness and
expressions of uneasiness. In other animals, as I shall afterward have
occasion to show, these expressions are still less equivocal: and in man we can
ascertain both their degree and their kind. That they differ considerably from
such as are produced by electricity will be proved when I come to speak of the
effects of this influence upon our senses."

"But the most important, and characteristic difference which I have yet been
able to discover, between this new influence and electricity, consists in their
effects upon the contractile power of animals and of plants. The contractions
of animals excited by electricity have a tendency to destroy that power upon
which contractions depend. But the contractions excited, by the application of
the metals, have, in all my experiments, had the directly opposite effect. The
more frequently contractions have been in this way excited, the longer do they
continue excitable: and the longer are the parts upon which such experiments
are made, preserved from putridity. An influence, capable of exciting
contractions without occa^ioning exhaustion, was a thing I so little expected
to find, and so contrary to the character which had been given of this both by
Galvani and by Doctor Valli, that I at first distrusted my own observation of
the fact: but the number of comparative experiments which I had afterward
occasion to make, though with views different from that of ascertaining the
point in question, convinced me that this influence, so far from destroying the
contractility of muscles, has a tendency to preserve it. Oxygene is, so far as
I know, the only stimulus in nature, whose effects are at all analogous."

"When a frog has been long dead, I have been sometimes more than a quarter of
an hour without being able to excite a single contraction by the application of
the metals: but after this, without at all varying the means employed,
contractions have appeared, and have become gradually more and more vigorous."

"It is said (for I have never had an opportunity of making the experiment),
that a stream of electricity, passed through a sensitive plant, produces an
almost immediate collapse of its leaves. But the influence discovered by
Galvani produced no such effect in the following experiment. Having separated
the leg of a frog from its body, I freed its crural nerves from surrounding
parts, and with one hand held it supported upon the end of a probe. An
assistant placed a piece of silver under its foot, and held the zinc with which
it was to be touched. A sensative plant formed the medium of communication
between us. He held the bottom of its stem between his fingers, while I held
the top; so that when the silver was touched by the zinc, the influence passed
up the plant, and through the whole of its stem. The frog's leg instantly
contracted, and repeated its contractions every time the silver and zinc were
brought in contact: but the leaves of the plant did not collapse; neither did
they when any of its branches formed part of the circuit."

I must however, confess that the plant, upon which this experiment was made,
had been kept through the winter. With a young one the result might possibly be
different; but such an one I have not yet had in my power to procure.

"The torpedo does not appear at all affected by the influence which itself
produces. Animals in which Galvani's phenomena are produced, are strongly
affected."

The very ingenious author passes on next to report the result of certain
experiments which he instituted, in order to refute the opinion of those, who
allege, that the fluid of Galvani proceeds entirely from the metallic
substances used, and does not reside at all in any part of the animal system.
In his enquiry respecting this point he displays the same fertility in
devising, the same sagacity in judging, and the same ingenuity in deducing,
which so forcibly impress the reader throughout every part of his experimental
investigation. He also farther shows, that the nervous influence of Galvani,
and the subtle fluid of electricity differ very materially from each other in
the following particular, namely, that against the effects of the former,
animals are able to guard themselves by means of a certain voluntary e^ertion,
whereas the operation of the latter is not in the smallest degree subject to
the control or influence of the will.

Having finished the consideration of the nature, Mr. Fowler proceeds to make
some useful applications, of the influence discovered by the professor of
anatomy at Bologna. In his attempts to shed light on certain controverted
points, and to solve certain abstruse questions, in physiology, by means of
this fluid, he appears no less ingenious and satisfactory than in the former
parts of his enquiry.

He appears peculiarly happy and conclusive in his researches after the source
from whence the nerves and muscles derive their respective powers. I beg leave
to lay before the reader two of the author's experiments, instituted for the
purpose of ascertaining this interesting particular -- a particular which has
so long furnished a subject of controversy among speculative physiologists. The
latter of the two experiments, (to which the former serves only as a necessary
introduction) is of itself more than equal to all that has ever been advanced
on the opposite side of the question.

EXPERIMENT I.

"I divided (says Mr. Fowler) the sciatic nerve of one leg, and tied the crural
artery of the other in a large frog. Scarcely any blood was lost in doing
either. Two days aft^ this I strangled it. During the first 24 hours, the leg
in which the nerve had been divided, appeared to contract with the most vigor;
after this period the difference between them became more doubtful; but the
contractions were at no time stronger in the leg whose artery was tied, than in
that whose nerve was divided.

EXPERIMENT II.

"The same operations were performed upon a large female frog full of spawn.
Four hours afterward she was covered by a male, who had been treated in a
similar manner. I mention this circumstance, as it tends to prove, that the
pain occasioned by the operation was probably not so great as to produce much
fallacy.

"On the day following, she had spawned, and on the sixth day from the
operations, she was strangled. When laid upon a plate of zinc, and excited by
means of a rod of silver, the contractions were found extremely feeble in the
leg whose artery had been tied, and ceased altogether in about twenty-two hours
after her death.

In the leg, whose nerve had been divided, they appeared as vigorous as they
usually are in legs to which no injury has been previously done, and continued
excitable upwards of two days after they had ceased to be so in the other."

It may be proper on the present occasion briefly to observe, that the
influence discovered by Galvani was the test used by Mr. Fowler to determine
the existence or cessation of irritability in the muscles of the animals
subjected to the preceding experiment. For this influence, as our author
judiciously observes, appears to be indeed by far the best and most delicate
test that has ever yet been discovered for ascertaining the lowest possible
degrees of muscular irritability. After having become wholly insensible to the
impressions of all other stimuli, muscles still continue to vibrate to the
kindred touches of this subtle fluid, to which nature appears to have given
them such a nice, and, perhaps I may say, specific correspondence.

Mr. Fowler, after having transiently glanced on the subject of inflammation,
passes on to the attack of a physiological doctrine, propagated with zeal, and
supported with ability by that celebrated experimentalist, the Abbe Fontana.
The doctrine alluded to, embraces the existence or residence of a certain vital
principle in the volume of the blood. On this principle, as the industrious
Abbe alleges, poisons produce their instantaneous effect, when introduced into
the vascular systems of living animals. To all the different parts of this
physical doctrine I could never yet be induced to subscribe, notwithstanding
the respectability of its learned and numerous advocates.

By attacking and vanquishing one of its most powerful champions, Mr. Fowler
has doubtless contributed much to its final demolition. For, in the contest now
under our immediate consideration, I must confess, that to me the laurels of
victory appear to be fairly wrested from the silvered temples of the Italian,
and planted over the youthful brow of the British Philosopher.

I have thus exhibited a view, somewhat general indeed, though confessedly very
succinct, of the results laid down, and of the opinions entertained, by the
ingenious Fowler, on the subject of the animal influence discovered by
Professor Galvani. To lay before the reader a full account of all that is
useful and important in the observations of this interesting author, would be
to transcribe and reprint his whole publication.

The only productions in the English language, which this country now
furnishes, professedly on the subject of the animal fluid discovered by
Galvani, are (as formerly observed) those of Fowler and Valli. On the
comparative merit of those two authors I will here take the liberty of
advancing a few general, and, I flatter myself, impartial, observations:

The experiments of Doctor Valli are more numerous and pompous -- those of Mr.
Fowler more definite and intelligible. The former author appears often, the
latter, never, to have experimented without some determinate end in view. The
experiments of the Italian may be compared to the promiscuous plants of the
forest, strewn at random by the sportive and irregular hand of nature -- those
of the young Briton, to choice and valuable collections, arranged with order
and elegance, in a well regulated and beautiful garden. The experiments of
Valli appear to throw into shade, those of Fowler into light, the objects which
they immediately regard. From the former, the reader collects information with
difficulty, from the latter, without labor or painful attention.

In their deductions and speculations, the two preceding authors are no less
dissimilar, than with regard to their experiments themselves. Valli is more
diffuse and often hypothetical -- Fowler more pointed and generally conclusive.
Valii appears to give loosened reins to a glowing imagination -- Fowler to be
constantly under the steady guidance of a powerful and well-cultivated
understanding. The former makes a greater display of learning, and, therefore,
too frequently views objects through the more obscure media of previous
publications -- the latter exhibits a higher degree of ingenuity, and derives
the principal part of his information, not from pages, sanctioned only by the
names of celebrated, yet fallible, authors, but from the great folio-volume of
nature, impressed with her own signature. On the whole, Valli has experimented
and written in the most lengthy and profuse -- Fowler in the most definite and
conclusive manner. In many parts of the writings of the former, nothing else
than the fiat of an almighty genius would be able to bring order out of
confusion -- in those of the latter, lucidity, connection, and regularity,
shine pre-eminent through almost every page.

Having thus, without reserve, delivered my sentiments on the publications of
others, I hope I may be allowed to trespass on the reader's attention while I
make a few observations relating to my own.

Nothing could have induced me thus hastily to forsake the humble, but secure,
retreats of obscurity, and risk myself before the eye of the world in the
hazardous character of an author, save a solicitous wish to contribute to the
advancement of medical science, and thus aid in acquiring for man a more
effectual exemption from misery and pain. I saw with regret the literary
treasures of a Blumenbach concealed from the view of my fellow-citizens beneath
the drapery of an ancient and an obsolete language. I was anxiously desirous to
see the physiological system of that illustrious character completely clothed
in the language of my country. I engaged in the translation of this work, not
because I conceived myself better qualified for its execution than others, but
because others appeared to me unpardonably remiss with regard to the
undertaking. The execution proved laborious and difficult beyond my
expectations. The difficulty of detecting an author's precise meaning through
the dusky medium of a Latin expression, can be fully understood and realised
only by him who has made the arduous experiment.

Even after the ideas and opinions in the original are fully embraced and
completely comprehended, another difficulty of no small magnitude still
remains, namely, to convey them to the reader with unequivocal definitude,
through the indefinite medium of a different language. It is well known how
extremely liable we are to misapprehend the precise meaning of an author who
even writes in our own vernacular tongue, much more so of one who publishes in
a language but little used in conversation, and, at best, but imperfectly
understood by any man living.

Should the foregoing translation ever fall into the hands of the celebrated
professor of Geottingen, I hope he will receive, with candor and indulgence, a
well meant attempt to extend the empire of his utility and his fame, by
increasing the number of his admiring readers. If the translation be in any
part erroneous, in any part deficient, strictures and corrections will be
thankfully received, and punctually attended to in a second edition of the
work, should a second be demanded by a patronising public.

To preserve as far as possible the firm and energetic spirit which
characterizes the writings of the illustrious professor of Goettingen, and to
convey to my readers the facts, the principles, the speculations, and the
opinions contained in his original work, without even the shadow of alteration,
diminution, or addition, has been my steady and uniform aim throughout the
whole of the foregoing translation. Owing, however, to the different
constitutions or idioms, as they are more generally termed, of the Latin and
English languages, my translation is in many places far -- very far from being
strictly literal. Phraseology I consider, at best, as the mere trappings or
drapery of composition, while facts and principles constitute its more
substantial and important part. To preserve the latter, therefore, inviolate,
and to communicate them with the utmost definitude, is the indispensible duty
of a translator, from a principle of justice to the original author, to the
public, and to himself; but in my opinion, he is not bound, by any principle
whatever, to make an entire sacrifice of all elegance and beauty, to mere
punctilious literality of expression. Impressed with the propriety and truth of
these sentiments, I have, throughout the whole of the foregoing work, been
sometimes literal and sometimes free, accordingly as the one or the other mode
of translation gave birth to a phraseology or style most agreeable to my ear,
and most accordant to the spirit of the original composition.

With respect to the appendix itself, it may not be amiss to make it the
subject of a few transient observations. The principle which these additional
pages regard, and are intended to communicate, is justly becoming, among
medical philosophers, an object of primary importance. This principle opens to
the view of the speculative mind a rich and spacious field, never yet printed,
save by the adventurous steps of a few pre-eminently active and enterprising
physiologists -- A field, the salutary fruits of which will, no doubt, at a
future day, serve to elucidate the nature, to develope the composition, and to
alleviate the complicated misery of man.

My whole design in this appendix is to give a condensed, but somewhat general
view, of this principle or influence discovered by professor Galvani.

By far the greater number of medical characters in the immense tract of
country embraced within the limits of the United States, are, in consequence of
their distances from literary institutions, excluded from access to public
libraries, and situated quite beyond the free circulation of physical science.
To such my appendix will serve the humble purpose of a literary chronicle; it
will convey to them a brief account of the discoveries which are now going
forward in the delightful and important science of physiology.

On the subject of the influence discovered by Galvani I have myself instituted
and performed a considerable number of experiments That the reader may be
acquainted with an easy, cheap and familiar method of experimenting on this
subject, without having his feelings hurt by the agonizing pangs of tortured
and dying animals, I will here take the liberty of inserting, in form of notes,
a few extracts taken from a communication transmitted to Mr. Fowler, by his
learned friend Mr. Robison, professor of natural philosophy in the university
of Edinburgh.

I. "I find (says the professor) that if a piece of zinc be applied to the
tongue, and be in contact with a piece of silver, which touches any part of the
lining of the mouth, nostrils, ears, ^rethra, or anus, the sensation resembling
taste is felt on the tongue. If the experiment be inverted, by applying the
silver to the tongue, the irritation produced by the zinc is not sensible,
except in the mouth and the urethra, and is very flight.

II. "If the zinc (finely polished) be applied to the ball of the eye, the
brightness of the flash seems to correspond with the surface of contact of the
silver with the tongue, palate, fauces, or cheek. The same thing happens when
the silver is applied to the eye."

III. "When a rod of zinc and one of silver are applied to the roof of the
mouth, as far back as possible, the irritations produced by bringing their
outer ends into contact, are very strong, and that by the zinc resembles taste,
in the same manner as when applied to the tongue."

IV. "I had been paring my toe nails with scissars, and had cut off a
considerable portion of the thick skin, so that the blood began to ooze through
in the middle of the wound. I applied the zinc there, and an extensive surface
of silver to the tongue. Every time I brought the metals into contact, I felt a
smart irritation by the zinc at the wound," etc.

A variety of other experiments of a similar nature are contained in the same
communication from Mr. Robison to Mr. Fowler; but a further detail of them I
conceive unnecessary, as the ingenious reader, being acquainted with the
foregoing, can with facility devise other experiments for himself. Thus I have
frequently conveyed to my eye the luminous flash mentioned by Mr. Robison, not
only from the internal vestments of the mouth, the nose, the urethra, etc. but
also from between my fingers, from the cubital flexure of my arm, and from
various other parts of my body, where the texture of the cuticle and skin is
more fine and soft than ordinary; always taking care, however, to moisten the
part previously to the application of the metals.


; some of my results have appeared striking and new, but my experiments have
been neither sufficiently numerous nor varied to warrant the deduction and
establishment of general principles. My present intention is (should heaven
indulge me in life and health), to prosecute to some extent this highly
interesting subject. Should my investigation be favored with the discovery of
any thing curious in science, or useful in practice, a detail of it may be
expected in a future communication.

To my solemn audit before the bar of the public, I now hasten in tremulous
anxiety, "with all my imperfections on my head," -- imperfections which will no
doubt awaken the censure of the critic, but receive, I flatter myself, the
indulgence of the liberal and candid. The approbation of the former I neither
court nor regard; that of the latter it shall be my constant ambition to
deserve. The professed business of most modern critics appears to be, to
condemn -- promiscuously condemn, too frequently without the faintest shadow of
either inclination or talents to discriminate merit from its reverse.

In my view the approbation of a professed critic is perfectly synonymous with
the censure of the liberal and the ingenious, to whose candid examination the
preceding pages are submitted with all that respect and deference due from an
inexperienced writer.

THE END.

