SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JOHN, EARL OF ROCHESTER, WHO DIED JULY
26, 1680. WRITTEN BY HIS OWN DIRECTION ON HIS DEATH BED. BY GILBERT BURNETT,
LORD BISHOP OF SARUM

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR JOHN DICKINS, NO. 50, NO. SECOND-STREET. M DCC XCV.

THE PREFACE
THE celebrating the praises of the dead, is an argument so worn out by long
and frequent use; and now become so nauseous, by the flattery that usually
attends it, that it is no wonder if funeral orations, or panegyrics, are more
considered for the elegancy of style, and fineness, of wit, than for the
authority they carry with them as to the truth of matters of fact. And yet I am
not hereby deterred from meddling with this kind of argument, nor from handling
it with all the plainness I can: delivering only what I myself heard and saw,
without any borrowed ornament.

I do easily foresee how many will be engaged for the support of their impious
maxims and immoral practices, to disparage what I am to write. Others will
censure it, because it comes from one of my profession, too many supposing us
to be induced, to frame such discourses for carrying on what they are pleased
to call Our Trade. Some will think I dress it up too artificially, and others,
that I present it too plain and naked.

But being resolved to govern myself by the exact rules of truth, I shall be
less concerned in the censures I may fall under. It may seem liable to great
exception, that I should disclose so many things, that were discovered to me,
if not under the seal of confession, yet under the confidence of friendship;
but this noble lord himself not only released me from all obligation of this
kind, when I waited on him in his last sickness, a few days before he died, but
gave it me in charge not to spare him in any thing which I thought might be of
use to the living; and was not ill pleased to be laid open, as well in the
worst as in the best and last part of his life, being so sincere in his
repentance, that he was not unwilling to take shame to himself, by suffering
his faults to be exposed for the benefit of others.

I write with one great disadvantage -- that I cannot reach his chief design,
without mentioning some of his faults: but I have touched them as tenderly as
the occasion would bear; and I am sure with much more softness than he desired,
or would have consented to, had I told him how I intended to manage this part.
I have related nothing with personal reflections on any others, concerned with
him, wishing rather that they themselves, reflecting on the sense he had of his
former disorders, may be thereby led to forsake their own; than that they
should be any ways reproached by what I write: and therefore though he used
very few reserves with me, as to his course of life, yet since others had a
share in most parts of it, I shall relate nothing but what more immediately
concerned himself: and shall say no more of his faults, than is necessary to
illustrate his repentance.

The occasion that led me into so particular a knowledge of him, was an
intimation given me by a gentleman of his acquaintance, of his desire to see
me. This was sometime in October, 1679, when he was slowly recovering out of a
great disease. He had understood that I often attended on one well known to
him, that died the summer before; he was also then entertaining himself in that
low state of his health, with the first part of the History of the Reformation
then newly come out, with which he seemed not ill pleased: and we had
accidentally met in two or three places some time before.

These were the motives that led him to call for my company. After I had waited
on him once or twice, he grew into that freedom with me, as to open to me all
his thoughts, both of religion and morality, and to give me a full view of his
past life, and seemed not uneasy at my frequent visits. So till he went from
London, which was in the beginning of April, I waited on him often.

As soon as I heard how ill he was, and how much he was touched with the sense
of his former life, I writ to him, and received from him an answer, that,
without my knowledge, was printed since his death; from a copy which one of his
servants conveyed to the press. In it there is so undeserved a value put on me,
that it had been very indecent for me to have published it: yet that must be
attributed to his civility and way of breeding: and indeed he was particularly
known to so few of the clergy, that the good opinion he had of me, is to be
imputed only to his unacquaintence with others.

My end of writing, is so to discharge the last commands this lord left on me,
as that it may be effectual to awaken those who run on to all the excesses of
riot; and that in the midst of those heats, which their lusts and passions
raise in them, they may be a little wrought on by so great an instance, of one
who had run round the whole circle of luxury; and as Solomon says of himself,
Whatsoever his eyes desired, he kept it not from them; and withheld his heart
from no joy. But when he looked back on all that on which he had wasted his
time and strength, he esteemed it vanity and vexation of spirit: though he had
both as much natural wit, and as much acquired by learning, and both as much
improved by thinking and study, as perhaps any libertine of the age. Yet when
he reflected on all his former courses, even before his mind was illuminated
with better thoughts, he counted them madness and folly.

But when the powers of religion came to operate on him, then he added a
detestation to the contempt he formerly had of them, suitable to what became a
sincere penitent, and expressed himself in so clear and so calm a manner, so
sensible of his failings toward his maker and his redeemer, that as it wrought
not a little on those that were about him; so, I hope, the making it public may
have a more general influence, chiefly on those on whom his former conversation
might have had ill effects.

I have endeavored to give his character as fully as I could take it: for I
who saw him only in one light, in a sedate and quiet temper, when he was under
a great decay of strength and loss of spirits, cannot give his picture with
that life and advantage that others may, who knew him when his parts were more
bright and lively: yet the composure he was then in, may perhaps be supposed to
balance any abatement of his usual vigor which the declination of his health
brought him under.

I have written this discourse with as much care, and have considered it as
narrowly as I could. I am sure I have said nothing but truth. I have done it
slowly, and often used my second thoughts in it, not being so much concerned in
the censures which might fall on myself, as cautious that nothing should pass,
that might obstruct my only design of writing, which is the doing what I can
toward the reforming a loose and lewd age.

And if such a signal instance, concurring with all the evidence that we have
for our most holy faith, has no effect on those who are running the same
course, it is much to be feared they are given up to a reprobate sense.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIEE and DEATH OF JOHN, EARL OF ROCHESTER.
JOHN WILMOT earl of Rochester, was born in April, anno domini 1648. His father
was Henry earl of Rochester, but best know by the title of lord Wilmot, who
bore so great a part in all the late wars, that mention is often made of him in
the history. He had the chief share in the honor of the preservation of his
majesty that now reigns, after Worchester-fight, and the conveying him from
place to place, till he happily escaped into France; but dying before the
king's return, he left his son little other inheritance, than the honor and
title derived to him, with the pretensions such eminent services gave him to
the king's favor. These were carefully managed by the great prudence and
discretion of his mother, a daughter of that noble and ancient family of the
St. John's of Wiltshire, so that his education was carried on in all things
suitably to his quality.

When he was at school he was an extraordinary proficient at his book; and
those shining parts which have since appeared with so much luster, began then
to show themselves: He acquired the Latin to such perfection, that to his
dying-day he retained a great relish for the fineness and beauty of that
tongue; and was exactly versed in the incomparable authors that writ about
Augustus' time, whom he read often with that peculiar delight, which the
greatest wits have ever found in those studies.

When he went to the university, the general joy that overran the whole nation
upon his majesty's restoration but was not regulated with that sobriety and
temperance, that became a serious gratitude to God for so great a blessing,
produced some of its ill effects on him: He began to love these disorders too
much.

His tutor was that eminent and pious divine Dr. Blanford, afterward promoted
to the sees of Oxford and Worcester. And under his inspection, he was committed
to the more immeate care of Mr. Phineas Berry, a fellow of Wadham college, a
very learned and good natured man; whom he afterward used with much respect,
and rewarded as became a great man. But the humor of that time wrought so much
on him, that he broke off the course of his studies, to which no means could
ever effectually recall him; till when he was in Italy his governor Dr. Balfour,
a worthy and learned man, now a celebrated physician in Scotland, his native
country, drew him to read such books as were most likely to bring him back to
love learning and study: and he often acknowledged to me, in particular three
days before his death, how much he was obliged to love and honor this his
governor, to whom he thought he owed more than to all the world, next after his
parents for his care and sidelity of him, while he was under his trust.

But no part of it affected him more sensibly, than that he engaged him by many
tricks (so he expressed it) to delight in books and readings. So that ever
after he took occasion in the intervals of those woeful extravagancies that
consumed most of his time to read much: and though the time was generally but
indifferently employed, for the choice of the subjects of his studies was not
always good, yet the habitual love of knowledge, together with these fits of
study, had much awakened his understanding and prepared him for better things,
when his mind should be so far changed as to relish them.

He came from his travels in the 18th year of his age, and appeared at court
with as great advantages as most ever had. He was a graceful and well shaped
person, tall, and well made, if not a little too slender. He was exactly well
bred, and what by a modest behavior natural to him, what by a civility become
almost as natural, his conversation was easy and obliging. He had a strange
vivacity of thought, and vigor of expression. His wit had a subtility and
sublimity both that were scarce imitable. His style was clear and strong. When
he used figures they were very lively, and yet far enough out of the common
road. He had made himself master of the ancient and modern wit, and of the
modern French and Italian as well as the English. He loved to talk and write of
speculative matters, and did it with so fine a thread that even those that
hated the subjects that his fancy run upon, yet could not but be charmed with
his way of treating them. Boileau among the French, and Cowley among the
English wits, were those he admired most, Sometimes other men's thoughts mixed
with his composures, but that flowed rather from the impressions they made on
him when he read them, by which they came to return upon him as his own
thoughts, than that he servilely copied them from any. For few men ever had a
bolder flight of fancy more steadily governed by judgment than he had. No
wonder a young man so made and so improved was very acceptable in a court.

Soon after his coming thither, he laid hold on the first occasion that
offered, to show his readiness to hazard his life in the defense and service of
his, country. In the Winter of 1665, he went with the earl of Sandwich to sea,
when he was fent to lie for the Dutch East India fleet; and was in the Revenge
commanded by Sir Thomas Tiddiman, when the attack was made on the port of
Bergen in Norway, the Dutch ships having got into that port. It was as
desperate an attempt as ever was made: during the whole action, the Earl of
Rochester showed as brave and and as resolute courage as was possible. A person
of honor told me he heard the Lord Clifford, who was in the same ship, often
magnify his courage at that time very highly. Nor did the rigours of the
season, the hardness of the voyage, and the extreme dangers he had been in,
deter him from running the like on the very next occasion. For in the Summer
following he went to sea again, without communicating his design to his nearest
relations. He went aboard the ship commanded by Sir Edward Spragge, the day
before the great sea fight of that year. Almost all the volunteers that were in
the same ship were killed. Mr. Middleton, (brother to Sir Hugh Middleton) was
shot in his arms. During the action, Sir Edward Spragge not being satisfied
with the behavior of one of the captains, could not easily find a person who
would cheerfully venture through so much danger, to carry his commands to that
captain. This lord offered himself to the service; and went in a little boat
through all the shot, and delivered his message, and returned back to Sir
Edward: which was much commended by all that saw it. He thought it necessary to
begin his life with these demonstrations of his courage in an element and way
of fighting, which is acknowledged to be the greatest trial of clear and
undaunted valor.

He had so entirely laid down the intemperance that was growing on him before
his travels, that at his return he hated nothing more. But falling into company
that loved these excesses, he was, though not without difficulty, and by many
steps, brought back to it again. And the natural heat of his fancy being
inflamed by wine, made him so extravagantly pleasant, that many to be more
diverted by that humor, studied to engage him in deeper and deeper
intemperance; which at length did so entirely subdue him, that, as he told me,
for five years together he was continually drunk: not all the while under the
visible effect of it, but his blood was so inflamed, that it was not in all
that time cool enough to to be perfectly master of himself. This led him to say
and do many wild and unaccountable things: by this, he said, he had broke the
firm constitution of his health, that seemed so strong, that nothing was too
hard for it; and he had suffered so much in his reputation, that he almost
dispaired to recover it.

There were principles in his natural temper, that being heightened by that
heat carried him to great excesses -- a violent love of pleasure, and a
disposition to extravagant mirth. The one involved him in great sensuality; the
other led him to many odd adventures and frolicks, in which he was often in
hazard of his life. The one being the same irregular appetite in his mind, that
the other was in his body, which made him think nothing diverting that was not
extravagant. And though in cold blood he was a generous and good natured man,
yet he would go far in his heats, after any thing that might turn to a jest or
matter of diversion.

He said to me, He never improved his interest at court, to do a premeditated
mischief to other persons. Yet he laid out his wit very freely in libels and
satires, in which he had a peculiar talent of mixing his wit with his malice,
and fitting both with such apt words, that men were tempted to be pleased with
them; from thence his composures came to be easily known, for few had such a
way of tempering these together as he had. So that when any thing extraordinary
that way came out, as a child is fathered sometimes by its resemblance, so was
it laid at his door as its parent and author.

These exercises in the course of his life were not always equally pleasant to
him; he had often sad intervals and severe reflections on them. And though then
he had not these awakened in him from any principle of religion, yet the horror
that nature raised in him, especially in some sicknesses, made him too easy to
recieve some ill principles, which others endeavored to possess him with; so
that he was soon brought to set himself to secure and fortify his his mind
against that, by dispossessing it of all he could of the belief or
apprehensions of religion.

The licentiousness of his temper, with the briskness of his wit, disposed him
to love the conversation of those who divided their time between lewd actions
and irregular mirth. And so he came to bend his wit and direct his studies and
endeavors to support and strengthen these ill principles both in himself and
others.

An accident fell out after this, which confirmed him more in these courses.
When he went to sea in the year 1665 there happened to be in the same ship with
him, Mr. Mountague, and another gentleman of quality; these two, the former
especially, seemed persuaded that they should never return into England. Mr.
Mountague said, he was sure of it: the other was not so positive. The Earl of
Rochester and the last of these, entered into a formal engagement, not without
ceremonies of religion, that if either of them died, he should appear and give
the other notice of the future state, if there was any. But Mr. Mountague would
not enter into the bond. When the day came that they thought to have taken the
Dutch fleet in the port of Bergen, Mr. Mountague, though he had such a strong
presage in his mind of his approaching death, yet he generously staid all the
while in a place of the greatest danger. The other gentleman signalized his
courage in a most undaunted manner, till near the end of the action, when he
fell on a sudden into such a trembling that he could scarce stand: and Mr.
Mountague going up to him to hold him up, as they were in each others arms, a
cannot ball killed him outright, and carried away Mr. Mountague's belly, so
that he died within an hour after.

The Earl of Rochester told me that these presages they had in their minds,
made some impression on him, that there were separated beings; and that the
soul, either by a natural sagacity, or some secret notice communicated to it,
had a sort of divination. But that gentleman's never appearing was a great
snare to him, during the rest of his life. Though when he told me this he could
not but acknowledge, it was an unreasonable thing to think, that beings in
another state were not under such laws and limits, that they could not command
their own motions, but as the Supreme Power should order them; and that one who
had so corrupted the natural principles of truth, as he had, had no reason to
expect that such an extraordinary thing should be done for his conviction.

He also told me of another odd presage that one had of his approaching death
in the lady War, his mother in law's house. The chaplain dreamed that such a
day he should die, but being by all the family put out of the belief of it, he
had almost forgot it; till the evening before at supper, there being thirteen
at table, according to fond conceit that one of these must soon die, one of the
young ladies pointed to him that he was to die. He remembering his dream fell
into some disorder, and the lady War reproving him for his superstition, he
said, he was confident he was to die before morning; but he being in perfect
health it was not much minded. It was Saturday-night, and he was to preach the
next day. He went to his chamber and sat up late, as appeared by the burning of
his candle, and had been preparing his notes for his sermon, but was found dead
in his bed the next morning. These things he said, made him inclined to believe
the soul was a substance distinct from matter; and this often returned into his
thoughts. But that which perfected his persuasion about it, was that in the
sickness which brought him so near death before I first knew him, when his
spirits were so low and spent, that he could not move nor stir, and did not
expect to live an hour. He said his reason and judgment were so clear and
strong, that from thence he was fully persuaded that death was not the spending
or dissolution of the soul, but only the separation of it from matter. He had
in that sickness great, remorses for his past life, but he afterward told me,
they were rather general and dark horrors, than any convictions of finning
against God. He was sorry he lived so as to waste his strength so soon, or that
he had brought such an ill name upon himself; and had an agony in his mind
about it, which he knew not well how to express. But at such times though he
complied with his friends in suffering divines to be sent for, he said, he had
no great mind to it: and that it was but a piece of his breeding, to desire
them to pray by him, in which he joined but little himself.

As to the supreme Being, he had always some impression of one: and professed
often to me, That he had never known an entire atheist, who full believed there
was no God. Yet when he explained his notion of that Being, it amounted to no
more than a vast power that had none of the attributes of goodness and justice
we ascribe to the Deity. These were his thoughts about religion, as himself
told me.

For morality, he freely owned to me, that though he talked of it as a fine
thing, yet this was only because he thought it a decent way of speaking, and
that as they went always in clothes, though in their frolicks they would have
chosen sometimes to have gone naked, if they had not feared the people; so that
though some of them found it necessary for human life to talk of of morality,
yet he confessed they cared not for it, further than the reputation of it was
necessary for their credit, and affairs; of which he gave me many instances, as
their professing and swearing friendship, where they hated morality; their
oaths and imprecations in their addresses to women, which they intended never
to make good; the pleasure they took in defaming innocent persons, and
spreading false reports of some, perhaps in revenge, because they could not
engage them to comply with their ill designs: the delight they had in making
people quarrel; their unjust usage to their creditors, and putting them off by
any deceitful promise they could invent, that might deliver them from present
importunity. So that in detestation of these courses, he would often break
forth into such hard expressions concerning himself, as would be indecent for
another to repeat.

Such had been his principles and practices in a course of many years, which
had almost quite extinguished the natural propensities in him to justice and
virtue. He would often go in to the country, and be for some months wholly
employed in study, or the sallies of his wit; which he came to direct chiefly
to satire. And this he often defended to me; by saying there were some people
who could not be kept in order or admonished but in this way. I replied, That
it might be granted that a grave way of satire, was sometimes no unprofitable
way of reproof. Yet they who used it only out of spite, and mixed lies with
truth, sparing nothing that mightadorn their poems, or gratify their revenge,
could not excuse that way of reproach, by which the innocent often suffer;
since the most malicious things, if wittily expressed, might stick to and
blemish the best character in the world; and the malice of a libel could hardly
consist with the charity of an admonition. To this he answered, A man could not
write with life, unless he was heated by revenge: for to make a satire without
resentment on the cold notions of philosophy, was as if a man would in cold
blood, cut mens' throats, who had never offended him. And he said, The lies in
these libels came often in as ornaments that could not be spared without
spoiling the beauty of the poem.

For his other studies, they were divided between the comical and witty
writings of the ancients and moderns, the Roman authors, and books of physic,
which the ill state of health he was fallen into made more necessary to
himself; and which qualified him for an odd adventure which I shall but just
mention. Being under an unlucky accident which obliged him to keep out of the
way, he disguised himself so that his nearest friends could not have known him,
and set up in Tower-street, for an Italian mountebank, where he practiced
physic for some weeks not without success. In his latter years he read books
of history more. He took pleasure to disguise himself as a porter, or as a
beggar; sometimes to follow some mean amors, which for the variety of them he
affected. At other times merely for diversion he would go about in odd shapes,
in which he acted his part so naturally, that even those who were in the
secret, and saw him in these shapes, could percieve nothing by which he might
be discovered.

I have now made the description of his former life and principles, as fully as
I thought necessary to answer my end in writing. And yet with those reserves,
that I hope I have given no just cause of offense to any. I have said nothing
but what I had from his own mouth, and have avoided the mentioning of the more
particular passages of his life, of which he told me not a few. But since
others were concerned in them, whose good only I design, I will say nothing
that may provoke or blemish them. It is their reformation, and not their
disgrace, I desire: this tender consideration of others has made me suppress
many remarkable and useful things he told me. But finding that though I should
name none, yet I must relate such circumstances as would give great occasion
for the reader to conjecture concerning the persons intended right or wrong,
either of which were inconvenient enough, I have chosen to pass them quite
over. But I hope those that know how much they were engaged with him in his ill
courses, will be somewhat touched with this tenderness I express toward them;
and be thereby the rather induced to reflect on their ways, and to consider
without prejudice or passion, what a sense this noble lord had of their case,
when he came at last seriously to reflect upon his own.

I now turn to those parts of this narrative, wherein I myself bore some share,
and which I am to deliver upon the observations I made, after a long and free
conversation with him for some months. I was not long in his company when he
told me, He should treat me with more freedom than he had ever used to men of
my profession. He would conceal none of his principles from me, but lay his
thoughts open without any disguise; nor would he do it to maintain debate or
show his wit, but plainly tell me what stuck with him. And he protested to me,
that he was not so engaged to his old maxims, as to resolve not to change, but
if he could be convinced, he would choose rather to be of another mind. He
said, he would impartially weigh what I should lay before him, and tell me
freely when it did convince him, and when it did not. He expressed this
disposition of mind to me in a manner so frank, that I could not but believe
him, and be much taken with his way of discourse. So we entered into almost all
the parts of natural and revealed religion, and of morality. He seemed pleased,
and in a great measure satisfied, with what I said on many of these heads. And
though our freest conversation was when we were alone, yet upon several
occasions other persons were witnesses to it. I understood from many hands,
that my company was not distasteful to him, and that the subjects about which
we talked most, were not unacceptable. And he expressed himself often not ill
pleased with many things I said to him, and particularly when I visited him in
his last sickness: so that I hope it may not be altogether unprofitable, to
publish the substance of those matters about which we argued so freely, with
our reasoning upon them. And perhaps what had some effects on him, may be not
altogether ineffectual upon others.

I followed him with such arguments as I found were most likely to prevail with
him. And my not urging other reasons proceeded not from any distrust I had of
their force, but from the necessity of using those that were most proper for
him. He was than in a low state of health, and seemed to be slowly recovering
from a great disease. He was in the milk diet, and apt to fall into
hectic-fits; any accident weakened him; so that he thought he could not live
long. And when he went from London, he said, He believed he should never come
to town more. Yet during his being in town, he was so well that he went often
abroad, and had great vivacity of spirit. So that he was under no such decay
that either darkened or weakened his understanding; nor was he any way troubled
with the spleen or vapors, or under the power of melancholy.

What he was then, compared to what he had been formerly, I could not so well
judge, who had seen him but twice before. Others have told me they perceived no
difference in his parts. This I mention more particularly that it may not be
thought that melancholy or want of spirits made him more inclined to recieve
any impressions; for indeed I never discovered any such thing in him.

Having thus opened my way to the heads of our discourse, I shall next mention
them. The three chief things we talked about, were morality, natural religion,
and revealed religion, Christianity in particular. For morality he confessed,
he saw the necessity of it, both for the government of the world, and the
preservation of health, life and friendship; and was very much ashamed of his
former practices, rather because he had made himself a beast, and brought pain
and sickness upon his body, and had suffered much in his reputation, than from
any deep sense of a Supreme Being, or another state. But so far this went with
him that he firmly resolved to change the course of his life, which he thought
he should effect by the study of philosophy, and had not a few, no less solid
and pleasant notions concerning the folly and madness of vice. But he confessed
he had no remorse for his past actions or offenses against God, but only as
injuries to himself and to mankind.

Upon this subject I showed him the effects of philosophy, for reforming the
world. That it was a matter of speculation, which but few either had the
leisure or the capacity to enquire into. But the principle that must reform
mankind, must be obvious to every man's understanding. That philosophy in
matters of morality, beyond the great lines of our duty, had no very certain
fixed rule, but the lesser offices and instances of our duty went much by the
fancies of men, and customs of nations; and consequently could not have
authority enough to bear down the propensities of nature, appetite or passion.
For which I instanced in these two points.

The one was about that maxim of the Stoics, to extirpate all sorts of passion
and concern for any thing. That, take it by one had, seemed desirable, because
if it could be accomplished, it would make all the accidents of life easy; but
I think it cannot, because nature after all our striving against it, will still
return to itself. Yet on the other hand it dissolved the bonds of nature and
friendship, and slackened industry which will move but dully, without an inward
heat, and if it delivered a man of many troubles, it deprived him of the chief
pleasures of life which arise from friendship.

The other was concerning the restraint of pleasure, how far that was to go.
Upon this, he told me the two maxims of his morality then were; that he should
do nothing to the hurt of any other, or that might prejudice his own health.
And he thought that all pleasure, when it did not interfere with these, was to
be indulged as the gratification of our natural appetites. It seemed
unreasonable to imagine these were put into a man only to be restrained, or
curbed to such a narrowness. This he applied to the free use of wine and women.

To this I answered, that if appetites being natural, was an argument for
indulging them, then the revengeful might as well allege it for murder, and
the covetous for stealing, whose appetites are no less keen on those objects
and yet it is acknowledged that these appetites ought to be curbed. If the
difference is urged from the injury another person receives, the injury is as
great, if a man's wife is defiled, or his daughter corrupted: and it is
impossible for a man to let loose his appetites to vagrant lusts, and not
transgress in these particulars. So there was no curing the disorders that must
rise from thence but by regulating these appetites. And why should we not as
well think that God intended our brutish and sensual appetites should be
governed by our reason, as that the fierceness of beasts should be managed and
tamed by the wisdom, and for the use of man? So that it is no real absurdity,
to grant that these appetites were put into men, on purpose to exercise their
reason in the restraint and government of them. Which to be able to do,
ministers a higher and more lasting pleasure to a man, than to give them their
full scope and range. And if other rules of philosophy be observed, such as the
avoiding those objects that stir passions, nothing raises higher passions than
ungoverned lust, nothing darkens the understanding and depresses a man's mind
more, nor is any thing managed with more frequent returns of other
immoralities, than such oaths and imprecations as are only intended to compass
what is desired. The expense that is necessary to maintain these
irregularities, make a man false in his other dealings.

All this he freely confessed was true; upon which I urged that if it was
reasonable for a man to regulate his appetite in things which he knew to be
hurtful to him, was it not reasonable for God to prescribe a regulation of
these appetites, whose unrestrained courses did produce such mischievious
effects? That it could not be denied, but doing to others what we would have
others do unto us, was a just rule Those men then that knew how extremely
sensible they themselves would be of the dishonor of their families in case
their wives or daughters, must needs condemn themselves, for doing that which
they could not bear from another. And if the peace of mankind, and the entire
satisfaction of our whole life, ought to be one of the chief measures of our
actions, then let all the world judge, whether a man that confines his
appetite, and lives contented at home, is not much happier than those that let
their desires run after forbidden objects.

The thing being granted to be better in itself, then the question falls
between the restrain of appetite in some instances, and the freedom of a man's
thoughts, the soundness of his health, his application to affairs, with the
easinelss of his whole life. Whether the one is not to be done before the
other? As to the difficulty of such a restraint, though it is not easy to be
done, when a man allows himself many liberties in which it is not possible to
stop; yet those who avoid the occasions that may kindle these impure flames,
and keep themselves well employed, find the victory and dominion over them no
such impossible or hard matter as may seem at first view.

So that though the philosophy and morality of this point were plain, yet there
is not strength enough in that principle to subdue nature and appetite.

Upon this I urged that morality could not be a strong thing, unless a man was
determined by a law within himfelf: for if he only measured himself by decency,
or the laws of the land, this would teach him only to use such caution in his
ill practices, that they should not break out too visibly; but would never
carry him to an inward and universal probity. That virtue was of so complicated
a nature, that unless man became entirely within its discipline, he could not
adhere steadfastly to any one precept. For vices are often made necessary
supports to one another. That this cannot be done either steadily, or with any
satisfaction, unless the mind does inwardly comply with, and delight in the
dictates of virtue. And that could not be effected, except a man's nature was
internally regenerated and changed by a higher principle. Till that came about,
corrupt nature would be strong, and philosophy but feeble; especially when it
struggled with such appetites or passions as were much kindled, or deeply
rooted in the constitution of ones body.

This, he said, sounded to him like enthusiasm or canting. He had no notion of
it, and so could not understand it. He comprehended the dictates of reason and
philosophy, in which as the mind became much conversant, there would soon
follow as he believed, a greater easiness in obeying its precepts.

I told him on the other hand, that all his speculations of philosophy would
not serve him in any stead, to the reforming of his nature and life, till he
applied himself to God for inward assistance. It was certain that the
impressions made in his reason governed him, as they were lively presented to
him. But these are so apt to slip out of our memory, and we too apt to turn our
thoughts from them, and at sometimes the contrary impressions are so strong,
that let a man set up a reasoning in his mind against them, he finds that
celebrated saying of the Poet, Video melior a proboque deterior a sequor.
I see what is better, and approve it: but follow what is worse,
to be all that philosophy will amount to. Whereas those who upon such
occasions apply themselves to God, by earnest prayer, feel a disengagement from
such impressions and themselves endued with a power to resist them. So that the
bonds which formerly held them, fall off.

This he said must be the effect of a heat in nature. It was only the strong
diversion of the thoughts that gave the seeming victory, and he did not doubt
but if one could turn to a problem in Euclid, or to write a copy of verses, it
would have the same effect.

To this, I answered, that if such methods did only divert the thoughts, there
might be some force in what he said; but if they not only drove out such
inclinations, but begat impressions contrary to them, and brought men into a
new disposition and habit of mind, then he must confess there was somewhat more
than a diversion in these changes, which were brought on our minds by true
devotion. I added, that reason and experience were the things that determined
our persuasions; that as experience without reason may be thought the delusion
of our fancy, so reason without experience had not so convincing an operation;
But these two meeting together, must needs give a man all the satisfaction he
can desire.

He could not say it was unreasonable to believe that the Supreme Being could
make some thoughts stir in our minds with more or less force as it pleased him:
especially the force of these motions, being for the most part, according to
the impression that was made on our brains, which that power which directed the
whole frame of nature, could make grow, deeper as it pleased. It was also
reasonable to suppose God a being of such goodness, that he would give his
assistance to such as desired it. For though he might upon some greater
occasions in an extraordinary manner turn some people's minds, yet since he had
endued man with a faculty of reason, it is fit that men should employ that as
far as they could, and beg his assistance; which certainly they can do.

All this seemed reasonable, and at least probable. Now good men who felt upon
their frequent applications to God in prayer, a freedom from those ill
impressions, that formerly subdued them, and inward love to virtue and true
goodness, and easiness and delight in all the parts of holiness, which was fed
and cherished in them by a seriousness in prayer, and did languish as that went
off; had as real a perception of inward strength in their minds, that did rise
and fall with true devotion, as they perceived the strength of their bodies
increased or abated, according as they had or wanted good nourishment.

After many discourses upon this subject, he still continued to think all was
the effect of fancy. He said, that he understood nothing of it, but
acknowledged that he thought they were very happy whose fancies were under the
power of such impressions, since they had somewhat on which their thoughts
rested and centered. But when I saw him in his last sickness, he then told me,
he had another sense of what we had talked concerning prayer and inward
assistances.

This subject led us to discourse of God, and of the notion of religion in
general. He believed there was a Supreme Being. He could not think the world
was made by chance, and the regular course of nature seemed to demonstrate the
eternal power of its Author. This, he said, he could never shake off; but when
he came to explain his notion of the Deity, he said, he looked upon it as a
vast power that wrought every thing by the necessity of its nature; and thought
that God had none of those affections of love or hatred, which breed
perturbation in us; and consequently could not see there was to be either
reward or punishment. He thought our conceptions of God were so low, that we
had better not think much of him. And to love God seemed to him a presumptuous
thing, and the heat of fanciful men.

Therefore he believed there should be no other religious worship, but a
general celebration of that being in some short hymn. All the other parts of
worship he esteemed the inventions of priests, to make the world believe they
had a secret of incensing and appeasing God as they pleased. In a word, he was
neither persuaded that there was a special Providence about human affairs, nor
that prayers were of much use, since that was to look on God as a weak being,
that would be overcome with importunities. And for the state after death, he
thought, the soul did not dissolve at death, yet he doubted much of rewards or
punishments; the one he thought too high for us to attain by our slight
services; and the other was too extreme to be inflicted for sin. This was the
substance of his speculations about God and religion.

I told him his notion of God was so low that the Supreme Being seemed to be
nothing but nature. For if that Being had no freedom or choice of its own
actions, nor operated by wisdom and goodness, all those reasons which led him
to acknowledge a God, were contrary to this conceit. For if the order of the
universe persuaded him to think there was a God, he must at the same time
conceive him to be both wise and good, as well as powerful, since these all
appeared equally in the creation: though his wisdom and goodness had ways of
exerting themselves, that were far beyond our notions or measures.

If God was wise and good, he would naturally love and be pleased with those
that resembled him in these perfections, and dislike those that were opposite
to him. Every rational being naturally loves itself, and is delighted in others
like itself, and averse from what is not so. Truth is a rational nature acting
in conformity to itself in all things, and goodness is an inclination to
promote the happiness of other beings. So truth and goodness were the essential
perfections of every reasonable being; and certainly most eminently in the
Deity. Nor does his mercy or love raise passion or perturbation in him; for we
feel that to be a weakness in ourselves, which indeed only flows from our want
of power, or skill to do what we wish or desire.

It is also reasonable to believe God would assist the endeavor of the good,
with some helps suitable to their nature. And it could not be imagined, that
those who imitated him should not be especially favored by him; and therefore
since this did not fully appear in this state, it was most reasonable to think
it should be in another, where the rewards shall be an admission into a more
perfect state of conformity with God with the felicity that follows it; and the
punishments should be a total exclusion from him, with all the horror and
darkness that must follow that.

These seemed to be the natural results of such several courses of life, as
well as the effects of divine justice, rewarding or punishing. For since he
believed the soul had a distinct substance separated from the body, upon its
dissolution there was no reason to think it passed into a state of utter
oblivion, of what it had been in formerly. But that as the reflections on the
good or evil it had done, must raise joy or horror in it, so those good or ill
dispositions accompanying the departed souls, they must either rise up to a
higher perfection, or sink to a more depraved and miserable state.

In this life, variety of affairs and objects do much cool and divert our
minds; and are on the one hand, often great temptations to the good, and give
the bad some ease in their trouble; but in a state wherein the soul shall be
separated from sensible things, and employed in a more quick and sublime way of
operation, this must very much exalt the joys and improvements of the good, and
as much heighten the horror and rage of the wicked.

So that it seemed a vain thing to pretend to believe a Supreme Being, that is
wise and good as well as great, and not think a discrimination will be made
between the good and the bad, which, it is manifest, is not fully done in this
life.

As for the government of the world if we believe the Supreme Power made it,
there is no reason to think he does not govern it. For all that we can fancy
against it is the distraction which that infinite variety of second causes, and
the care of their concernments must give to the first, if it inspects them all.
But as among men those of weaker capacities are wholly taken up with some one
thing, whereas those of more enlarged powers can, without distraction, have
many things within their care; as the eye can at one view receive a great
variety of objects, in that narrow compass, without confusion: So if we
conceive the divine understanding to be as far above ours, as his power of
creating and framing the whole universe is above our limited activity, we will
no more think the government of the world a distraction on him. And if we have
once overcome this prejudice, we shall be ready to acknowledge a providence
directing all affairs; a care well becoming the great creator.

As for worshipping him, if we imagine our worship is a thing that adds to his
happiness, or gives him such a fond pleasure as weak people have to hear
themselves commended; or that our repeated addresses do overcome him through
our mere importunity, we have certainly very unworthy thoughts of him. The true
end of worship comes within another consideration, which is this, a man is
never entirely reformed till a new principle governs his thoughts; nothing
makes a principle so strong, as deep and frequent meditations of God, whose
nature though it be far above our comprehension, yet his goodness and wisdom
are such perfections as fall within our imagination. And he that thinks often
of God, and considers him as governing the world, and as ever observing all his
actions, will feel a very sensible effect of such meditations, as they grow
more lively and frequent with him; so the end of religious worship, either
public or private, is to make the apprehensions of God have deeper root and a
stronger influence on us. The frequent returns of these are necessary, lest if
we allow of too long intervals between them, these impressions may grow
feebler, and other suggestions may come in their room. And the returns of
prayer are not to be considered as favors extorted by mere importunity, but as
rewards conferred on men so well disposed and prepared for them, according to
the promises that God had made for answering our prayers, thereby to engage and
nourish a devout temper in us, which is the chief root of all true holiness and
virtue.

It is true, we cannot have suitable notions of the divine essence; for indeed
we have no just Idea of any essence whatsoever. Since we commonly consider all
things either by their outward figure or effects, and from thence make
inferences what their nature must be; so though we cannot frame any perfect
image in our minds of the Divinity, yet we may from the discoveries God has
made of himself, form such conceptions of him, as may possess our minds with
great reverence for him, and beget in us such a love of those perfections as to
engage us to imitate them. For when we say we love, the meaning is, we love
that being God that is holy, just, good, wise, and infinitely perfect. And
loving these attributes in that object, will certainly carry us to desire them
in ourselves. For whatever we love in another, we naturally, according to the
degree of our love, endeavor to resemble. In sum, the loving and worshipping
of God, though they are just and reasonable returns and expressions of the
sense we have of his goodness to us, yet they are exacted of us not only as a
tribute to God, but as a mean to beget in us a conformity to his nature, which
is the chief end of pure and undefiled religion.

If some men have at several times found out inventions to corrupt this, and
cheat the world, it is nothing but what occurs in every form of employment to
which men betake themselves. Mountebanks corrupt physic: petty-foggers have
entangled the matters of property: and all professions have been vitiated by
the knaveries of a number of their calling.

With all these discourses he was not equally satisfied. He seemed convinced
that the impressions of God being much in men's minds, would be a powerful
means to reform the world; and did not seem determined against Providence. But
for the next state he thought it more likely that the Soul began anew, and that
her sense of what she had done in this body, lying in the figures that are made
in the brain as soon as she dislodged, all these perished, and that the soul
went into some other state to begin a new course.

But I said upon this head, that this was at best a conjecture raised in him by
his fancy, for he could give no reason to prove it true. Nor was all the
remembrance our souls had of past things, seated in some material figures
lodged in the brain: though it could not be denied but that a great deal of it
lay in the brain. That we have many abstracted notions and ideas of immaterial
things, which depend not on bodily Figures. Some sins, such as falsehood and ill
nature were seated in the mind, as lust and appetite were in the body; and as
the whole body was the receptacle of the soul, and the eyes and ears were the
organs of seeing and hearing, so was the brain the seat of memory. Yet the
power and faculty of memory, as well as of seeing and hearing, lay in the mind;
and so it was no inconceivable thing that either the soul by its own strength,
or by the means of some subtiler organs, which might be fitted for it in
another state, should still remember as well as think.

But indeed we know so little of the nature of our souls, that it is a vain
thing for us to raise an hypothesis out of the conjectures we have about it, or
to reject one, because of some difficulties that occur to us; since it is as
hard to understand how we remember things now, as how we shall do it in another
state; only we are sure we do it now, and so we shall be then when we do it.

When I pressed him with the secret joys a good manfelt, particularly as he
drew near death, and the horrors of ill men especially at that time; he was
willing to ascribe to the impressions they had received from their education.
But he often confessed that whether the business of religion was true or not,
he thought those who had the persuasions of it, and lived so that they had
quiet in their consciences, and believed God governed the world, and acquiesced
in his providence, and had the hope of an endless blessedness in another state,
the happiest men in the world. And said, he would give all he was master of to
be under those persuasions, and to have the supports and joys that must needs
flow from them.

I told him the main root of all corruptions in men's principles, was their ill
life; which, as it darkened their minds, and disabled them from discerning
better things; so it made it necessary for them to seek out such opinions as
might give them ease from those clamours, that would otherwise have been raised
in them. He did not deny but that after the doing of some things, he felt great
and severe challenges within himself: But he said, he felt not these after some
others which I would perhaps call far greater sins, than those that affected
him more sensibly. This I said, might flow from the disorders he had cast
himself into, which had corrupted his judgment and vitiated his taste of
things; and by his long continuance in, and frequent repeating of some
immoralities, he had made them so familiar to him that they had become as it
were natural: And then it was no wonder if he had not so exact a sense of what
was good or evil; as a fevrish man cannot judge of tastes.

He did acknowledge the whole system of religion, if believed, was a greater
foundation of quiet than any other thing whatsoever; for all the quiet he had
in his mind, was, that he could not think so good a being as the Deity would
make him miserable. I asked him if when by the ill course of his life he had
brought so many diseases on his body, he could blame God for it; or expect that
he should deliver him from them by a miracle. He confessed there was no reason
for that. I then urged that if sin should cast the mind by a natural effect,
into endless horrors and agonies, which being seated in a being not subject to
death, it must last for ever unless some miraculous power interposed, could he
accuse God for that which was the effect of his own choice and ill life.

He said, they were happy that believed, for it was not in every man's power.

And upon this we discoursed long about revealed religion. He said, he did not
understand the business of inspiration; he believed the writers of the
Scriptures had heats and honesty, and so writ; but could not comprehend how God
should reveal his secrets to mankind. Why was not man made a creature more
disposed for religion, and better illuminated? He could not apprehend how there
should be any corruption in the nature of man, or a lapse derived from Adam.
God's communicating his mind to one man, was the putting it in his power to
cheat the world. For propnesies and miracles, the world had always been full of
strange stories; for the boldness and cunning of the contrivers meeting with
the simplicity and credulity of the people, things were easily received; and
being once received, passed down without contradiction. The incoherences of
style in the Scriptures, the odd transitions, the seeming contradictions,
chiefly about the order of time, the cruelties enjoined the Israelites in
destroying the Canaanites, circumsicion, and many other rites of the Jewish
worship, seemed to him unsuitable to the divine nature; and the first three
chapters of Genesis, he thought could not be true, unless they were parables.
This was the substance of what he excepted to revealed religion in general, and
to the old Testament in particular.

I answered to all this, that believing a thing upon the testimony of another,
in other matters where there was no reason to suspect the testimony, chiefly
where it was confirmed by other circumstances, was not only a reasonable thing,
but was the hinge on which all the government and justice in the world
depended; since all courts of justice proceed from evidence given by witnesses,
for the use of writings is but a thing more lately brought into the world.

So then if the credibility of the thing, the innocence and disinterestedness
of the witnesses, the number of them, and the most public confirmations that
could possibly be given, do concur to persuade us of any matter of fact, and it
is a vain thing to say, because it is possible for so many men to agree in a
lie, that therefore these have done it. In all other things a man gives his
assent when the credibility is strong on the one side, and there appears
nothing on the other side to balance it.

So such numbers agreeing in the testimony of these miracles, for instance --
our Savior's calling Lazarus out of the grave the fourth day after he was
buried, and his own rising again after he was certainly dead; if there had been
ever so many impostures in the world, no man can with reasonable color pretend
this was one.

We find both by the Jewish and Roman writers that lived in that time, that our
Savior was crucified: and that all his disciples and followers believed
certainly that he rose again. They believed this upon the testimony of the
Apostles, and of many hundreds who saw it, and died confirming it. They went
about to persuade the world of it, with great zeal, though they knew they were
to get nothing by it, but reproach and sufferings: and by many wonders which
they wrought they confirmed their testimony. Now to avoid all this by saying,
it is possible this might be a contrivance and to give no presumption to make
it so much as probable, that it was so, is in plain English to say, We are
resolved, let the evidence be what it will, we will not believe it.

He said, if a man says he cannot believe, what help is there? for he was not
master of his own belief, and believing was at highest but a probable opinion.

To this I answered, that if a man will let a wanton conceit possess his fancy
against these things and never consider the evidence for religion on the other
hand, but reject it upon a flight view of it, he ought not to say he cannot,
but will not believe. And while a man lives an ill course of life, he is not
fitly qualified to examine the matter aright. Let him grow calm and virtuous,
andup on due application examine things fairly, and then let him pronounce
according to his conscience, if to take it at its lowest, the reasons on the
one hand are not much stronger than they are on the other. For I found he was
so possessed with the general conceit, that a mixture of knaves and fools had
made all extraordinary things easily believed, that it carried him away to
determine the matter, without so much as looking on the historical evidence for
the truth of Christianity, which he had not enquired into, but had bent all
upon his wit and study to the support of the other side.

As for that, that believing is at best but an opinion; if the evidence be but
probable, it is so; but if it be such that it cannot be questioned, it grows as
certain as knowledge. For we are no less certain that there is a great town
called Constantinople, the seat of the Ottoman empire, than that there is
another called London. We have as little doubt that queen Elizabeth once
reigned, as that king Charles now reigns in England. So that believing may be
as certain, and as little subject to doubting as seeing or knowing.

There are two sorts of believing divine matters; the one is wrought in us by
our comparing all the evidences of matter of fact, for the confirmation of
revealed religion, with the prophesies in the Scripture; where things were
punctually predicted, some ages before their completion; not in dark and
doubtful words, uttered like oracles, that could bend to any event; but in
plain terms, as the foretelling that Cyrus by name should send the Jews back
from the captivity, after the fixed period of seventy years: The history of the
Syrian and Egyptian kings so punctually foretold by Daniel; and the prediction
of the destruction of Jerusalem, with many circumstances relating to it, made
by our Savior; joining these to the excellent rule and design of the Scripture
in matters of morality, it is at least as reasonable to believe this as any
thing else in the world. Yet such a believing as this, is only a general
persuasion in the mind, which has not that effect, till a man applying himself
to the directions set down in the Scriptures, which upon such evidence cannot
be denied, to be as reasonable, as for a man to follow the prescriptions of a
learned physician, and when these rules are both good and easy, to submit to
them for the recovering of his health, and by following these, finds a power
entering within him, that frees him from the slavery of his appetites and
passions, that exalts his mind above the accidents of life, and spreads an
inward purity in his heart, from which a serene and calm joy arises within him.
And good men by the efficacy these methods have upon them, and from the returns
of their prayers and other endeavors, grow assured that these things are true,
and answerable to the promises they find registered in Scripture.

All this, he said, might be fancy. But to this I answered, that as it were
unreasonable to tell a man that is abroad, and knows he is awake, that perhaps
he is in a dream, and in his bed, and only thinks he is abroad, or that as some
go about in their sleep, so he may be asleep still; so good and religious men
know, though others may be abused by their fancies, that they are under no such
deception; and find they are neither hot nor enthusiastical, but under the
power of calm and pure principles. All this he said he did not understand, and
that it was to assert or beg the thing in question which he could not
comprehend.

As for the possibility of revelation, it was a vain thing to deny it: For as
God gives us the sense of seeing material objects by our eyes, and opened in
some a capacity of apprehending high and sublime things, of which other men
seemed utterly incapable; so that it was a weak assertion, that God cannot
awaken a power in some men's minds, to apprehend and know some things in such a
manner that others are not capable of it. This is not half so incredible to us
as sight is to a blind man, who yet may be convinced there is a strange power
of seeing, that governs men, of which he finds himself deprived.

As for the capacity put into such men's hands to deceive the world, we are at
the same time to consider that besides the probity of their tempers, it cannot
be thought but God can so forcibly bind up a man in some things that it should
not be in his power to deliver them otherwise than as he gives him in
commission. Besides the confirmation of miracles are a divine credential, to
warrant such persons in what they deliver to the world; which cannot be
imagined can be joined to a lie, since this were to put the omnipotence of God,
to attest that which no honest man will do.

For the business of the fall of man, and other things of which we cannot
perhaps give ourselves a perfect account, we who cannot fathom the secrets of
the council of God, do very unreasonably to take on us to reject an excellent
system of good and holy rules, because we cannot satisfy ourselves about some
difficulties in them. Common experience tells us there is a great disorder in
our natures, which is not easily rectified. All philosophers were sensible of
it, and every man that designs to govern himself by reason, feels the struggle
between it and nature. So that it is plain, there is a lapse of the high powers
of the Soul.

But why, said he, could not this be rectified by some plain rules given; but
men must come and show a trick to persuade the world they speak to them in the
name of God? I answered that religion being a design to recover and save
mankind, was to be so opened as to awaken and work upon all sorts of people:
and generally men of a simplicity of mind, were those that were the fittest
objects for God to show his favor to. Therefore it was necessary that
messengers sent from heaven, should appear with such alarming evidences, as
might awaken the world, and prepare them by some astonishing signs, to listen
to the doctrine they were to deliver.

Philosophy, that was only a matter of fine speculation, had few votaries. And
as there was no authority in it to bind the world to believe its dictates, so
they were only received by some of nobler and resined natures, who could apply
themselves to and delight in such notions. But true religion was to be built
upon a foundation, that should carry more weight on it, and to have such
convictions as might not only reach those who were already disposed to receive
them, but rouse up such as without great and sensible excitation would have
otherwise slept on in their ill courses.

Upon this and some other occasions, I told him I saw the ill use he made of
his wit, by which he flurred the gravest things with a slight dash of his
fancy; and the pleasure he found in such wanton expressions, as calling the
doing of miracles, The showing of a trick, did really keep him from examining
them, with that care which such things required.

For the old Testament, we are so remote from that time, we have so little
knowledge of the Language in which it was writ, have so imperfect an account of
the history of those ages, know nothing of their customs, forms of speech, and
the several periods they might have by which they reckoned their time, that it
is rather a wonder we should understand so much of it, than that many passages
in it should be sod ark to us. The chief use it has to us Christians is, that
from writings which the Jews acknowledge to be divinely inspired, it is
manifest the Messia was promised before the destruction of their temple; which
being done long ago, and these prophesies agreeing to our Savior, and no
other; here is a great confirmation given to the Gospel. But though many things
in these books could not be understood by us, who lived above three thousand
years after the chief of them were written, it is no such extraordinary matter.

For that of the destruction of the Canaanites by the Israelites, it is to be
considered that if God had sent a plague among them all, that could not have
been found fault with. If then God had a right to take away their lives,
without injustice or cruelty, he had a right to appoint others to do it, as
well to execute it by a more immediate way. And the taking away people by the
sword is a much gentler way of dying, than to be smitten with a plague or a
famine. And for the children that were innocent of their father's faults, God
could in another state make that up to them. So all the difficulty is, why were
the Israelites commanded to execute a thing of such barbarity? But this will
not seem so hard, if we consider that this was to be no precedent for future
times; since they did not do it but upon special warrant and command from
heaven, evidenced to all the world by such mighty miracles as did plainly show
that they were particularly designed by God for the executioners of his
justice. And God by employing them in so severe a service, intended to possess
them with great horror of Idolatry, which was punished in so extreme a manner.

For the rites of their religion, we can ill judge of them, except we perfectly
understood the idolatries round about them; to which we find they were much
inclined. So they were to be bent by other rites to an extreme aversion from
them; and yet by the pomp of many of their ceremonies and sacrifices, great
indulgencies were given to a people naturally fond of a visible splendour in
religious worship.

In all which, if we cannot descend to such satisfactory answers, in every
particular as a curious man could desire, it is no wonder. The long interval of
time, and other accidents, have worn out those things which were necessary to
give us a clear light into the meaning of them. And for the story of the
creation, how far some things in it may be parabolical, and how far historical,
has been much disputed; there is nothing in it that may not be historically
true. For if it be acknowledged that spirits can form voices in the air, for
which we have as good authority as for any thing in history, then it is no
wonder that Eve being so lately created, might be deceived and think a serpent
spoke to her, when the evil spirit framed the voice.

But in all these things I told him he was in the wrong way, when he examined
the business of religion, by some dark parts of scripture: there I desired him
to consider the whole contexture of the Christrian religion, the rules it
gives, and the methods it prescribes. Nothing can conduce more to the peace,
order, and happiness of the world, than to be governed by its rules. Nothing is
more for the interests of every man in particular. The rules of sobriety,
temperance and moderation, were the best preservers of life, and which was
perhaps more, of health. Humility, contempt of the vanities of the world, and
being well employed, raises a man's mind to a freedom from the follies and
temptations that haunted the greater part. Nothing was so generous and great,
as to supply the necessities of the poor, and to forgive injuries. Nothing
raised and maintained a man's reputation so much, as to be exactly just and
merciful, kind, charitable, and compassionate; nothing opened the powers of a
man's soul so much as a calm temper; a serene mind free of passion and
disorder. Nothing made societies, families, and neighbourhoods so happy, as
when these rules which the Gospel prescribes, took place, Of doing us we would
have others do to us, and loving our neighbors as ourselves.

The Christian worship was also plain and simple; suitable to so pure a
doctrine. The ceremonies of it were few and significant, as the admission to it
by a washing with water, and a memorial of our Savior's death in bread and
wine; the motives in it to persuade to this purity were strong -- that God sees
us, and will judge us for all our actions -- that we shall be ever happy or
miserable, as we pass our lives here -- the example of our Savior's life, and
the great expressions of his love in dying for us, are mighty engagements to
obey and imitate him -- the plain way of expression used by our Savior and his
apostles, shows there was no artifice, where there was so much simplicity used
-- there was no secrets kept only among the priests, but every thing was open
to all Christiaus -- the rewards of holiness are not entirely put over to
another state, but good men are specially blessed with peace in their
consciences, great joy in the confidence they have of the love of God, and of
seeing him for ever: And often a single course of blessings follows them in
their whole lives: but if at other times calamities fell on them, these were so
much mitigated by the patience they were taught, and the inward assistances
with which they were furnished, that even those crosses were converted into
blessings.

I desired he would lay all these things together, and see what he could except
to them, to make him think this was a contrivance. Interest: appears in all
human contrivancies. Our Savior plainly had none; he avoided applause,
withdrew himself from the offers of a crown; he submitted to poverty and
reproach, much contradiction in his life, and to a most ignominous and painful
death.

His apostles had none neither; they did not pretend either to power or wealth,
but delivered a doctrine that must needs condemn them, if they ever made use of
it; they declared their commission fully without reserve till other times; they
recorded their own weakness: some of them wrought with their own hands; and
when they received the charities of their converts, it was not so much to
supply their own necessities, as to distribute to others; they knew they were
to suffer much for giving their testimonies to what they had seen and heard; in
which so many in a thing so visible, as Christ's resurrection and ascension,
and the effusion of the Holy Ghost which he had promised, could not be
deceived. And they gave such public confirmations of it, by the wonders they
themselves wrought, that great multitudes were converted to a doctrine, which,
besides the opposition it gave to lust and passion, was borne down and
persecuted for three hundred years; and yet its force was such, that it not
only weathered out all those storms, but even grew and spread vastly under them.

Pliny about threescore years after, found their numbers great and their lives
innocent. And even Lucian amidst all his raillery, gives a high testimony to
their charity and contempt of life, and the other virtues of the Christians,
which is likewise more than once done by malice itself, Julian the apostate.

If a man will lay all this in one balance, and compare with it the few
exceptions brought to it, he will soon find how strong the one, and how slight
the other are. Therefore it was an improper way, to begin at some cavils about
some passages in the New Testament, or the Old, and from thence to prepossess
one's mind against the whole. The right method had been first to consider the
whole matter, and from so general a view to descend to more particular
enquiries. Whereas they suffered their minds to be forestalled with prejudices,
so that they never examined the matter impartially.

To the greatest part of this he seemed to afsent, only he excepted to the
belief of Mysteries in the Christian Religion; which he thought no man could
do, since it is not in a man's power to believe that which he cannot
comprehend, and of which he can have no notion.

The believing mysteries, he said, made way for all the jugglings of Priests,
for they getting the people under them in that point, set out to them what they
pleased; and giving it a hard name, and calling it a Mystery, the people were
tamed, and easily believed it.

The restraining a man from the use of women, except one in the way of
marriage, and denying the remedy of divorce, he thought unreasonable
impositions on the freedom of mankind. And the business of the clergy, and
their maintenance, with the belief of some authority and power conveyed in
their orders, looked, as he thought, like a piece of contrivance. And why, said
he, must a man tell me, I cannot be saved, unless I believe things against my
reason, and then that I must pay him for telling me of them? These were all the
exceptions which at any time I heard from him to Christianity. To which I made
these answers.

For mysteries, it is plain there is in every thing somewhat unaccountable. How
animals or men are formed in their mother's bellies, how seeds grow in the
earth, how the soul dwells in the body, and acts and moves it; how we retain
the figures of so many words or things in our memories, and how we draw them
out so easily and orderly in our thoughts or discourses? How sight and hearing
were so quick and distinct, how we move, and how bodies were compounded and
united?

These things if we follow them into all the difficulties, that we may raise
about them, will appear every whit as unaccountable as any mystery of religion.
And a blind or deaf man would judge sight or hearing as incredible, as any
mystery may be judged by us: for our reason is not equal to them. In the same
rank, different degrees of age or capacity raise some far above others: so that
children cannot fathom the learning nor weak persons the counsels of more
illuminated minds. Therefore it was no wonder if we could not understand the
divine essence. We cannot imagine how two such different natures as soul and
body should so unite together, and be mutually affected with one another's
concerns; and how the soul has one principle of reason, by which it acts
intellectually, and another of life by which it joins to the body and acts
vitally; two principles so widely differing both in their nature and operation,
and yet united in one and the same person. There might be as many hard
arguments brought against the possibility of these things, which yet every one
knows to be true, from speculative notions, as against the mysteries mentioned
in the Scriptures.

As that of the Trinity, that in one essence there are three different
principles of operation, which, for want of terms fit to express them by, are
called persons, and are called in Scripture, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
and that the second of these did unite himself in a most intimate manner with
the humane nature of Jesus Christ: and that the sufferings he underwent were
accepted of God as a sacrifice for our sins: who thereupon conferred on him a
power of granting eternal life to all that submit to the terms on which he
offers it: and that the matter of which our bodies once consisted, which may be
as justly called the bodies we laid down at our deaths, as these can be said to
be the bodies we formerly lived in, being refined and made more spiritual,
shall be reunited to our souls and become a fit instrument for them in a more
perfect estate: and that God inwardly bends and moves our wills, by such
impressions as he can make on our bodies and minds.

These, which are the chief mysteries of our religion, are neither so
unreasonable, that any other objection lies against them, but this, that they
agree not with our common notions, nor so unaccountable that somewhat like
them, cannot be assigned in other things, which are believed really to be,
though the manner of them cannot be apprehended.

So this ought not to be any just objection to the submission of our reason to
what we cannot so well conceive, provided our belief of it be well grounded.
There have been too many niceties brought indeed, rather to darken than explain
these: they have been defended by weak arguments, and illustrated by similies
not always so very apt and pertinent. And new subtilties have been added which
have rather perplexed than cleared them. All this cannot be denied; the
opposition of heretics anciently occasioned too much curiosity among the
fathers: which the schoolmen have wonderfully advanced of late times.

But if mysteries were received rather in the simplicity in which they are
delivered in the Scriptures, than according to the discantings of fanciful men
upon them, they would not appear much more incredible, than some of the common
objects of sense and perception. And it is a needless fear that if some
mysteries are acknowledged, that are plainly mentioned in the new Testament, it
will then be in the power of the priests to add more at their pleasure. For it
is an absurd inference from our being bound to assent to some truths about the
divine essence, of which the manner is not understood, to argue that therefore
in an object presented duly to our senses, such as bread and wine, we should be
bound to believe against their testimony, that it is not what our senses
perceived it to be, but the whole flesh and blood of Christ; an entire body
being in every crumb and drop of it. It is not indeed in a man's power to
believe thus against his sense and reason, where the object is proportioned to
them, and fitly applied, and the organs are under no indisposition or disorder.

It is certain that no mystery is to be admitted, but upon very clear and
express authorities from Scripture, which could not reasonably be understood in
any other sense. And though a man can form no explicit notion of a mystery, for
then it would be no longer a mystery; yet in general he may believe a thing to
be, though he cannot give himself a particular account of the way of it; or
rather, though he cannot answer some objections that lie against it. We know we
believe many such in human matters, which are more within our reach; and it is
very unreasonable to say we may not do it in divine things, which are much more
above our apprehensions.

For the severe restraint of the use of women, it is hard to deny that
privilege to Jesus Christ as a lawgiver, to lay such restraints as all
inserior legislators do; who when they find the liberties their subjects take,
prove hurtful to them, set such limits, and make such regulations as they judge
necessary and expedient. It cannot be said but the restraint of appetites is
necessary in some instances; and if it is necessary in these, perhaps other
restraints are no less necessary to fortify and secure them. For if it be
acknowledged that men have a property in their wives and daughters, so that to
defile the one, or corrupt the other, is an unjust and injurious thing; it is
certain, that except a man carefully governs his appetites, he will break
through these restraints: and Therefore our Savior knowing that nothing could
so effectually deliver the world from mischief and unrestrained appetite, as
such a consinement, might very reasonably enjoin it. And in all such cases we
are to balance the inconveniences on both hands, and where we find they are
heaviest, we are to acknowledge the equity of the law. On the one hand there is
no prejudice but the restraint of appetite; on the other are the mischiefs of
being given up to pleasure, of running inordinately into it, of breaking the
quiet of our own family at home, and of others abroad; the engaging into much
passion, the doing many false and impious things to compass what is desired,
the waste of men's estates, time, and health. Now let any man judge whether the
prejudices of this side are not greater than that single one on the other side,
of being denied some pleasure?

For polygamy, it is but reasonable since women are equally concerned in the
laws of marriage, that they should be considered as well as men. But in a state
of polygamy they are under great misery and jealousy, and are indeed
barbarously used. Man being also of a sociable nature, friendship and converse
were among the primitive intendments of marriage, in which as far as man may
excel the wife in greatness of mind, and height of knowledge, the wife some way
makes that up with, her affection and tender care: so that from both happily
mixed, there arises a harmony, which is to virtuous minds one of the greatest
joys of life. But all this is gone in a state of polygamy, which occasions
perpetual jarrings and jealousies. And the variety does but engage men to a
freer range of pleasure, which is not to be put in the balance with the far
greater mischiefs that must follow the other course.

So that it is plain, our Savior considered the nature of man, what it could
bear, and what was fit for it, when he so restrained us in these our liberties.

And for divorce, a power to break that bond would too much encourage married
persons in the little quarrellings that may rise between them, if it were in
their power to depart one from another. For when they know that cannot be, and
that they must live and die together, it does naturally incline them to lay
down their resentments, and to endeavor to live as well together as they can.

So the law of the gospel being a law of love, designed to engage Christians to
mutual love; it was fit that all such provisions should be made, as might
advance and maintain it: and all such liberties be taken away, as are apt to
enkindle and foment strife. This might fall instances to be uneasy and hard,
enough, but laws consider what falls out most commonly, and cannot provide for
all particular cases. The best laws are in some instances very great
grievances. But the advantages being balanced with the inconveniences, measures
are to be taken accordingly.

Upon this whole matter I said, that pleasure stood in opposition to other
considerations of great weight, and so the decision was easy. And since our
Savior offers us so great rewards, it is but reasonable he has a privilege of
loading these promises with such conditions, as are not in themselves grateful
to our natural inclinations: for all that propose high rewards, have thereby a
right to exact difficult performances.

To this he said, we are sure the terms are difficult, but are not so sure of
the rewards. Upon this I told him, that we have the same assurance of the
rewards, that we have of the other parts of Christian Religion. We have the
promises of God made to us by Christ, confirmed by many miracles. We have the
earnests of these, in the quiet and peace which follows a good conscience; and
in the resurrection of him from the dead, who has promised to raise us up. So
that the reward is sufficiently assured to us: and there is no reason it should
be given to us, before the conditions are performed, on which the promises are
made. It is but reasonable we should trust God, and do our duty, in hopes of
that eternal life, which God who cannot lie, has promised.

The difficulties are not so great, as those which sometimes the commonest
concerns of life bring upon us. The learning some trades or sciences, the
governing our health or affairs, bring us often under as great straights. So
that it ought to be no just prejudice, that there are some things in Religion
that are uneasy, since this is rather the effect of our corrupt natures, which
are farther depraved by vicious habits, and can hardly turn to any new course
of life, without some pain, than of the dictates of Christianity, which are in
themselves just and reasonable, and will be easy to us when renewed, and in a
good measure restored to our primitive integrity.

As for the exceptions he had to the maintenance of the clergy, and the
authority to which they pretended; if they stretched their designs too far, the
Gospel did plainly reprove them for it. So that it was very suitable to that
church, which was so grossly faulty this way, to take the Scriptures out of the
hands of the people, since they do so manifestly disclaim all such practices.
The priests of the true Christian Religion have no secrets among them, which
the world must not know, but are only an order of Men dedicated to God, to
attend on sacred things, who ought to be holy in a more peculiar manner, since
they are to handle the things of God. It was necessary that such persons should
have a due esteem paid them, and a fit maintenance appointed for them, that so
they might be preserved from the contempt that follows poverty, and the
distractions which the providing against it might other ways involve them in.
And as in the order of the world, it was necessary for the support of
magistracy and government, and for preserving its esteem, that some state be
used (though it is a happiness when great men have philosophical minds, to
despise the pageantry of it.) So the plentiful supply of the clergy, if well
used and applied by them, will certainly turn to the advantage of religion. And
if some men either through ambition or covetousness used indirect means, or
servile compliances to aspire to such dignities, and being possessed of them,
applied their wealth either to luxury or vain pomp, or made great fortunes out
of it for their families; these were personal failings in which the doctrine of
Christ was not concerned.

He upon that told me plainly, there was nothing that gave him, and many
others, a more secret encouragement in their ill ways, than that those who
pretended to believe, lived so that they could not be thought to be in earnest,
when they said it. For he was sure religion was either a mere contrivance, or
the most important thing that could be. So that if he once believed, he would
set himself in great earnest to live suitably to it. The aspirings that he had
observed at court, of some of the clergy, with the servile ways they took to
attain to preferment, and the animosities among those of several parties, about
trifles, made him often think they suspected the things were not true which in
their sermons and discourses they so earnestly recommended.

Of this he had gathered many instances; I knew some of them were mistakes and
calumnies; yet I could not deny but something of them might be too true. And I
publish this the more freely, to put all that pretend to religion, chiefly to
those that are dedicated to holy functions, in mind of the great obligation
that lies on them to live suitably to their profession. Since otherwise a great
deal of the irreligion and atheism that is among us, may too justly be charged
on them: for wicked men are delighted out of measure when they discover ill
things in them, and conclude from thence not only that they are hypocrites, but
that religion itself is a cheat.

But I said to him on this head, that though no good man could continue in the
practice of any known sin, yet such might by the violence or surprise of a
temptation, to which they are liable as much as others, be of a sudden overcome
to do an ill thing, to their great grief all their life after. And then it was
a very unjust inference, upon some few failings, to conclude that such men do
not believe themselves. But how bad so many are, it cannot be denied but that
there are also many both of the clergy and laity, who give great and real
demonstrations of the power religion has over them; in their contempt of the
world, the strictness of their lives, their readiness to forgive injuries, to
relieve the poor and to do good on all occasions. And yet even these may have
their failings, either in such things wherein their constitutions are weak, or
their temptations strong and sudden. And in all such cases we are to judge of
men, rather by the course of their lives, than by the errors that they through
infirmity or surprise may have slipped into.

These were the chief heads we discoursed on; and as far as I can remember, I
have faithfully repeated the substance of our arguments. I have not concealed
the strongest things he said to me, but though I have not enlarged on all the
excursions of his wit in setting them off, yet I have given them their full
strength, as he expressed them; and as far as I could recollect, have used his
own words. So that I am afraid some may censure me for setting down these
things so largely, which impious men may make an ill use of, and gather
together to encourage and desend themselves in their vices. But if they will
compare them with the answers made to them, and the sense that so great and
refined a wit had of them afterward, I hope they may through the blessing of
God be not altogether ineffectual.

The issue of all our discourse was this; he told me, he saw vice and impiety
were as contrary to human society, as wild beasts let loose would be; and
therefore he firmly resolved to change the whole method of his life, to become
strictly just and true, to be chaste and temperate, to forbear swearing and
irreligious discourse, to worship and pray to his maker. And that though he was
not arrived at a full persuasion of Christianity, he would never employ his wit
more to run it down, or to corrupt others.

Of which I have since a further assurance from a person of quality, who
conversed much with him, the last year of his life; to whom he would often say,
that he was happy, if he did believe, and that he would never endeavor to draw
him from it.

To all this I answered, that a virtuous life would be very uneasy to him,
unless vicious inclinations were removed. It would otherwise be a perpetual
constraint. Nor could it be effected without an inward principle to change him;
and that was only to be had by applying himself to God for it in frequent and
earnest prayers. And I was sure if his mind were once cleared of these
disorders, and cured of those distempers, which vice brought on it, so great an
understanding would soon see through all those flights of wit, that do feed
atheism and irreligion; which have a false glittering in them, that dazzles
some weak-fighted minds, who have not capacity enough to penetrate further than
the surfaces of things: and so they stick in these toils, which the strength of
his mind would soon break through, if it were once freed from those things that
depressed and darkened it.

At this pass he was when he went from London, about the beginning of April. He
had not been long in the country when he thought he was so well, that being to
go to his estate in Somersetshire he rode thither post. This heat and violent
motion did so inflame an ulcer, that was in his bladder, that it raised a very
great pain in those parts. Yet he with much difficulty came back by coach to
the Lodge at Woodstock-Park. He was then wounded both in body and mind. He
understood physic and his own constitution and distemper so well, that he
concluded he could hardly recover: for the ulcer broke and vast quantities of
purulent matter past with his urine. But now the hand of God touched him, and
as he told me, it was not only a general dark melancholy over his mind, such as
he had formerly felt, but a most penetrating cutting sorrow. So that though in
his body he suffered extreme pain for some weeks, yet the agonies of his mind
sometimes swallowed up the sense of what he felt in the body.

He told me, and gave it me in charge, to tell it to one for whom he was much
concerned, that though there were nothing to come after this life, yet all the
pleasures he had ever known in sin, were not worth that torture he had felt in
his mind. He considered he had not only neglected and dishonored, but had
openly defied his Maker, and had drawn many others into the like impieties. So
that he looked on himself as one that was in great danger of being damned. He
then set himself wholly to turn to God unseignedly, and to do all that was
possible in that little remainder of his life which was before him, to redeem
those great portions of it, that he had formerly so ill employed.

The minister that attended constantly on him, was that good and worthy man Mr.
Parsons, his mother's chaplain, who has since his death preached, according to
the directions he received from him, his funeral sermon; in which there are so
many remarkable passages, that I shall refer my reader to them, and will repeat
none of them here, that I may not thereby lessen his desire to edefy himself by
that excellent discourse, which has given so great and so general a
satisfaction to all good and judicious readers. I shall speak cursorily of
every thing, but that which I had immediately from himself. He was visited
every week of his sickness by his Diocesan, that truly primitive prelate, the
lord bishop of Oxford, Dr. Fell; who though he lived six miles from him, yet
looked on this as so important a piece of his pastoral care, that he went often
to him; and treated him with that decent plainness and freedom which is so
natural to him; and took care also that he might not on terms more easy than
safe, be at peace with himself. Dr. Marshall the learned and worthy rector of
Lincoln College in Oxford, being the minister of the parish, was also
frequently with him; and by these helps he was so directed and supported, that
he might not on the one hand satisfy himself with too superficial a repentance,
nor on the other hand be out of measure oppressed with a sorrow without hope.

As soon as I heard he was ill, but yet in such a condition that I might write
to him, I wrote a letter to the best purpose I could. He ordered one that was
then with him, to assure me it was very welcome to him: but not satisfied with
that, he sent me an answer, which, as the countess of Rochester his mother told
me, he dictated every word, and then signed it.

I was once unwilling to have published it, because of a compliment in it to
myself, far above my merit, and not very well suiting with his condition.

But the sense he expresses in it of the change then wrought on him, has upon
second thoughts prevailed with me to publish it, leaving out what concerns
myself.

WOODSTOCK-PARK, Oxfordshire, June 25, 1680. MOST HONORED DR. BURNETT,
MY spirits and body decay so equally together, that I shall write you a letter
weak as I am in person. I begin to value churchmen above all men in the world,
etc. If God be yet pleased to spare me longer in this world, I hope in your
conversation to be exalted to that degree of piety, that the world may see how
much I abhor what I so long loved, and how much I glory in repentance, and in
God's service. Bestow your prayers upon me, that God would spare me (if it be
his good will) to show a true repentance and amendment of life for the time to
come: or else if the Lord pleases to put an end to my wordly being now, that
he would mercifully accept of my deathbed repentance, and perform that promise
that he has been pleased to make, that at what time soever a sinner
dothrepent, he would receive him. Put up these prayers, most dear Doctor, to
Almighty God for your most obedient and languishing servant.

ROCHESTER.


He told me when I saw him, that he hoped I would come to him upon that general
insinuation of the desire he had of my company; and he was loath to write more
plainly; not knowing whether I could easily spare so much time. I told him,
that on the other hand, I looked on it as a presumption to come so far, when he
was in such excellent hands; and though perhaps the freedom formerly between
us, might have excused it with those to whom it was known; yet it might have
the appearance of so much vanity, to such as were strangers to it; so that till
I received his letter, I did not think it convenient to come to him: and then
not hearing that there was any danger of a sudden change, I delayed going to
him till the twentieth of July.

At my coming to his house, an accident fell out not worth mentioning, but that
some have made a story of it. His servant, being a Frenchman, carried up my
name wrong, so that he mistook it for another, who had sent to him, that he
would undertake his cure, and he being resolved not to meddle with him, did not
care to see him. This mistake lasted some hours, with which I was the better
contented, because he was not then in such a condition, that my being about him
could have been of any use to him; for that night was like to have been his
last. He had a convulsion fit, and raved; but opiates being given him, after
some hours rest, his raving left him so entirely, that it never again returned
to him.

I cannot easily express the transport he was in, when he awoke and saw me by
him. He broke out in the tenderest expressions concerning my kindness in coming
so far to see such a one, using terms of great abhorrence concerning himself,
which I forbear to relate. He told me, as his strength served him at several
snatches, for he was then so low, that he could not hold up discourse long at
once, what sense he had of his past life; what sad apprehension for having so
offended his maker, and dishonored his redeemer; what horrors he had gone
through, and how much his mind was turned to call on God, and on his crucified
Savior So that he hoped he should obtain mercy, for he believed he had
sincerely repented; and had now a calm in his mind after that storm that he had
been in for some weeks.

He had strong apprehensions and persuasions of his admittance to heaven; of
which he spoke once not without some extraordinary emotion. It was indeed the
only time that he spoke with any great warmth to me; for his spirits were then
low, and so far spent, that though those about him told me, he had expressed
formerly great servour in his devotions; yet nature was so much sunk, that
these were in a great measure fallen off.

But he made me pray often with him; and spoke of his conversion to God as a
thing now grown up in him to a settled and calm serenity. He was very anxious
to know my opinion of a deathbed repentance. I told him, that before I gave
any resolution in that, it would be convenient that I should be acquainted more
particularly with the circumstances and progress of his repentance.

Upon this he satisfied me in many particulars. He said, he was now persuaded
both of the truth of Christianity, and of the power of inward grace, of which
he gave me this strange account. He said, Mr. Parsons in order to his
conviction, read to him the 53d chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah, and compared
that with the history of our Savior's passion, that he might there see a
prophecy concerning it, written many ages before it was done; which the Jews
that blasphemed Jesus Christ still kept in their hands, as a book divinely
inspired. He said to me, that as he heard it read, he felt an inward force upon
him, which did so enlighten his mind, and convince him, that he could resist it
no longer: for the words had an authority which did shoot like rays or beams in
his mind; so that he was not only convinced by the reasonings he had about it,
which satisfied his understanding, but by a power which did so effectually
constrain him, that he did ever after as firmly believe in his Savior, as if
he had seen him in the clouds.

He had made it be read so often to him, that he had got it by heart: and went
through a great part of it in discourse with me, with a sort of heavenly
pleasure, giving me his reflections on it. Some few I remember, Who has
believed our report? v. 1. Here, he said, was foretold the opposition the
gospel has to meet with from such wretches as he was. He has no form or
comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him: v. ii. On this he said, the meanness of his appearance and person has made
vain and foolish people disparage him, because he came not in such a fool's
coat as they delight in.

What he said on the other parts I do not well remember: and indeed I was so
affected with what he said then to me, that the general transport I was under
during the whole discourse, made me less capable to remember these particulars,
as I wish I had done.

He told me, that he had thereupon received the sacrament with great
satisfaction, and that was increased by the pleasure he had in his lady's
receiving it with him; who had been for some years misled into the communion of
the church of Rome, and he himself had been not a little instrumental in
procuring it, as he freely acknowledged. So that it was one of the joyfullest
things that befell him in his sickness, that he had seen that mischief removed,
in which he had so great a hand,

And during his whole sickness, he expressed so much tenderness and true
kindness to his lady, that as it easily defaced the remembrance of every thing
wherein he had been in fault formerly, so it drew from her the most passionate
care and concern for him that was possible; which indeed deserves a higher
character than is decent to give of a person yet alive. But I shall confine
myself to the dead.

He told me, he had overcome all his resentments to all the world; so that he
bore ill will to no person, nor hated any upon personal accounts. He had given
a true state of his debts, and had ordered to pay them all, as far as his
estate that was not settled, could go: and was confident that if all that was
owing to him were paid to his executors, his creditors would be all satisfied.

He said, he found his mind now possessed with another sense of things, than
ever he had formerly. He did not repine under all his pain, and in one of the
sharpest fits he was under while I was with him, he said, he did willingly
submit; and looking up to heaven, said, God's holy will be done, I bless him
for all he does for me. He knew he could never be so well, that life could be
comfortable to him. He was consident he should be happy if he died, but he
feared if he lived he might relapse. And then said he to me, in what a
condition shall I be, if I relapse after all this? But, he said, he trusted in
the grace and goodness of God, and was resolved to avoid all those temptations,
that course of life and company, that was likely to ensnare him: and he desired
to live on no other account, but that he might by the change of his manners
some way take off the high scandal his former behavior had given. All these
things at several times I had from him, besides some messages which very well
became a dying penitent to some of his former friends, and a charge to publish
any thing concerning him, that might be a means to reclaim others. Praying God,
that as his life had done much hurt, so his death might do some good.

Having understood all these things from him, and being pressed to give him my
opinion plainly about his eternal state; I told him, that though the promises
of the gospel did all depend upon a real change of heart and life, as the
indispensible condition upon which they were made; and that it was scarce
possible to know certainly whether our hearts are changed, unless it appeared
in our lives; and the repentance of most dying men, being like the how lings of
condemned prisoners for pardon, which flowed from no sense of their crimes, but
from the horror of approaching death; there was little reason to encourage any
to hope much from such sorrowing; yet certainly if the mind of a sinner, even
on a deathbed, be truly renewed and turned to God, so great is his mercy, that
he will receive him, even in that extremity.

He was sure his mind was entirely turned, and though horror had given him his
first awaking, yet that was now grown up into a settled faith and conversion.

There is but one prejudice lies against all this, to defeat the good ends of
divine providence by it upon others, as well as on himself; and that is, it was
a part of his disease, and that the lowness of his spirits made such an
alteration in him, that he was not what he had formerly been: and this some
have carried so far as to say, that he died mad. These reports are raised by
those who are unwilling that the last thoughts or words of a person, every way
so extraordinary, should have any effect either on themselves or others. And it
is to be feared, that some may have so far feared their consciences, and
exceeded the common measures of sin and infidelity, that neither this
testimony, nor one coming from the dead, would signify much toward their
conviction.

That this lord was either mad or stupid, is a thing so notoriously untrue,
that it is the greatest impudence for any that were about him, to report it;
and a very unreasonable credulity in others to believe it. All the while I was
with him, after he had slept out the disorders of the fit, he was not only
without ravings, but had a clearness in his thoughts, in his memory, in his
reflections on things and persons, far beyond what I ever saw in a person so
low in his strength. He was not able to hold out long in discourse, for his
spirits failed; but once for half an hour, and often for a quarter of an hour,
after he awakened, he had a vivacity in his discourse that was extraordinary,
and in all things like himself.

He called often for his children, his son the now earl of Rochester, and his
three daughters, and spoke to them with a sense and feeling that cannot be
expressed in writing.

He called me once to look on them all, and said, see how good God has been to
me, in giving me so many blessings, and I have carried myself to him like an
ungracious and unthankful dog.

He once talked a great deal to me of public affairs, and of many persons and
things, with the same clearness of thought and expression, that he had ever
done before. So that by no sign but his weakness of body, and giving over
discourse so soon, could I perceive a difference between what his parts
formerly were, and what they were then.

And that wherein the presence of his mind appeared most, was in the total
change of an ill habit grown so much upon him, that he could hardly govern
himself, when he was any ways heated, three minutes without falling into it; I
mean swearing.

He had acknowledged to me the former winter, that he abhorred it as a base and
indecent thing, and had set himself much to break it off; but he confessed that
he was so over powered by that ill custom, that he could not speak with any
warmth, without repeated oaths, which, upon any sort of provocation, came
almost naturally from him. But in his last remorses this did so sensibly affect
him, that by a resolute and constant watchfulness, the habit of it was
perfectly mastered; so that upon the returns of pain which were very severe and
frequent upon him, the last day I was with him; or upon such displeasures as
people sick or in pain are apt to take of a sudden at those about them: on all
these occasions he never swore an oath all the while I was there.

Once he was offended with the delay of one that he thought made not haste
enough, with some what he called for, and said in a little heat, that d -- d
fellow. Soon after I told him, I was glad to find his style so reformed, and
that he had so entirely overcome that ill habit of swearing; only that word of
calling any d -- d, which had returned upon him, was not decent.

His answer was, Oh that language of fiends which was so familiar to me, hangs
yet about me: sure none has deserved more to be damned than I have done. And
after he had humbly asked God pardon for it, he desired me to call the person
to him, that he might ask him forgiveness; but I told him that was needless,
for he had said it of one that did not hear it, and so could not be offended by
it.

In this disposition of mind did he continue all the while I was with him, four
day's together; he was then brought so low that all hope of recovery was gone.
Much purulent matter came from him with his urine, which he passed always with
some pain; but one day with unexpressible torment. Yet bore it decently without
breaking out into repinings, or impatient complaints. He imagined he had a
stone in his passage, but it being searched, none was found.

The whole substance of his body was drained by the ulcer, and nothing was left
but skin and bone; and by lying much on his back, the parts there began to
mortify. But he had been formerly so low, that he seemed as much past all hopes
of life as now; which made him one morning after a full and sweet night's rest
procured by laudanum, given him without his knowledge, to fancy it was an
effort of nature, and to begin to entertain some hopes of recovery: for he
said, he felt himself perfectly well, and that he had nothing ailing him, but
an extreme weakness, which might go off in time; and then he entertained me
with the scheme he had laid down for the rest of his life, how retired, how
strict, and how studious he intended to be. But this was soon over, for he
quickly felt that it was only the effect of a good sleep, and that he was still
in a very desperate state.

I thought to have left him on Friday, but not without some passion, he desired
me to stay that day. There appeared no symptom of present death, and a worthy
physician then with him told me, that though he was so low that an accident
might carry him away on a sudden; yet without that, he thought he might live
yet some weeks.

So on Saturday at four o'clock in the morning I left him, being the 24th of
July. But I durst not take leave of him; for he had expressed so great an
unwillingness to part with me the day before, that if I had not presently
yielded to one day's stay, it was like to have given him some trouble,
therefore I thought it better to leave him without any formality. Some hours
after he asked for me, and when it was told him, I was gone, he seemed to be
troubled, and said, has my friend left me, then I shall die shortly. After that
he spoke but once or twice till he died: he lay much silent: once they heard
him pray very devoutly. And on Monday about two of the clock in the morning, he
died without any convulsion, or so much as a groan.

THE CONCLUSION.
THUS he lived, and thus he died, in the three and thirtieth year of his age.
Nature had fitted him for great things, and his knowledge and observation
qualified him to have been one of the most extraordinary men, not only of his
nation, but of the age he lived in: and I do verily believe, that if God had
thought fit to have continued him longer in the world, he had been the wonder
and delight of all that knew him.

But the infinitely wise God knew better what was fit for him, and what the age
deserved. For men who have so cast off all sense of God and religion, deserve
not so signal a blessing, as the example and conviction which the rest of his
life might have given them.

And I am apt to think that the divine goodness took pity on him, and seeing
the sincerity of his repentance, would try and venture him no more in
circumstances of temptation, perhaps too hard for human frailty.

Now he is at rest, and I am very confident enjoys the fruits of his late, but
sincere repentance. But such as live, and still go on in their sins and
impieties, and will not be awakened neither by this, nor the other alarms that
are about their ears, are, it seems given up by God to a judicial hardness and
impenitency,

Here is a public instance of one who lived of their side, but could not die of
it: and though none of all our libertines understood better than he, the secret
mysteries of sin, had more studied every thing that could support a man in it,
and had more resisted all external means of conviction than he had done; yet
when the hand of God inwardly touched him, he could no longer kick against
those pricks, but humbled himself under that mighty hand; and as he used often
to say in his prayers, he who had so often denied him, found then no other
shelter, but his mercies and compassions.

I have written this account with all the tenderness and caution I could use,
and in whatsoever I may have failed, I have been strict in the truth of what I
have related, remembering that of Job, Will ye lie for God?

Religion has strength and evidence enough in itself, and needs no support from
lies and made stories. I do not pretend to have given the formal words that he
said, though I have done that where I could remember them. But I have written
this with the same sincerity, that I would have done, had I known I had been to
die immediately after I had finished it.

I did not take notes of our discourses last winter after we parted; so I may
perhaps in the setting out of my answers to him, have enlarged on several
things both more fully and more regularly, than I could say them in such free
discourses as we had. I am not so sure of all I set down as said by me, as I am
of all said by him to me. But yet the substance of the greatest part, even of
that, is the same.

It remains that I humbly and earnestly beseech all that shall take this book
in their hands, that they will consider it entirely, and not wrest some parts
to an ill intention. God, the searcher of hearts, knows with what fidelity I
have writ it. But if any will drink up only the poison that may be in it,
without taking also the antidote here given to those ill principles; or
considering the sense that this great person had of them, when he reflected
seriously on them; and will rather confirm themselves in their ill ways, by the
scruples and objections which I set down, than be edified by the other parts of
it; as I will look on it as a great infelicity, that I should have said any
thing that may strengthen them in their impieties, so the sincerity of my
intentions will, I doubt not, excuse me at his hands, to whom I offer up this
small service.

I have now performed, in the best manner I could, what was left on me by this
noble lord, and have done with the part of an historian. I shall in the next
place say somewhat as a divine. So extraordinary a text does almost force a
sermon, though it is plain enough itself, and speaks with so loud a voice, that
those who are not awakened by it, will perhaps consider nothing that I can say.

If our libertines will become so far sober as to examine their former course
of life, with that disengagement and impartiality, which they must acknowledge
a wise man ought to use in things of greatest consequence, and balance the
account of what they have got by their debaucheries, with the mischiefs they
have brought on themselves and others by them, they will soon see what a mad
bargain they have made.

Some diversion, mirth, and pleasure is all they can promise themselves; but to
obtain this, how many evils are they to suffer! How many have wasted their
strength, brought many diseases on their bodies, and precipitated their age in
the pursuit of those things? And as they bring old age early on themselves, so
it becomes a miserable state of life to the greatest part of them; gouts,
stranguries, and other infirmities, being severe reckonings for their past
follies; not to mention the more loathsome diseases, with their no less trouble
some cures, which they must often go through, who deliver themselves up to
forbidden pleasure.

Many are disfigured beside, with the marks of their intemperance and lewdness,
and which is yet sadder, an infection is derived oftentimes on their innocent,
but unhappy issue, who being descended from so vitiated an original, suffer for
their excesses.

Their fortunes are profusely wasted both by their neglect of their affairs,
they being so far buried in vice, that they cannot employ either their time or
spirits, so much exhausted by intemperance, to consider them; and by that
prodigal expense which their lusts put them upon.

They suffer no less in their credit, the chief mean to recover an entangled
estate: for that irregular expense forces them to so many mean shifts, makes
them so often false to all their promises and resolutions, that they must needs
feel how much they have lost, that which a gentleman, and men of ingenuous
tempers do sometimes prefer even to life itself, their honor and reputation.

Nor do they suffer less in the nobler powers of their minds, which by a long
course of such dissolute practices, come to sink and degenerate so far, that
not a few, whose first blossoms gave the most promissing hopes, have so
withered, as to become incapable of great and generous undertakings, and to be
disabled to every thing, but to wallow like swine in the filth of sensuality,
their spirits being dissipated, and their minds so nummed, as to be wholly
unfit for business, and even indisposed to think.

That this dear price should be paid for a little wild mirth, or gross and
corporal pleasure, is a thing of such unparalleled folly, and if there were not
too many such instances before us, it might seem incredible.

To all this we must add the horrors that their ill actions raise in them, and
the hard shifts they are put to to stave off these, either by being perpetually
drunk or mad, or by an habitual difuse of thinking and reflecting on their
actions, and (if these arts will not perfectly quiet them) by taking sanctuary
in such atheistical principles as may at least mitigate the sourness of their
thoughts, though they cannot absolutely settle their minds.

If the state of mankind and human societies are considered, what mischiefs can
be equal to those which follow these courses.

Such persons are a plague wherever they come, they can neither be trusted nor
beloved, having cast off both truth and goodness, which procure confidence and
attract love; they corrupt some by their ill practices, and do irreparable
injuries to the rest; they run great hazards, and put themselves to much
trouble, and all this to do what is in their power to make damnation as sure to
themselves as possibly they can. What influence this has on the whole nation is
but too visible; how the bonds of nature, Wedlock, and all other relations are
quite broken. Virtue is thought an antique piece of formality, and religion the
effect of cowardice or knavery. These are the men that would reform the world,
by bringing it under a new system of intellectual and moral principles, but
bate them a few bold and lewd jests, what have they ever done, or designed to
do, to make them be remembered, except it be with detestation? They are the
scorn of the present age, and their names must not in the next.

Here they have before them an instance of one who was deeply corrupted with
the contagion which he first derived from others, but unhappily heightened it
much himself. He was a master indeed, and not a bare trifler with wit, as some
of these are who repeat, and that but scurvily, what they may have heard from
him or some others, and with impudence and laughter will face the world down,
as if they were to teach it wisdom; who, God knows, cannot follow one thought a
step further than as they have conned it; and take from them their borrowed wit
and their mimical humor, and they will presently appear what they indeed are,
the least and lowest of men.

If they will, or if they can think a little, I wish they would consider that
by their own principles, they cannot be sure that religion is only a
contrivance; all they pretend to is only to weaken some arguments that are
brought for it; but they have not brow enough to say, they can prove that their
own principles are true.

So that at most they bring their cause no higher, than that it is possible
religion may not be true. But still it is possible it may be true, and they
have no shame left that will deny that it is also probable it may be true; and
if so, then what mad men are they who run so great a hazard for nothing?

By their own confession it may be there is a God, a judgment, and a life to
come; and if so, then he that believes these things, and lives according to
them, as he enjoys a long course of health and quiet of mind, an innocent
relish of many true pleasures, and the serenities which virtue raises in him,
with the good will and friendship which it procures him from others; so when he
dies, if these things prove mistakes, he does not outlive his error, nor shall
it afterward raise trouble or disquiet in him if he then ceases to be. But if
things be true, he shall be infinitely happy in that state, where his present
small services shall be so excessively rewarded.

The libertines on the other side, as they know they must die, so the thoughts
of death must be always melancholy to them, they can have no pleasant view of
that which yet they know cannot be very far from them. The least painful idea
they can have of it is, that it is an extinction and ceasing to be, but they
are not sure even of that. Some secret whispers within make them, whether they
will or not, tremble at the apprehensions of another state; neither their
tinsel wit, nor superficial learning, nor their impotent assaults upon the weak
side as they think of religion, nor the boldest notions of impiety, will hold
them up then. Of all which I now present so lively an instance, as perhaps
history can scarce parellel.

Here were parts so exalted by nature, and improved by study, and yet so
corrupted and debased by irreligion and vice, that he who was made to be one of
the glories of his age was become a proverb, and if his repentance had not
interposed, would have been one of the greatest reproaches of it. He knew well
the small strength of that weak cause, and at first despised, but afterward
abhorred it. He felt the mischiefs, and saw the madness of it; and therefore
though he lived to the scandal of many, he died as much to the edefication of
all those who saw him; and because they were but a small number, he desired
that he might even when dead, yet speak. He was willing nothing should be
concealed that might cast reproach on himself, and on sin, and offer up glory
to God and religion. So that though he lived a heinous sinner, yet he died a
most exemplary penitent.

It would be a vain and ridiculous inference, for any from hence to draw
arguments about the abstruse secrets of predestination; and to conclude that if
they are of the number of the elect, they may live as they will, and that
divine grace will at some time or other violently constrain them, and
irresistably work upon them. But as St. Paul was called to that eminent service
for which he was appointed, in so stupendous a manner, as is no warrant for
others to expect a vocation; so if upon some signal occasions such conversions
fall out, which, how far they are short of miracles, I shall not determine, it
is not only a vain but a pernicious imagination, for any to go on in their ill
ways, upon a fond conceit and expectation that the like will befall them. For
whatsoever God's extraordinary dealings with some may be, we are sure his
common way of working is by offering these things to our rational faculties,
which, by the assistance of his grace, if we improve them all we can, shall be
certainly effectual for our reformation; and if we neglect or abuse these, we
put ourselves beyond the common methods of God's mercy, and have no reason to
expect that wonders should be wrought for our conviction; which though they
sometimes happen, that they may give an effectual alarm for the awaking of
others, yet it would destroy the whole design of religion, if men should depend
upon, or look for such an extraordinary and forcible operations of God's grace.

And I hope that those who have had some sharp reflections on their past life,
so as to be resolved to forsake their ill courses, will not take the least
encouragement to themselves in that desperate and unreasonable resolution of
puttnig off their repentance till they can sin no longer, from the hopes I have
expressed of this Lord's obtaining mercy at the last; and from thence presume
that they also shall be received, when they turn to God on their deathbeds.
For what mercy soever God may show to such as really were never inwardly
touched before that time; yet there is no reason to think that those who have
dealt so disingenuously with God and their own souls, as designedly to put off
their turning to him, upon such considerations, should be then excepted with
him.

They may die suddenly, or by a disease that may so disorder their
understandings, that they shall not be in any capacity of reflecting on their
past lives. The inward conversion of our minds is not so in our power, that it
can be effected without divine grace assisting. And there is no reason for
those who have neglected these assistances all their lives, to expect them in
so extraordinary a manner at their death. Nor can one, especially in a
sickness, that is quick and critical, be able to do those things that are often
indispensibly necessary to make his repentance complete: and even in a longer
disease, in which there are larger opportunities for these things. Yet there is
great reason to doubt of a repentance begun and kept up merely by terror, and
not from any ingenuous principle. In which, though I will not take on me to
limit the mercies of God, which are boundless, yet this must be confessed, that
to delay repentance, with such a design, is to put the greatest concernment
that we have, upon the most dangerous and desperate issue that is possible.

But they that will still go on in their sins, and be so partial to them, as to
cease all endeavors to strengthen themselves in their evil course, even by
these very things which the providence of God sets before them, for the casting
down of these strong holds of sin: What is to be said to such? It is to be
feared, that if they obstinately persist, they will by degrees come within that
curse, "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that is filthy, let
him be filthy still. But if our Gospel is hid, it is hid to them that are lost,
in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them."

FINIS.

