J. P. BRISSOT. Born the 14th of Jany 1754. Guillotined Octr 31st 1793


THE COMMERCE OF AMERICA WITH EUROPE, PARTICULARLY WITH FRANCE AND GREAT
BRITAIN; COMPARATIVELY STATED AND EXPLAINED.

SHOWING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION TO THE INTERESTS OF FRANCE,
AND POINTING OUT THE ACTUAL SITUATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, IN
REGARD TO Trade, Manufactures and Population.

By J. P. BRISSOT DE WARVILLE, AND ETIENNE CLAVIERE.

Translated from the last French Edition, Revised by BRISSOT, and called the
SECOND VOLUME of his View of America.

With the Life of BRISSOT, and an Appendix, By the Translator.

NEW YORK: Printed and sold by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 (...) -- 1795 --

A SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF J. P. BRISSOT.
By the Editor.
HE was born at the village of Ouarville, near Chatres, in Oreannois, on the
14th of January, 1754. His father was what the French called a Traiteur; that
is, keeper of an eating house or an ordinary. He was intended for the
profession of the l^w, and was articled to an attorney for that purpo^e. But he
grew disgusted with the chicane and turpitude he was daily obliged to witness,
and therefore, after the five years of the articleship were expired, he left
Chatres and went to Paris.

An accident one night at the theater at Paris placed him in the company of an
English gentleman. They became intimate, and from this gentleman he obtained
some knowledge of the English language; which he afterward improved by a
residence in London.

He had received a regular classical education, and acquired, by strict
application, a tolerable knowledge of the German, Italian, and Spanish
languages, sufficient to consult the authors who have written in those
languages On his arrival at Paris, his first study was jurisprudence, with an
intention of becoming an advocate in parliament. No science however escaped his
attention. He attended lectures and experiments in every branch of science;
wherein his active genius found ample exercise. Chemistry was his favorite
object of pursuit; but his circumstances were too limited to indulge much in
it. The small patrimony which he inherited from his father did not exceed forty
pounds per annum.

In the year 1777 he made his first tour to London. During his stay in London
he became engaged in the conduct of a French newspaper, at that time called the
Courier de l' Europe, but since the Courier de Londres. Some misunderstanding
having happened concerning the stamps (at the stamp-office in London) for this
paper, the proprietor took a resolution of printing it at Boulogne sur-mer; and
Brissot was appointed the Editor, and resided at Boulogne for that purpose. He
continued in this capacity at Boulogne about two years. From thence he went to
Paris, and was admitted Counselor in Parliament. -- Early in the year 1782 he
went to Neuschatel to superintend the printing of one of his books (mentioned
hereafter). This was the memorable period of the revolution at Geneva. Here he
became acquainted with M. Claviere and M. du Rovray, who, with a numerous
party, were expelled that city, and sought an asylum in Ireland.

In the autumn of this year, he married a daughter of Madame Dupont of
Boulogne. This young lady had been recommended to the celebrated Madame de
Genlis, who obtained a situation for her in the nursery of the Duke de
Chartres, late Duke of Orleans, who suffered under the guillotine; in which
situation she continued some time after her marriage.

At the beginning of the year 1783, he visited London a second time. His view
in this journey was to establish in London, a Lyceum, or Academy of Arts and
Sciences, together with an office of general correspondence. In this
undertaking he was encouraged by some of the first literary men in France; and
a Monsieur du Forge, musician at Paris, was so captivated with the scheme, that
he advanced four thousand livres, (166 l.) for one third share of the profits.
Brissot was to have the sole management, and the other two thirds of the
profits. He took a house in Newman-street, Oxford-street; and published a
prospectus of his undertaking. He sent for his wife and his youngest brother
(his eldest brother was a priest.) At this time he commenced his description of
the sciences in England (mentioned hereafter) to be published monthly. Having
in one of his publications taken occasion to vindicate the Chevalier Launay,
editor of the Courier du Nord, printed at Maestricht, the editor of the Courier
de l' Europe, now M. du Morande, was so highly offended by it, that he became
from that time Brissot's most determined enemy. It is to be observed, that the
Courier du Nord, and the Courier de l'Europe, were rival newspapers. De Launay
quitted Maestricht, and went to Paris, where he was immediately put into the
Bastile, and was never more heard of.

In the month of May, 1784, Brissot was arrested by his printer in London.
Although he was at this time very well known to several persons of rank and
fortune, yet he was too delicate to apply to any of them for pecuniary
assistance. But after remaining a day or two in a lock-up house in Gray's Inn
Lane, he sent his brother to an intimate friend, who instantly paid the printer
his bill, and liberated him.

The next morning Brissot set out for France, leaving his wife and brother in
England, assuring them he would quickly return, which he certainly intended.
But in this he was severely disappointed. Thus ended his literary enterprise of
establishing a (...) in London, in which he embarked his whole property with a
degree of infatuation and zeal that seemed to border upon insanity. During his
residence in London he became acquainted with one Count de Pelleport, author of
several pamphlets against the principal persons of the French Court,
particularly of one called Soirees d'Antoinette, for the apprehension of the
author of which the French court offered a thousand pounds (1000 Louis) reward.
Brissot, instead of proceeding directly to Paris, stopped at Boulogne, and
resided there with his mother-in-law: here he resolved to continue his
publication on the original plan. Du M -- knowing that Pelleport was the author
of the offensive pamphlet, and that Brissot and Pelleport were intimate,
resolved to obtain the reward, and gratify his resentment. He applied to
Pelleport, offering him the superintendance of a publication to be carried on
at Bruges, (near Ostend,) the salary of which was to be two hundred pounds per
annum. Pelleport accepted the offer. But it was necessary to stop at Boulogne,
where some final arrangements were to be made. In the month of July, Pelleport
embarked for Boulogne with Captain Meredith. But the moment he landed, he was
seized by the officers of the Police, who put him in chains and carried him to
Paris, where he was sent to the Bastile. Du M -- was an agent of the Police of
Paris. Information being given to the Police, that Brissot was at Boulogne, and
that he was the intimate friend of Pelleport, he was immediately taken into
custody, carried to Paris, and committed to the Bastile. However, it is certain
that Brissot never wrote any thing against either the King or Queen of France.
He was sincere in his abhorrence of the arbitrary and despotic principles of
the French government, but with respect to the private conduct of the King and
Queen, he never bestowed the smallest attention upon it. In this magazine of
human victims, he continued about six weeks. His wife applied to Madame Genlis
in his favor, and Madame Genlis most generously made a point of it with the
Duke de Chartres to obtain his liberty. The Duke de Chartres's interference
does not appear by any document; but Brissot's acquittal of the charge brought
against him appears in the following report of his examination, made to the
French minister, M. Breteuil, on the 5th of September.

The Sieur Brissot de Warville was conveyed to the Bastile on the day after the
Sieur de Pelleport, who was arrested at Boulogne sur-mer, arrived at Paris. In
consequence of his connections with this man, guilty of writing libels, he was
suspected of having been his coadjutor. The attestation of a boy in the
printing-office, from whence one of these libels issued, gave strength to
suspicions; but this attestation, transmitted from London, is destitute of
authenticity; and the Sieur Brissot de Warville, who has very satisfactorily
answered to the interrogatories which were put to him, attributes his
crimination to the animosity of enemies whom he conceives to have plotted
against him in London. The Sieur Brissot de Warville is a man of talents, and
of letters; he appears to have formed systems, and to entertain extraordinary
principles; but it is certain that, for the last seven or eight months, his
connections with the Sieur de Pelleport had ceased, and that he employed
himself solely upon a periodical paper, which he obtained permission to
circulate and sell in France, after having submitted it to the examination of a
licenser.

It is proper to observe, that the addition of de Warville, which Brissot made
to his name, (to distinguish himself from his elder brother) is a kind of local
designation, not uncommon in many countries. William of Malmsbury, Geoffry of
Monmouth, Rapin de Thoyras, Joan d'Arc, etc. etc. But in the orthography he
substituted the English W for the French dipthong Ou; the sound of that
dipthong being similar to our W. Thus Ouarville is pronounced Warville in both
languages.

In a very short time after his release from the Bastile, he very honorably
discharged his pecuniary obligation to his friend in London.

In the year 1787, which was the era of the foundation of the French
revolution, the Duke de Chartres, now become Duke of Orleans by the death of
his father, embraced the party of the parliament against the Court. Upon the
principle of gratitude Brissot attached himself to the Duke of Orleans. As an
honest man he could not do otherwise.

We shall here pass by his tour to America, and some other circumstances,
because they are intimately connected with the account of his writings, which
is subj^ined.

Upon his return to France he found that his celebrity had not been diminished
by his absence. He was elected a member of the Constituent Assembly, and was
much engaged in the committees of research, of which he was the reporter. He
was also elected a member of the Legislative Assembly for the department of
Paris. It must be observed, that the revolution cast a veil over the crimes of
all those who had been obliged to leave their country. In this group who
returned to France was Du M --. He opposed Brissot in his election for Paris,
but Brissot was elected by a majority of more than three to one. However, Du M
-- 's party were excessively mortified; and they unceasingly calumniated
Brissot in the most opprobrious terms. M. Petion, mayor of Paris, and who was
Brissot's friend and townsman, contributed much to strengthen his interest and
ascendency.

Brissot now distinguished himself as one of the Amiss des Noirs (friend of the
Negroes) of whom he was a most zealous advocate. In a speech which he delivered
in the Assembly in the year 1791, there is a strong trait of philanthropy.

Of this speech the following is a short extract: "You have heard of enormities
that freeze you with horror; but Phalaris spoke not of his brazen bull, he
lamented only the dagger that his own cruelty had raised against him. The
colonists have related instances of ferocity; but give me, said he, an informed
brute, and I will soon make a ferocious monster of him. It was a white man who
first threw a negro into a burning oven; who dashed out the brains of a child
in the presence of its father; who fed a slave with its own proper flesh. These
are the monsters that have to account for the barbarity of the revolted
savages. Millions of Africans have perished on this soil of blood. You break,
at every step, the bones of the inhabitants, that nature has given to these
islands: and you shudder at the relation of their vengeance. In this dreadful
struggle the crimes of the whites are yet the most horrible. They are the
offspring of despotism: whilst those of the blacks originate in the hatred of
slavery, and the thirst of revenge. Is philosophy chargeable with these
horrors? Does she require the blood of the colonists? Brethren, she cries, be
just, be beneficent, and you will pros^^^^. -- Eternal slavery must be an
eternal source of crimes; -- divest it at least of the epithet eternal; for
anguish that knows no limitation of period can only produce despair."

Upon the abolition of the French monarchy, in the month of September 1792, the
Legislative Assembly dissolved itself. The constitution being dissolved by the
abolition of the King, they conceived that it was the inherent right of the
people to choose a new representation, in order (...) new constitution, suited
to the wishes of the p^^ple, and to the necessity of the existing circumstances
of the times. In this general election Brissot was elected one of the deputies
from the department of Eure and Loire. His abilities and talents became every
day more conspicuous. He was chosen the Reporter of the Committee of Public
Safety; in which situation he conducted himself without reproach, until the
treacherous conduct of Dumourier threw a suspicion on the whole of the Gironde
party.

Although assailed on all sides by his enemies, his character aspersed and
depreciated by the basest of calumnies, Brissot showed himself consistent with
his public principles of philanthropy.

In the dreadful massacre of the 3d of September, his opponents, particularly
Du M --, sought every opportunity to accomplish his destruction, by accusing
him of being a principal instigator of those horrors. And it must be owned,
that these repeated and continual calumnies weakened him in the public esteem.
Du M -- was perfectly acquainted with the English method of writing a man down.

When Condorcet moved for the abolition of royalty, Brissot was silent.

When the motion was made to pass sentence of death on the King, Brissot spoke
and voted for the appeal to the primary assemblies.

When Fayette was censured, Brissot defended him.

When the Duke of Orleans (M. de Egalite) was censured. Brissot defended him.

The two first seem to have arisen in principles of humanity.

The two last, unquestionably, arose in the strongest ties of gratitude and
friendship.

A conscientious man cannot suffer a more severe affliction, than when his
private honor places him against his public duty.

Of Brissot's Writings; and particularly of this Work.
Upon the settlement of the American government after the war, he became an
enthusiastic admirer of the new constitution of that great country. But some
French persons, who had been in America, and were returned to France, had
published their thoughts and opinions of America, in a manner that was nothing
short of illiberality. The reader will find the principal names of these
writers in the thirty-second chapter of the first volume. Brissot was fired
with indignation at this treatment of a people, whom he conceived could not in
any wise have deserved such reproach; and, imagining that the general peace in
1783, had opened an honorable and free communication of reciprocal commercial
advantages between America and France, he wrote this volume with the view of
supporting and establishing that primary idea, or theory of a French commerce
with the United States.

Upon this point it is no more than ordinary candor to observe, that all which
Brissot recommends, explains, or relates, concerning a French commerce with the
United States, applies equally, and in some points more than equally, to the
British commerce with them. Every B^itish merchant and trader may derive some
advantage from a general view of the principles which he has laid down for the
establishment and regulation of a reciprocal commerce between France and
America. The produce and manufactures of England are infinitely better suited
to the wants of America; and therefore all his theory, which is directed to the
welfare and improvement of France, must strongly attach the attention of the
British merchant and mechanic: who, in this great point, have not at present
any superiors, but have several rivals. Brissot's ambition was to make France
the greatest and most powerful rival. And every candid person must allow that
he deserved much credit of his countrymen for the progress he made, in this
first attempt, to open the eyes of the French nation to prospects of new
sources of advantage. All that is further necessary to say of this work, is
said by Brissot himself in the introduction, from the tenth to the twentieth
pages. In the last French edition of Brissot's Travels in America, published by
himself, about seven or eight months before his decapitation, this volume is
placed the last of that work. We have followed the Author's arrangement, and
collated the whole by the last Paris edition.

Of the preceding volume, entitled, "New Travels in the United States of
America," we have nothing to add: the whole of the French edition is now before
the reader.

Of Brissot's other works it is proper to mention the following*

The Theory of Criminal Laws, in two volumes -- Although M. la Cr^telle, at the
conclusion of his Essay on the Prejudices attached to Infamy, speaks in
flattering terms of this work; for he says, that it exhibits an extensible
knowledge, and shows the writer's ambition ascends to great principles; yet to
those persons who have read Becar^a's Essay on Crimes and Punishments, it will
not appear that Brissot has added much novelt^ to the subject.

The Necessi^^ of a Reform of the Criminal Laws.

What Repar^ (...) is due to innocent Persons unjustly accused.

These were two discourses which were crowned by the Academy of Chalons sur
(...), and were printed in the form of two pamphlets. The ministers of Louis
XVL were a good deal offended at the principle* they contained, and they forbid
the Academy proposing the discussing of similar subjects at any of their future
^eetings.

This check served but as a stimulus to Brissot to continue his subject. He
therefore, in two years afterward, publishes his Philosophical Library of the
Criminal Laws. This work is now ten volumes. Brissot's view in this work was,
to diffuse and explain those grand principles of freedom which produced the
revolution in England in the year 1688, and the revolution in America in the
year 1775. Before the dissolution of the monarchy in France, those principles
were almost unknown to the French, and are still almost unknown to the other
parts of Europe. But as several of the monarchs of Europe approved of the
American revolution, it may be presumed that their subjects will not long
continue ignorant of the motives and grounds of a measure which was honored
with the patronage of their sovereigns. This circumstance alone should convince
the English, that many of the powers of Europe behold with pleasure the
diminution of their greatness and consequence, and that very few of those
powers are ever friendly to them, except during the time they are receiving a
bribe, by virtue of an instrument, commonly called a subsidiary treaty.

Of Dr. Price of London he was an admirer; but of Dr. Priestley he was also an
imitator, for he amused himself frequently with chemistry, physics, anatomy,
and religion. On the last subject there is a presumption that he wrote but
little; for in his Letter to the Archbishop of Sons (the only tract on
religion, by him, that has come to the Editor's knowledge) he says, That
religious tyranny had been prostrated by the blows of Voltaire, Rousseau,
D'Alembert, and D'lderot. His mind was capacious, and his comprehension
extensive. In his zeal to become an imitator of Priestley, he published a
volume Concerning Truth, or Thoughts on the Means of attaining Truth, in all
the branches of Human Knowledge. Here was a wide field for the display of
Brissot's talents and industry. His design was to have carried on the work to
several volumes, and to have invited the communications of the literati of all
Europe, in all the different sciences, and, it may be added, speculations. But
there was such a freedom of sentiment manifested in the first volume, that both
the author and printer were alarmed with the terrors of the Bastile. Filled
with these apprehensions, he left Paris, and went to Neufchatel. There he
printed his prospectus, and he caused it to be also printed in London. But when
these copies were attempted to be circulated in France, they were seized. Not a
single number was permitted to be seen in any bookseller's shop in France.

Finding the execution of his project thus rendered impracticable, he left
Neufchatel, and went to London; where, in order to give currency to his free
opinions, he altered the title of his book. He proposed to publish the
remaining part periodically, under the name of A Description of the Sciences
and Arts in England; great part of which was intended to be devoted to an
examination of, and to observations on, the English constitution. His friends
solicited the French ministry to permit this work to be reprinted at Paris. At
first they obtained this favor; and the work went on as far as twelve numbers,
or two volumes; after which it was prohibited, not more to the author's
mortification than to the injury of his pocket. M. de Vergennes, who was at
that time minister of France, had so strong a dislike to every thing that was
English, that he would not endure the smallest commendation upon any part of
the English constitution, or commerce, to be promulgated in France. He had
begun to discover, that the favorite idea of his master, of separating the
British colonies from the British empire, might lead to an investigation of the
principles of government at home, and prove extremely dangerous to a despotic
monarchy.

Notwithstanding he was thus disappointed a second time, he still pursued his
design; but under a second change of title. He published two volumes under the
title of Philosophical Letters on the History of England. The title did not
attract the public attention; because two volumes under a similar name had been
published in London, and had, with some art, been imposed on the public as the
production of Lord Lyttleton; but they were written by Goldsmith, in support of
tyranny and aristocracy.

Every circumstance of cruelty and oppression met with the observation of
Brissot. When the late Emperor Joseph was punishing Horiah, the leader of the
revolt in Walachia, and issuing his shocking edict against emigration, Brissot
addressed two letters to him upon those subjects, which were read throughout
Germany. In one letter he affirmed, that Horiah was justified in his revolt; in
the other he held, that a privilege to emigrate from ^ne country to another,
was a sacred right derived from nature.

He was an enthusiast in his admiration of the American revolution, and of the
conduct of the Americans in risking every thing to emancipate themselves from
the tyranny of Great Britain. Upon comparing the new constitution of America
with that of England, he changed his opinion of the latter -- he ceased to
approve of it.

Some French gentlemen, who had visited America, having, when they returned to
France, written some severe remarks on the Americans, Brissot defended the
Americans, particularly in his book called A Critical Examination of the
Travels of the Marquis of Chatelleux. But as this work has been already
mentioned in the preceding volume (see chapters 31 and 32), it is not necessary
to say any thing more of it here.

It must never be forgot, that during the period of the French monarchy there
were more intrigues always going on in the French court than in any court in
Europe. At this time (the year 1787) the court was full of intrigues --
libidinous as well as political; for though the King had no mistresses, the
Queen had her favorites and her party. Neckar was dismissed, and Calonne was
appointed by her influence. Montmorin succeeded Vergennes, and the Duke of
Orleans was at the head of the party that sought the overthrow of the new
ministry. When Calonne assembled the Notables at Versailles, Brissot published
a pamphlet entitled No Bankruptcy; or Letters to a Creditor of the State
concerning the Impossibility of a National Bankruptcy, and the Means of
restoring Credit and Peace. This pamphlet, which contained many severe
observations on Calonne's measures and plans, and some arguments in support of
certain privileges claimed by the people, the Duke of Orleans was highly
pleased with. He made inquiry after the author, for the tract was anonymous,
and having discovered him, he ordered his chancellor to provide a situation for
him. He was made secretary-general of the Duke's chancery. This did not save
him from ministerial resentment. A letter de cachet was made out against him;
but having notice of it, he instantly escaped to the Netherlands. He was for
several months editor of the Courier Belgique, printed at Mechlin. It was
during this voluntary exile that he formed his project of visiting America. He
communicated his design to the Philanthropic Society of the Friends of the
Negroes at Paris, and was by them assisted and recommended to several persons
in America. The produce of this visit to America was the first volume of this
work, written upon his return to France. The French ministry being changed
before he left Europe, he embarked at Havre de Grace in the month of June, 1788.

Intelligence having reached him in America of the rapid progress liberty was
making in France, he returned to his native country in 1789, in a confidence
that his labors might become useful to the general interest.

His first publication after his return (except the preceding volume of his
travels in America) was, A Plan of Conduct for the Deputies of the People.

His knowledge and admiration of America naturally produced a friendship with
the Marquis de la Fayette, who introduced him into the club of the Jacobins.

We shall pass by the several steps and measures of the revolution; for to give
an account of all Brissot's concern therein, would be to write a large volume
upon that event only. But the mention of a few circumstances which are attached
to Brissot peculiarly, is indispensible.

By the interest, or rather influence, of Fayette, he was made a member of the
Commune of Paris. He was agent of the Police, and a member of the Committee of
Inspection at Paris; and afterward a representative for the department of Eure
and Loire.

He commenced a newspaper, which he called Patriote Francais; in which he
constantly defended the conduct of la Fayette. He attached himself to the party
called Girondists.

To the English reader this name may require some explanation. The warm and
most violent of the National Convention, having gained the confidence and
support of the city of Paris by various arts, but principally by declaring,
upon every opportunity, that Paris must constantly be the place in which the
National Representation must hold their deliberations; to balance against this
power of Paris, Condorcet, Petion, Vergniaux, Brissot, Isnard, and others, all
members of the Convention, endeavored to gain the commercial cities in their
interest. Bourdeaux was the principal of those cities which joined them; it is
situated on the river Garonne, locally pronounced Gironde, which being the
center of a department, named from the river, the appellation of Girondists was
given to the whole party.

The whole was a struggle for power: there was no other object whatever. It is
a foolish, and an idle assertion, in those who say, that Brissot and the party
had engaged in a plot to restore the monarchy of France. Whatever their
opinions might have been in some of the early stages of the revolution, perhaps
from an apprehension that the people of France might hesitate at an abrupt
proposition of a republican government, they were unquestionably innocent of
the charge at the time it was made. Here follow, however, the documents as
published by authority, in justification of the execution, which, like all
other state papers, in every country, consist of the best apology, or most
colorable pretense, for a thing that has been done by order of government.

Report against Brissot, and the other arrested Deputies; made October 3, 1793.
The Citizens of Paris, being informed that Amar was to present his report from
the Committee of General Safety this day, filled the galleries at a very early
hour.

As soon as he appeared at the bar, the applauses were so loud and continued,
that he was unable to begin for more than a quarter of an hour.

At length, amidst the most profound silence, he read his report.

He began by stating, that, before he proceeded to the report which had been
expected with such impatience, and would amply recompense the unavoidable delay
that had prevented a more speedy gratification of the wishes of the people, he
was commanded by the Committee of General Safety to request that none of the
members of the Convention should be allowed to go out till the decree of
accusation had been adopted. This request was immediately complied with, and a
decree being passed, the President gave orders to the Commander of the National
Guards to allow no members to go beyond the bar.

Amar then affirmed that the gigantic arm of treason had been uplifted to
strike the representative majesty of the people, and to level with the ground
the unity and indivisibility of the French Republic. -- The arm of treason had
been nerved and supported by the united energies of Brissot, Condorcet, Gaudet,
Vergniaud, and the other Deputies.

Brissot, the leader of this traitorous band, commenced his political career by
being a Member of the Commune of Paris, to which he was introduced by La
Fayette, to whose designs he had prostituted his pen. At this era of his life
he made his appearance three times in the Jacobin Club. In the first visit he
proposed those measures which have proved so disastrous to the Colonies; in the
second, he attempted to produce the assassination of the people in the Champ de
Mars; and in the third visit he moved the declaration of war against
Great Britain.

Introduced into the Legislative Assembly, he immediately entered into a
coalition with Condorcet and the Girondine faction, whose designs he approved
and supported. The consummation of the object of this coalition was to have
been produced by the surrender of the Republican body to the violation of the
Allied Powers, and by the destruction of that unity and indivisibility which
can alone be expected to combat with effect the tyrants who would undermine the
proud pillar of Liberty, and destroy even the vestige of freedom from the face
of the earth.

The Court made use of their influence to declare war at a moment when the
armies and the fortified places were in a state of absolute want, or entrusted
to traitors chosen by a perjured King. They protected Narbonne, the minister,
whom all France accused of the measures taken to render this war fatal to
liberty; and in their Journals they calumniated the Patriots who had the
courage to resist them. They defended Dietrisch, convicted of being an
accomplice with La Fayette, and of having offered to give up Strasbourg; and
while the chiefs of that faction protected the conspirators and traitorous
Generals, the patriotic soldiers were proscribed, and the volunteers of Paris
sent to be butchered.

During the time we were surrounded by the satellites of despots, when the
court was going to open the gates of France to them, after having caused the
intrepid defenders of liberty to be murdered at Paris, Brissot and his
accomplices did all they could to counteract the generous efforts of the
people, and to save the tyrant. During and after the unhappy insurrection of
the 10th of August, they endeavored to prevent the abdication of Louis XVI.
and to preserve to him the crown.

In the night of the 10th of August, Petion* shut up in the Thuilleries,
consulted with the satellites of tyrants the plan to massacre the people, and
gave orders to Mandat, Commander of the National Guards, to let the people come
in, and then to cannonade them in the rear. A few days before, Gensonne and
Vergniaud engaged to defend Louis XVI. on condition that the three ministers,
Roland, Claviere, and Servan were recalled.

Petion and La Source made use of all their means to send the federates from
Paris. Brissot, Kersaint, and Rouyer, according to the letters found in the
Thuilleries, gave bad advice to the tyrant, and, in defiance of the laws, they
dared to solicit places in the ministry, under a promise to extend the
destructive authorities of the despot.

The project to overturn the foundation of the Republic, and to murder the
friends of Liberty, was put in practice in the Legislative Assembly, by
Brissot, in his insidious harangue on the 20th of July, 1792, opposing the
abdication of the throne. We have seen Brissot and his accomplices Republicans
under Monarchy, and Royalists under the Republic; always constant in their
designs to ruin the French nation, and to abandon it to its enemies. At the
time the hypocritical tyrant, Louis the XVI. came into the Assembly to accuse
the people, whose massacre he had prepared, -- Vergniaud, like a true
accomplice of the tyrant, told him -- "That the Assembly held it to be one of
their most sacred duties to maintain all constituted authorities, and
consequently that of Royalty."

When the Attorney General, Raderer, came to announce, with the accent of
grief, that the citizens in insurrection had taken the resolution not to
separate till the Assembly had pronounced the forfeiture of the Crown,
President Vergniaud silenced the applauses from the gallaries by telling them,
that they violated the laws in obstructing the freedom of opinion; and he told
Raderer, that the Assembly was going to take into immediate consideration the
proposal which he, Vergniaud, had made, showing the necessity of preserving the
existence of the King.

Kersaint seconded the motion. Geradet proposed to liberate Mandat, who was
arrested for having given orders to fire on the people; or, in the event that
that commander was no more, to send a deputation of twelve Girondist members,
authorized to choose his successor, in order by this means to keep the public
force at the disposition of that mischievous ^action.

In that memorable sitting of the 10th of August, the G^^ondist chiefs,
Vergniaud, Guadet, and Gensonne, took by turns the chair, and went to the
galleries to slacken the energy of the people, and to save Royalty, under the
shield of the pretended constitution. They spoke of nothing but obedience to
the constitutional laws to those citizens that came to the bar to protect their
newly acquired liberty.

When the municipality came to invite the Assembly to send the proces-verbal of
the great operations of the 10th of August, in order to prevent the calumnies
of the enemies of liberty, Guadet interrupted the members who made that demand,
by making a motion to recommend anew to the magistrates the execution of the
laws. -- He blamed the Council of the Commune for having confined Petion in his
own house; though they did it in order to render it impossible for that
impostor to make even insurrection subservient to act against liberty.

When a deputation from the suburb St. Antoine came to announce the civic
affliction of the widows and children massacred on that day, the perfidious
Guadet cooly answered them, "That the Assembly hoped to restore public
tranquillity and the reign of the laws."

Vergniaud, in the name of the extraordinary commission directed by that
faction, proposed the suspension of the King, who had been dethroned by the
people, as a simple conservatory act of royalty; and seemed greatly affected at
the events which had saved the country, and operated the ruin of the tyrants.
He opposed Choudieu's motion, tending to exclude from the Convention the
members of both the Legislative and Constituent Assemblies; and with the same
cunning he prevented the registers of the civil list from being deposited on
the table.

Gaudet wished to have a governor named to the son of the late King, whom he
called the Prince Royal. Brissot and his accomplices always affected to invoke
the literal execution of the Constitution, while the people, in the name of the
martyrs who fell before the castle of the Thuilleries, demanded the complete
o^erthrow of the tyrant.

Vergniaud opposed this demand, saying, that the people of Paris were but a
section of the empire, and affected to oppose it in this manner to the
departments. -- He likewise resisted the petition made by the Commons to put
the tyrant under arrest. He used all his efforts with Brissot, Petion, and
Manuel, to get Louis XVI. confined in the Luxembourg, from whence it would have
been easier for him to escape than out of the tower of the temple.

Gensonne and Gaudet had the servility to publish, at different times, that
Louis XVI. had commanded the Swiss not to fire upon the people. From that time,
the leaders of the Girondists (Department of Bourdeaux), compelled to praise
the events of the 10th of August, continued, notwithstanding, to undermine the
Republic. They published the severest satires against the Jacobins, against the
Commons and people of Paris, and in general against all those who contributed
to the destruction of monarchy. Roland's house was filled with packets of
libels, which were to be distributed among the people, and sent into the
departments.

These guilty men protected all the conspirators, favored the progress of
Brunswick with all their power, and were the agents of the English faction
which has exerted so fatal an influence during the course of our revolution.
Carra was in league with certain characters of the court of Berlin. In his
Journal Politic of the 25th of August, 1791, he formed a wish, on account of
the marriage of the Duke of York with the Princess of Prussia, "that the Duke
might become Grand Duke of Belgium, with all the powers of the King of the
French." While Brunswick was preparing to decide the fate of the French nation
by the force of arms, Carra, in the same Journal, represented him as a great
commander, the greatest politician, the most amiable Prince in Europe, formed
to be the restorer of liberty in all nations. -- He published, that this Duke,
on his arrival at Paris, would go to the Jacobins, and put on the red cap, in
order to interest the people in favor of this satellite of tyrants. Finally,
Carra was so audacious as to propose openly to the Jacobins, for the Duke of
York to be King of the French.

From these and many other facts, too tedious to mention, there results, that
Carra and his associates were iniquitous and deep dissemblers, pensioned by
England, Prussia, and Holland, to enable a Prince of that family which rules
over those countries to obtain the crown of France. This same Carra, together
with Sillery, the dishonored confidant of a contemptible Prince, was sent by
the then reigning faction to Dumourier, to complete that treason which saved
the almost ruined army of the Prussian despot. Dumourier came suddenly to Paris
to concert with Brissot, Petion, Guadet, Gensonne, and Carra, the persidious
expedition into the Austrian Netherlands, which he undertook when the Prussian
army, wasting away, by contagious disorders, was peaceably retiring -- while
the French army was burning with indignation at the inaction in which they were
kept.

It was not the fault of this faction, if the motion often made by Carra to
receive Brunswick at Paris, was not realized. He meditated, in the beginning of
September, 1792, to deliver up this city, without means of defense, by flying
beyond the river Loire, with the Legislative Assembly, with the Executive
Council, and with the captive King. He was supported in it by Roland, Claviere,
and le Brun, the creatures and instruments of Brissot and his a^complices.

But these perfidious ministers, having been threatened by one of their
colleagues to be denounced to the people, it was then that Carra and Sillery
were sent to Dumourier, to authorize this General to negociate with Frederick
William, to enable this Prince to get out of the kingdom, on condition that he
should leave the Netherlands without the sufficient means of defense, and
deliver them up to the numerous and triumphant armies of France.

The calumnious harangues that were made in the Tribunes were prepared or
sanctioned at Roland's, or in the meetings that were held at Valaze's and
Petion's. They proposed to surround the Convention with a pretorian guard,
under the name of Departmental Force, which was to be the basis of their
foederal system. In the Legislative Assembly they meditated a flight beyond the
Loire, with the Assembly, the Executive Council, the Royal Family, and the
public treasure. Kersaint, at his return from Sedan, dared to propose this
project to the Executive Council; and it was supported by Roland, Claviere, and
le Brun, the creatures and instruments of Brissot.

The faction strove to put off the judgment of the tyrant by impeding the
discussion. They appointed a commission of twenty-four members to examine the
papers found in the Thuilleres, in the guilt of which some of these members
were implicated; and they endeavored, in concert with Roland, to conceal those
which tended to discover their transaction with the court. They voted for the
appeal to the people, which would have been a germ for civil war, and
afterward wanted a respite to the judgment.

They incessantly repeated, that the Convention could do no good, and that it
was not free. These declamations misled the departments, and induced them to
form a coalition which was near being fatal to France.

They patronized an incivic peace, entitled, L'am^ des Loix.

On the 14th of January, Barbaroux and his friends had given orders to the
battalion of Marseillois to surround the Convention.

On the 20th, Validi wrote to the other deputies, "Tomorrow in arms to the
Convention -- he is a coward who does not appear there."

Brissot, after the condemnation of Louis Capet, censured the Convention, and
threatened France with the vengeance of the European Kings. When it was his
object to bring on war, he spoke in an opposite sense, and treated the downfall
of all thrones, and the conquest of the universe, as the sport of the French
nation. Being the organ of the Diplomatic Committee, composed almost entirely
of the same faction, he proposed war suddenly against England, Holland, and all
the powers that had not then declared themselves.

This faction acted in coalition with perfidious Generals, particularly with
Dumourier. Gensonne held a daily correspondence with him: Petion was his
friend. He avowed himself the Counselor of the Orleans party, and had
connection with Sillery and his wife.

After the revolt of Dumourier, Vergniaud, Guadet, Brissot, and Gensonne,
wished to justify his conduct to the Committee of General Defense, asserting
that the denunciations made against him by the Jacobins and the Mountain were
the cause of his conduct; and that Dumourier was the protector of the sound
part of the Convention. This was the party of which Petion, Brissot, Vergniaud,
etc. were the chiefs and the orators.

When Dumourier was declared a traitor by the Convention, Brissot, in the
Patriote Francoise, as well as other writers, who were his accomplices, praised
him, in defiance of the law. As members of the Committee of General Defense,
they ought to have given information relative to the preparations that were
making in La Vendee. The Convention, however, was not made acquainted with them
till the war became serious.

They armed the Sections where Aristocracy reigned, against those where public
spirit was triumphant.

They affected to believe that a plot was meditated by the Republicans against
the National Convention, for the purpose of naming the commission of twelve,
who, in an arbitrary manner, imprisoned the magistrates of the people, and made
war against the patriots.

Isnard developed the views of the conspiracy, when he used this atrocious
expression: "The astonished traveller will seek on what banks of the Seine
Paris once stood." The Convention dissolved the commission, which, however,
resumed its functions on its own authority, and continued to act.

The faction, by the addresses which it sent to the departments, armed them
against Paris and the Convention. The death of numbers of patriots in the
southern departments, and particularly at Marseilles, where they perished on
the scaffold, was the consequence of those fatal divisions in the Convention,
of which they were the authors. -- The defection of Marseilles soon produced
that of Lions. This important city became the central point of the
counter-revolution in the South. The republican municipality was dispersed by
the rebels, and good citizens were massacred. -- Every punishment that cruelty
could devise to increase the torments of death was put in execution. The
administrative bodies were leagued partly with Lions, and partly with foreign
Aristocrats, and with the Emigrants dispersed through the Swiss Cantons.

The cabinet of London afforded life and energy to this rebellious league. Its
pretext was the anarchy that reigned at Paris -- its leaders, the traitorous
deputies of the Convention.

Whilst they made this powerful diversion in favor of the tyrants united
against us, La Vendee continued to drink the blood of the patriots.

Carra and Duchatel were sent to this department in quality of Deputies from
the National Convention.

Carra publicly exhorted the administrators of the Maine and Loire to send
troops against Paris. Both these deputies were at the same time connected with
the Generals of the combined armies.

Coustard, sent also as a commissioner, carried his treasonable projects to
such a length, as even to furnish supplies of provisions and stores to the
rebels. The mission of the agents of this faction, sent to different parts of
the republic, was marked by singular traitorous measures.

Perhaps the column of republican power would ere this have measured its length
upon the ground, if the conspirators had preserved much longer their inordinate
power. On the 10th of August, the foundation of the column was laid; on the
31st of May it was preserved from destruction. The accused published a thousand
seditious addresses, a thousand counter-revolutionary libels, such as that
addressed by Condorcet to the department of the Aisne. They are the disgraceful
monuments of the treason by which they hoped to involve France in ruin.

Ducos and Fonfrede formed the flame of the rebellion, by their correspondence
and their speeches, in which they celebrated the virtues of the conspirators.

Several of these conspirators fled, and dispersed themselves through the
departments -- They established there a kind of National Convention, and
invested the administration with independent powers -- they encircled
themselves with guards and cannon, pillaged the public treasuries, intercepted
provisions that were on the road to Paris, and sent them to the revolted
inhabitants of the former provinces of Britanny. They levied a new army, and
gave Wimpfen, degraded by his attachment to tyranny, the command of this army.

They attempted to effect a junction with the rebels of la Vendee, and to
surrender to the enemy the provinces of Britanny and Normandy.

They deputed assassins to Paris, to murder the members of the Convention, and
particularly Marat, whose destruction they had solemnly sworn to accomplish.
They put a poignard into the hands of a woman who was recommended to Duperret
by Barbaroux and his accomplices. She was conveyed into the gallery of the
Convention by Fauchet. -- The enemies of France exalted her as a heroine.
Petion pronounced her apotheosis at Caen, and threw over the blood stained form
of assassination the snowy robe of virtue.

Girey Dupre, the colleague of Brissot, in the publication of the Patriote
Francais, printed at Caen several songs, which invited, in a formal manner, the
citizens of Caen to arm themselves with ^oignards, for the purpose of stabbing
three deputies of the Convention, who were pointed out by name.

Brissot fled with a lie added to his other crimes. Had he gone to Switzerland,
as the false passport stated, it would have been for the purpose of exciting a
new enemy against France.

Rabaud St. Etierre, Rebecqui, Duprat, and Antiboul, carried the torch of
sedition into the department of le Guard and the neighboring departments.
Biroteau, Rouger, and Roland, projected their terrible plots in Lions, where
they poured the ample stream of patriotic blood, by attaching to the friends of
their country the appellation of anarchists and monopolizers.

At Toulon these endeavors were successful, and Toulon is now in the hands of
the English. The same lot was reserved for Bourdeaux and Marseilles. The
reigning faction had made some overtures to Lord Hood, whose fleet they
expected. The entire execution of the conspiracy in the South waited only for
the junction of the Marseillese and Lyonese, which was prevented by the victory
gained by the Republican army which produced the reduction of Marseilles.

The measures of the conspirators were exactly similar to those of the enemies
of France, and particularly of the English. -- Their writings differed in
nothing from those of the English ministers, and libellers in the pay of the
English ministers.

Mr. PIT.
Wished to degrade and to dissolve the Convention.

He wished to assassinate the members of the Convention.

He wished to destroy Paris.

He wished to arm all nations against France.

In this intended partition of France, Mr. Pit wished to procure a part for
the Duke of York, or some other branch of his master's family.

He endeavored to destroy our colonies.

The DEPUTIES.
Attempted to do the same.

The deputies procured the assissination of Marat and Le Pelletier.

The deputies did all in their power to produce this effect.

The deputies obtained a declaration of war against all nations.

Carra and Brissot entered into a panegyric of the Dukes of York and Brunswick,
and even went so far as to propose them for Kings.

The deputies have produced the destruction of the colonies.

Brissot, Petion, Guadet, Gensonne, Vergniaud, Ducos, and Fonfrede, directed
the measures relative to the colonies* which measures reduced them to the most
lamentable situation.



Santhonax and Polverel, the guilty Commissioners who ravaged the colonies with
fire and sword, are their accomplices. Proofs of their corruption exist in the
correspondence of Raimond, their creature.

Of the numerous facts of which the faction are accused, some relate only to
particular individuals: the general conspiracy, however, is attached to all.

Upon this act of accusation they were tried before the Revolutionary Tribunal,
on the 30th day of October, 1793. When the act of accusation was read to them
in the court, they refused to make any answer to it, unless Rob^^^ierre,
Barrere, and other members of the Committee of Safety, were present, and
interrogated: they insisted upon those members being sent for; which being
refused, and they still refusing to make any answer, the Judge stated to the
Jury, that from the act of accusation it resulted that,

I. There existed a conspiracy against the unity and indivisibility of the
Republic, the liberty and safety of the French people.

II. That all the individuals denounced in the act of accusation are guilty of
this conspiracy, as being either the authors of, or the accomplices in it.

The Jury of the Revolutionary Tribunal brought in their verdict at eleven
o'clock at night, on the 30th of October, against BRISSOT,
Vergniaud Gensonne Duprat Valaze Lehardi Ducos Fonfrede Borleau Gardien
Duchatel Sillery Fauchet Duperret Lasource Carra Beauvais Mainvielle Antiboul
Vigee, and Lacaze,
who were declared to be the authors and accomplices of a conspiracy which had
existed against the unity and indivisibility of the Republic, against the
liberty and security of the French people.

The President of the Revolutionary Tribunal immediately pronounced the
sentence decreed by the constitution: -- That they should suffer the punishment
of death -- that their execution should take place on the subsequent day, on
the Place de Revolution -- that their property should be confiscated, and that
this sentence should be printed and posted up throughout the whole extent of
the republic.

As soon as the sentence was pronounced, Valaze pulled a dagger from his pocket
and stabbed himself. -- The Tribunal immediately ordered that the body should
be conveyed on the morrow to the Place de la Revolution, with the other
deputies.

At eleven o'clock in the forenoon, on the 31st, the execution took place. The
streets were lined with soldiers, and every precaution taken to prevent the
disturbance of the public tranquillity.

Duchatel, Ducos, Fonfrede, and Lehardi, preserved a firm and undaunted air,
and surveyed the engine of death with a composed and unruffled countenance.

The deportment of Brissot was manly -- he preserved a fixed silence, and
submitted his head to the guillotine, after surveying steadfastly, for a few
moments, the Deputies, to whom, however, he did not speak.

Sillery saluted the people with much respect, and conversed a short time with
his confessor, as did Fauchet. -- Lasource died in a penitential manner. --
Carra, Vergniaud, Gensonne, Duperret, Gardien, Duprat, Beauvais, Mainvielle,
Lacaze, Antiboul, and Vigee, died with firmness, and with the exclamation of "
Vive la Republique." -- The execution was concluded in thirty-seven minutes.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION Page. 1 CHAPTER I. Of External Commerce; the circumstances which
lead to it, and the Means of assuring it to a Nation Page. 17 CHAPTER II. Of
External Commerce, considered in its Means of Exchange, and its Balance Page.
24 CHAPTER III. Application of the foregoing general Principles to the
reciprocal Commerce of France and the United States Page. 38 CHAPTER IV. That
the United States are obliged by their present Necessities and Circumstances to
engage in foreign Commerce Page. 46 CHAPTER V. Of the Importation to be made
from France into the United States, or of the Wants of the United States and
the Productions of France which correspond thereto Page. 64 Section I. Wines
Page. 65 Section II. Brandy Page. 74 Section III. Oils, Olives, Dry Fruits,
etc. Page. 79 Section IV. Cloths Page. 80 Section V. Linens Page. 84 Section
VI. Silks, Ribbons, Silk Stockings, Gold and Silver Lace, etc. Page. 92 Section
VII. Hats Page. 96 Section VIII. Leather, Shoes, Boots, Saddles, etc. Page. 97
Section IX. Glass Houses Page. 100 Section X. Iron and Steel Page. 103 Section
XI. Jewelry, Gold and Silversmiths' Articles, Clock-work, etc. Page. 109
Section XII Different Sorts of Paper, stained Paper, etc. Page. 112 Section
XIII. Printing Page. 115 Section XIV. Salt Page. 117 Section XV. General
Considerations on the Catalogue of French Importations into the United States
Page. 118
CHAPTER VI. Of the articles which Independent America may furnish in return
for Importations from France Page. 120 Monsieur Calonne's Letter to Mr.
Jefferson, the American Minister at Paris ibid EXPORTS OF AMERICA Page. 125
Section I. Tobacco ibid Section II. Fisheries, Whale-oil, etc. Spermaceti
Candles Page. 128 Section III. Corn, Flour, etc. Page. 135 Section IV. Masts,
Yards, and other Timber for the Navy Page. 139 Section V. Skins and Furs Page.
141 Section VI. Rice, Indigo, Flax-seed Page. 143 Section VII. Naval Stores,
such as Pitch, Tar, and Turpentine Page. 147 Section VIII. Timber and Wood, for
Carpenters and Coopers Work; such as Staves, Casks-heads, Planks, Boards, etc.
Page. 148 Section IX. Vessels constructed in America, to be sold or freighted
Page. 150 Section X. General Considerations on the preceding Catalogue of
Importations from the United States into France Page. 156
CONCLUSION, and Reflections on the Situation of the United States Page. 163
APPENDIX; consisting of authentic Papers, and Illustrations, added by the
Editor Page. 171 Return of the Population of the United States Page. 173 Ditto
of the Territory South of the Ohio Page. 174 Dr. Franklin's Observations on the
Population of America Page. 176 Captain Hutchins's Account of the Western
Territory Page. 178 Thoughts on the Duration of the American Commonwealth Page.
206 Mr. Jefferson's State of the Commercial Intercourse between the United
States and Foreign Nations Page. 209 Principal Articles of Exportation during
the Year 1792 Page. 225 Of the Civil List and Revenue of the United States
Page. 226 Mr. Paine's Statement of the Expenses of the American government
Page. 227


INTRODUCTION,
BY J. P. BRISSOT DE WARVILLE.
THE Court of Great Britain had no sooner signed the Treaty acknowledging the
Independence of her late Colonies in North America, than her merchants and
political writers sought the means of rendering to her by commerce an
equivalent for her losses by the war.

Lord Sheffield has predicted, in his Observations on the Commerce of America,
"that England would always be the storehouse of the United States; that the
Americans, constantly attracted by the excellence of her manufactures, the long
experienced integrity of her merchants, and the length of credit, which they
only can give, would soon forget the wounds which the ministerial despotism of
London, as well as the ferocity of the English and German satellites, had given
to America, to form with it new and durable connexions." These are not Lord
Sheffield's words. They are M. Brissot's; and contain HIS description of Lord
Sheffield's SUPPOSED sentiments, from a pe^usal of that Nobleman's Observations
on the Commerce of America. EDIT.


This politician was the only one who appeared in that career; others followed
it [Dr. Price, etc.] and the debates, which the new regulations of commerce
proposed for America, produced in Parliament, prove that the matter was known,
discussed, and profoundly examined.

The English nation resembled at that time a man who, coming out of a long
delirium (wherein he had broken every thing that he ought to have held most
dear,) eagerly strives to repair the ravages of his insanity.

As for us, we have triumphed, and the honor of the triumph is almost the only
benefit we have reaped. Tranquil under the shade of our laurels, we see with
indifference the relations of commerce which nature has created between us and
the United States* -- whilst, to use the language of vulgar policy, the
English, of whom we are jealous as our rivals, whom we fear as our enemies, use
the greatest efforts to make it impossible for us to form new connexions with
our new friends.

That the English will succeed, there is no doubt, if our languor be not soon
replaced by activity; if the greatest and most generous faculties, on our part,
do not smooth this commerce, new, and consequently easy to be facilitated:
finally, if our ignorance of the state of America be not speedily dissipated by
the constant study of her resources of territory, commerce, finance, etc. and
affinities they may have with those of their own.

Our ignorance! This word will undoubtedly shock, -- for we have the pride of
an ancient people: We think we know every thing, -- have exhausted every thing:
-- Yes, we have exhausted every thing; but in what? In futile sciences, in
frivolous arts, in modes, in luxury, in the art of pleasing women, and the
relaxation of morals. We make elegant courses of chemistry, charming
experiments, delicious verses, strangers at home, little informed of any thing
abroad: this is what we are; that is, we know every thing except that which is
proper for us to know. This assertion will perhaps appear severe and false,
even to persons who think that we excel in physics and the exact sciences. But
in granting this, is it these kinds of sciences to which a man who reflects
o^ght at first to give himself up? Does not the study of hi^ social and civil
state more nearly concern him? Ought not this to interest him more than the
number of stars, or the order of chemical affinities? -- It is, however, the
science of which we think the least. We are passionately fond of poetry: we
dispute seriously about music; that is, we have a great consideration far
playthings, and make a plaything of our affairs.


It would be opening a vast field to show what is proper for us to know,
therefore I will not undertake it. I confine myself to a single point: I say
that it concerns us essentially to have a thorough knowledge of the state of
America, and that, nevertheless, we have scarcely begun the alphabet which
leads to it. What I advance has been said before by Mr. Pain, a free American,
and who has not a little contributed, by his patriotic writings, to spread,
support, and exalt, among his fellow countrymen, the enthusiasm of liberty. I
will remark, says he, in his judicious letter to the Abbe Raynal, that I have
not yet seen a description, given in Europe, of America, of which the fidelity
can be relied on.

In France, I say it with sorrow, the science of commerce is almost unknown,
because its practice has long been dishonored by prejudice; which prevents the
gentry from thinking of it. This prejudice, which is improperly thought
indestructible, because the nobility are improperly thought one of the
necessary elements of a monarchical constitution; this would alone be capable
of preventing French commerce from having activity, energy, and dignity, were
it not to be hoped, that sound philosophy, in destroying it insensibly, would
bring men to the great idea of estimating individuals by their talents, and not
by their birth: without this idea there can be no great national commerce, but
aristocratical men will abound; that is, men incapable of conceiving any
elevated view; and men contemptible, not in a state to produce them.

Finally, another prejudice, quite as absurd, which has been combated a
thousand times, and is always predominant in France, withholds from the eyes of
the public precious memoirs, and interesting discussions, which would inform
France of her interests.

Who is ignorant that it is to the freedom of debate and public discussion that
England owes the singular prosperity which, till lately, has followed her every
where, in commerce, in arts, in manufactures, as well abroad as at home? a
prosperity which she may enjoy in spite of the faults of her ministers; for
none but these have ever endangered it: and it is to the freedom of debate that
she has often owed her salvation from ruin. Who doubts that this liberty would
not produce the same happy effects in France; -- that it would not destroy
false appearances; -- that it would not prevent the destructive enterprises of
personal interest; -- that it would not alarm mischievous indulgence, or the
coalition of people in place with the enemies of the public welfare? Government
seems at present to do homage to this influence of the freedom of discussion.
At length, it appears to relax of its severity in the laws of the press; it has
suffered some shackles, which restrained discussion, to be broken, especially
in political matters. But how far are we still from feeling the happy effects
of the liberty of the press, rather granted to public opinion, than encouraged
by a real love of truth!

By what fatality are energetic discourses of truth ineffectual? This ought to
be pointed out; government itself invites us to do it; the abuses which render
information useless in France, ought to be laid open.

It is because the liberty of thinking and writing on political matters is but
of recent date.

Because the liberty of the press is environed with many disgusting
circumstances; and that an honest man who disdains libels, but loves frankness,
is driven from the press by all those humiliating formalities which subject the
fruit of his meditation and researches to a censure necessarily arising from
ignorance.

It is because the censor, instituted to check the elevation of a generous
liberty, thinks to flatter authority, by even exceeding the end proposed;
suppresses truths, which would frequently have been received, for fear of
letting too bold ones escape, with which he would have been reproached;
multiplies objections, gives birth to fears, magnifies dangers, and thus
discourages the man of probity, who would have enlightened his fellow citizens;
whilst this censor sanctions scandalous productions, wherein reason is
sacrificed to sarcasms, and severe morality to amiable vices. We may put in the
rank of these productions which dishonor the censorship, the comedy of Figaro,
a scandal^us farce, wherein, under the appearance of defending morality, it is
turned into ridicule; and wherein great truths are disparaged by the
contemptible dialogist who presents them; wherein the end seems to have been to
parody the greatest writers of the age, in giving their language to a rascally
valet, and to encourage oppression, in bringing the people to laugh at their
degradation, and to applaud themselves for this mad laughter: finally, in
giving, by culpable imposture, to the whole nation, that character of
negligence and levity which belongs only to her capital.


It is because there are but few writers virtuous enough, sufficiently
organized, or in proper situations to combat and surmount these obstacles.

Because these writers, few in number, have but little influence; abuses weakly
attacked and strongly defended, resist every thing which is opposed to them.

Because the necessity of getting works printed in foreign presses, renders the
publication difficult; but few of them escape from the hands of greedy hawkers,
who monopolize the sale, to sell at a dearer price; who post the mystery, and a
false rarity, to sell dear for a longer time.

Because these books are wanting in the moment when they would excite a happy
fermentation, and direct it properly, in giving true principles.

Because they fall but successively into the hands of well-informed men, who
are but few in number, in the search of new truths.

Because the Journalists, who ought to render them a public homage, are
obliged, through fear, to keep silence.

Because the general mass, abandoned to the torrent of frivolous literature,
loses the pleasure of meditation, and with it the love of profound truths.

Finally, because truth is by this fatal concurrence of circumstances never
sown in a favorable soil, nor in a proper manner; that it is often stifled in
its birth; and if it survives all adverse maneuvers, it gathers strength but
slowly, and with difficulty; consequently its effects are too circumscribed for
instruction to become popular and national.

Let government remove all these obstacles: let it have the courage, or rather
the found policy, to render to the press its liberty; and good works, such as
are really useful, will have more success; from which there will result much
benefit.

Does it wish for an example? I will quote one, which is recent and well known:
the lawsuit of the monopolizing merchants against the colonists of the sugar
islands. Would not the last have, according to custom, been crushed, if the
dispute had been carried on in obscurity? They had the liberty of speech, of
writing, and of printing; the public voice was raised in their favor, truth
was triumphant; and the wise minister, who had permitted a public discussion,
that he might gain information, pronounced for humanity in pronouncing in their
favor.

Let us hope that this example will be followed; that government will more and
more perceive the immense advantages which result from the liberty of the
press. There is one which, above all others, ought to induce it to accelerate
this liberty, because it nearly regards the interest of the present moment:
this liberty is a powerful means to establish, fortify, and maintain public
credit, which is become, more than ever, necessary to great nations, since they
have stood in need of loans. As long as the attempts of personal interest are
feared by the obscurity which covers them, public credit is never firmly
established, nor does it rise to its true height. It is no longer calculated
upon the intrinsic strength of its resources, but upon the probability, upon
the fear of the disorder, which may either divert them from their real employ,
or render them sterile. The liberty of the press keeps personal interest too
much in awe not to fetter its measures; and then public credit supports itself
if it be established, is formed if it be still to be constituted, and fortifies
itself if it has been weakened by error.

Full of these ideas, as well as the love of my country, and surmounting the
obstacles to the liberty of printing, I have undertaken to throw some light
upon our commercial affinities with the United States. This object is of the
greatest importance; the question is, to develope the immense advantages which
France may reap from the revolution which she has so powerfully favored, and
to indicate the means of extending and consolidating them.

It appears to me that all the importance of this revolution has not been
perceived; that it has not been sufficiently considered by men of
understanding. Let it, therefore, be permitted me to consider it at present.

I will not go into a detail of the advantages which the United States must
reap from the revolution, which assures them liberty. I will not speak of that
regeneration of the physical and moral man, which must be an infallible
consequence of their constitutions; of that perfection to which free America,
left to its energy, without other bounds but its own faculties, must one day
carry the arts and sciences, America enjoys already the right of free debate,
and it cannot be too often repeated, that without this debate, perfection is
but a mere chimera. In truth, almost every thing is yet to be done in the
United States, but almost every thing is there understood: the general good is
the common end of every individual, -- this end cherished, implanted, so to
speak, by the constitution in every heart. With this end, this intelligence,
and this liberty, the greatest miracles must be performed.

I will not speak of the advantages which all America must one day reap from
this revolution; nor of the impossibility that absurd despotism should reign
for a long time in the neighborhood of liberty. -- I will confine myself to
the examination of what advantages Europe, and France in particular, may draw
from this change. There are two which are particularly striking: the first, and
greatest of the revolution, at least in the eyes of philosophy, is that of its
salutary influence on human knowledge, and on the reform of local prejudices;
for this war has occasioned discussions important to public happiness, -- the
discussion of the social compact, -- of civil liberty, -- of the means which
can render a people independent, of the circumstances which give sanction to
its insurrection, and make it legal, -- and which give this people a place
among the powers of the earth.

What good has not resulted from the repeated description of the English
constitution, and of its effects? What good has not resulted from the codes of
Massachusetts and New York, published and spread every where? And what benefits
will they still produce? They will not be wholly taken for a model; but
despotism will pay a greater respect, either from necessity or reason, to the
rights of men, which are so well known and established. Enlightened by this
revolution, the governments of Europe will be insensibly obliged to reform
their abuses, and to diminish their burdens, in the just apprehension that
their subjects, tired of bearing the weight, will take refuge in the asylum
offered to them by the United States.

This revolution, favorable to the people, which is preparing in the cabinets
of Europe, will be undoubtedly accelerated, by that which its commerce will
experience, and which we owe to the enfranchisement of America. The war which
procured it to her, has made known the influence of commerce on ^ower, the
necessity of public credit, and consequently of public virtue, without which it
cannot long subsist: -- What raised the English to that height of power, from
whence, in spite of the faults of their Ministers, Generals, and Negociators,
they braved, for so many years, the force of the most powerful nations? Their
commerce, and their credit; which, loaded as they were with an enormous debt,
put them in a state to use all the efforts which nations, the most rich by
their soil and population, could not have done in a like case.

These are the advantages which France, the world, and humanity, owe to the
American Revolution; and when we consider them, and add those we are obliged to
let remain in obscurity, we are far from regretting the expenses they
occasioned us.

Were any thing to be regretted, ought not it to vanish at the appearance of
the new and immense commerce which this revolution opens to the French? This is
the most important point at present for us, -- that on which we have the least
information, which consequently makes it more necessary to gain all we can upon
the subject; and such is the object of this work.

In what more favorable moment could it appear, when every nation is in a
ferment to extend its commerce, seeks new information and sure principles? The
mind is incessantly recalled in this book to the nature of things, the first
principle of commerce. -- At a time when people, which an ancient rivality, an
antipathy, so falsely and unhappily called natural, kept at a distance one from
the other, are inclined to approach each other, and to extinguished in the
connexions of commerce the fire of discord; this work shows that these
rivalities must be effaced by the immensity of the career which is opened to
all. -- At a time when all the parts of universal policy are enlightened by the
flambeau of philosophy, even in governments which have hitherto professed to be
afraid of it, the author of this work has let slip no opportunity of attacking
false notions and abuses of every kind.

Never was there a moment more favorable for publishing useful truths. Every
nation does not only do homage to commerce, as to the vivifying spirit of
society; but they employ, in the examination of all these connexions and
affinities, that logic of facts, whose use characterizes the end of the present
century, -- that art truly philosophical, of considering objects in their
nature, and in their necessary consequences: -- Never had well informed men
more contempt for those chimerical systems solely founded upon the fancies of
pride, upon the little conceptions of vanity, and upon the presumption of the
false political science, which has too long balanced the destiny of States.
Never were so many men seen united by the same desire of an universal peace,
and by the conviction of the misfortune and inutility of hateful rivalities. At
length it appears, that men perceive that the field of industry is infinite;
that it is open to every sta^^, whatever may be its absolute or relative
positions; that all states may thrive in it, provided that in each of them the
support of individual liberty, and the preservation of property, be the
principal end of legation.

This work still concurs with the patriotic views which the sovereign of France
manifests at present: he meditates important reformations. He directs them
toward the happiness of the people; and consults the most respectable members
of this people, whom he wishes to render happy, upon the means of insuring the
success of his good intentions. Therefore, could there be a more propitious
moment to offer to the present arbitrators of the national prosperity, a work
written with deliberation, on the means of establishing a new commerce with a
new people, who unites to an extensive soil, and proper to nourish an immense
population, laws which are the most favorable to its rapid increase?

At first I had alone undertaken this work, depending on my own strength and
laborious researches: I had collected all the facts, -- all the books, -- all
the proofs which could be certain guides to my steps; but I soon perceived the
impossibility of raising upon objects of commerce a solid and useful theory, if
it were not directed by the skill which practice only can give, and possessed
by a man whose judgment had been long exercised by reflection, and whose
decided love of truth and the public welfare had accustomed to generalize his
ideas. I found this man, this co-operator, of whose assistance I stood in need,
in a republican; to whom I am united by a similarity of ideas, as well as by
the most tender attachment. I have permission to name him, -- he consents to
it: I have conquered his modesty by the consideration of his interest, and of
the law which the particular circumstances of his situation imposes on him: I
have persuaded him, that the best means of destroying calumny was to make known
his principles and opinions on public matters. It is M. Claviere, a Genevese,
exiled without any form from his country, by the military aristocracy; which
has substituted its illegel and destructive regimen to the reasonable and
legitimate influence of a people, distinguished by their natural good
understanding, their knowledge, and their more simple manners. What was his
crime? That of having defended the rights of these people, with a firmness and
ability, which the implacable hatred of his enemies attest! This part does too
much honor to my friend, not to confine myself to describe him in this
character, the only one which has ever been productive of public good.

M. Claviere has, during his abode in France, given proofs of his knowledge in
the philosophical and political part of commerce. It is to his abode among us
that the public is indebted for some useful works on these abstract matters;
works, as remarkable for their solidity of principle and truth of discussion,
as for the clearness and precision of ideas; works, whose success proves that
minds may be led to the contemplation of these matters, by substituting an
exact and clear analysis to the metaphysical and obscure jargon which
restrained them from it.

Finally, the present work will prove at once the extent of his knowledge, and
that of the sincere philanthropy which animates him, even for the good of a
country, where a man less generous would see nothing, perhaps, but the origin
and cause of his misfortunes. Oh! how happy am I, to have it in my power to
defend my friend against cowardly calumniators, in putting him under the
safeguard of his own talents and virtues! And is it not a sacred duty for me,
as the calumny is public, to publish the part he has taken in this work,
wherein it is impossible not to discover the honest man, in the man
enlightened? the friend of mankind, in the propagation of the wisest maxims? In
the thinking philosoper, accustomed to a severe logic, to pursue the interests
of public good, whenever the light of truth can clear up some of its aspects?
This is not a vague eulogium; people will be convinced of it in reading the two
chapters which concern the principles of commerce; a great number of notes in
which he has had a part, and especially the article of tobacco, which is
entirely his own In general, he will be known in those new considerations which
the commercial man of reflection only can suggest to the philosophical
politician.

The same motive has guided us both in the composition and publication of this
work. It was the desire of being useful to France, to Free America, to
Humanity; for nothing which passes in the United States, neither ought to, nor
can in future, be indifferent to humanity. America has revenged it by her
revolution: she ought to enlighten it by her legislation, and become a
perpetual lesson to all governments, as a consolation to individuals.

It remains to me now to speak of the sources to which we have had recourse, in
the order of this work, etc. etc.

We have joined the information of intelligent persons, whose abode in America
has given them an opportunity of gaining information, to that with which the
public papers, the acts of Congress, of different legislatures, and the
different works published in the United States, have furnished us. Therefore
credit may be given to all the facts which we advance.

In associating our ideas, we have striven to give them an uniformity: we have,
above every thing, endeavored to express them with that clearness which is so
difficult to introduce into matters of commerce and finance. The poverty of our
language, and the singularity of new circumstances which we had to describe,
has sometimes led us to what is called neology. We must create what we have
not, and of which we stand in need, without giving ourselves any trouble about
those grammarians, but triflingly philosophical, whom Cicero describes thus in
his time: Controversies about words torment these little Greeks, more desirous
of contention than of truth. Verbi controversia torquet Craeculos homines
contentionis cupidiores quam veritatis.


We have carefully avoided certain words much used in vulgar politics, and
which give and perpetuate false ideas and deceitful systems. Such are these
expressions; powers fill the first character, have the first rank, the balance
of trade, the political balance of Europe, etc. These words, which stir up
hatred and jealousy, are only proper to feed petulant ambition, and, if I may
use the expression, to put the policy of disturbance in the place of that
happiness. Ministers, wearied of these words and ideas, will attach a greater
price to real glory, -- that of making the people happy.

Many notes will be found in this work; we thought it necessary to give this
form to all the ideas, which, thrown into the text, might have obscured the
principal one.

A note relaxes the mind, in suspending the chain of the principal thoughts; it
excites curiosity, in announcing a new point of view; it forces the reader to a
certain degree of attention, in obliging him to attach the note to the text, to
reap any advantage from his reading.

We have in these notes indicated, as often as it has been possible, the ideas
of reform which may be useful to France. We have frequently quoted the English
nation and government. Let not our readers, be surprised at it. It is this
nation which has made most progress in the practice of some good principles of
political economy. To what nation in Europe can we better compare France? If a
rivality ought to exist between them, is it not in that which is good? Ought
not we from that moment to know all the good measures taken in England? Ought
people to be displeased with us for mentioning these measures? The example of
those who have already quoted England has encouraged us. They have naturalized
in France, happy institutions, imitated from her rival.

If our criticism appears sometimes roughly expressed, our readers will be so
good as to consider, that friends to public welfare can but with difficulty
refrain from being moved by the aspect of certain abuses, and from suffering
the sentiment of indignation which it excites in them to break forth.

Notwithstanding the numerous precautions we have taken to come at truth;
notwithstanding the extreme attention we have given to this work, errors will
undoubtedly be sound in some of the statements, and perhaps in the reasonings.
Whether they be publicly discussed, or that we are privately informed of them,
we shall see these refutations with pleasure; we shall joyfully receive these
observations, and if they be well founded, we shall be eager to retract. This
is but a simple essay on an important subject. It may become a good work by the
aid of a concourse of lights.

PARIS, April 1, 1787.
THE COMMERCE, etc.
CHAPTER I. Of External Commerce; the circumstances which lead to it, and the
Means of assuring it to a Nation.
COMMERCE signifies an exchange of productions, either by barter, or by
representative signs of their value.

External commerce is that carried on between two or more nations. It supposes
in them mutual wants, and a surplus of productions correspondent thereto.

Nations, which nature or the force of things invites to a commercial
intercourse, are those which have that correspond^nce of wants, and surplus of
productions.

This familiarity enables them to trade together, directly or indirectly; a
direct commerce is that which exists between two nations, without the
intervention of a third.

Commerce is indirect when one nation trades with another by way of a third.
This is the case of states which have no seaports, and yet wish to exchange
their productions for those of the Indies.

That nation, which having it in its power to carry on a direct commerce with
another, yet makes use of an intermediate one, is necessarily obliged to divide
its profits. However, this disadvantage may sometimes be compensated by other
considerations.

Such, for instance, is the case of a nation which, in want of husbandmen and
manufacturers, prefers that strangers should themselves come in search of its
superfluities, and bring in exchange those of others: its want of population
imposes this law, and whilst these considerations exist, it is both morally and
physically better that its inhabitants should be employed in cultivation, than
become carriers of their own national productions, or of those of others.

It is impossible that nations which already have communications with each
other, should be ignorant of their mutual productions. Hence arises the desire
of acquiring them in those where they do not exist. Hence direct or indirect
commerce, which is consequently the inevitable result of the state of things.

From the same principle, it is the interest of each nation to render its
exterior commerce direct as soon as possible, without doing an injury to its
interior trade.

Direct importations, not being subject to the expenses and commissions of
agents, procure things at a cheaper rate.

A moderate price is the surest means of obtaining an exterior commerce, the
best reason for preference, and the guarantee of its continuation. It is
vulgarly said that a thing is dear when once it is above the accustomed price;
and it is esteemed cheap the moment that price is diminished.

By this it seems that the dearness of a thing is the comparison of its stated,
with its usual price. The last is determined by five principal circumstances.
1st. The cost of the raw materal. 2d. That of the workmanship. 3d. The want the
consumer has of the thing. 4th. The means he has of paying for it. 5th. The
proportion of its quantity with the demand there is for it. These circumstances
increase or diminish the profit of the seller; sometimes indeed they may
prevent him from gaining at all. Circumstances which influence the most are
scarcity and abundance, expressions by which the proportion between the want
and the quantity of productions are designated.

If there be a surplus of them, they are naturally sold at a low price. Whence
it appears, that nations having great quantities of raw materials, various
manufactures and a numerous population, are more particularly invited to an
exterior and continued commerce, because they have it in their power to carry
it on upon better terms.

An article may be sold at a low price, and enrich him who furnishes it; as it
may be sold dear, and ruin the seller. This depends upon the relation there is
between its value and the means of its productions. Every nation disposed to
exterior commerce, in whatsoever article it may be, ought therefore to consider
two things, the price at which it can afford such an article, and that at which
it is sold by rival nations: if it cannot equal the last, it ought to abandon
that part of its trade.




The country which can produce and sell a thing at the cheapest rate, is that
which unites the favorable advantages of that production, whether it be with
respect to its quality, manufacture, or its low rate of carriage.

The advantages which render commodities and raw materials cheap, are a fertile
soil, easy of cultivation, climate favorable to the production, a government
which encourages industry, and facilitates carriage by the construction of
public roads and navigable canals; finally, a population not too numerous
relative to the extent of country which offers itself to be cultivated. The
situation of the United States proves the last assertion, which may at first
sight appear paradoxical; things are cheap there, because population is not in
proportion to the extent of lands to be cultivated. In a good soil, a man may,
by his labor, easily supply the consumption of ten men, or even more. These
ten men may therefore be employed for exterior consumption.


The same circumstances are still more favorable to the manufacture of things
common, simple, or little charged with fashion, if the raw material be a
natural production of the country, in plenty, and easy to be worked up; because
these manufactures require but few hands, or are carried on at that leisure
which agriculture affords. Nothing can equal the cheapness of this workmanship,
and in general no industry is more lucrative, or better supported on easy
terms, than that which is employed in the intervals of repose from cultivation:
in that case cheapness is neither the product nor the sign of misery in the
manufacturer; it is, on the contrary, the proof and consequence of his easy
circumstances. Switzerland, and certain parts of Germany, offer a striking
example of this fact. Merchandise is fabricated there, at a lower rate than in
any other country of Europe, by means of this employment of leisure hours, and
is capable of being transported to distant countries, without losing its
original advantage; even across great states, where nature, left to her own
energy, would be still more favorable to the same manufactures.


The most necessary conditions for manufacturing, at a cheap rate, articles
complicated, or extremely fine and perfect, or which require the union of
several kinds of workmanship, are a constant and assiduous application, and a
numerous population; one half of which must be at a distance from the labors
of the field, and applied to manufacture alone.

These manufactures ought, according to natural order, to be the productions of
an excess of population only, which cannot give its industry to agriculture or
simple manufactures; but in general they are the result of the gathering
together of the poor and wretched in great cities. These manufactures are
crowded with individuals, who having no property, or hope of constant employ in
the country, or who are induced by the allurements of gain and luxury, run into
cities, and soon become obliged to sell their industry at a mean price,
proportioned to the number of those who are in want of employ. When cheapness
of workmanship comes from this afflicting concurrence of the want of money in
men without employ, it is not a sign of prosperity. On the contrary, it is the
result and proof of a bad social organization, of too unequal a division of
property, and consequently of an unjust distribution of necessary employments,
which compels industry to change, from the fabrication of what is necessary and
useful, to that which is fantastic, forced, and pernicious. Hence it follows,
that wretchedness in any country is in proportion to this cheapness of
workmanship.

It is equally evident from these reasonings, that new and well constituted
states ought not to desire manufactures produced by things so badly arranged:
they ought not to be anxious about them till the rate of population and excess
of useful labor naturally incline industry to apply itself to improve and
carry them on. These reasonings against low priced workmanship do not hinder us
from agreeing, that there is a real advantage in the means of exterior
commerce; and that in the actu^^ state of things manufacturing and commercial
nations may perhaps be obliged to seek for it, although it does not compensate
the interior evil by which it is produced.




These manufactures cannot furnish their productions but with difficulty and
uncertainty for exterior commerce, when they are established and supported
merely by forced means, such as prohibitions, exclusive privileges, etc. by
which natural obstacles, not to be destroyed, are pretended to be combated.
Countries exempt from them prevail in the end, and obtain a preference.

It sometimes happens, that obstacles caused to manufactures by dearness of
provisions, burdensome imposts, distance from the raw material, and
unskilfulness, or small number of hands, are surmounted by ingenuity, or the
use of machines; which make the work of one man equal to that of many; and
render a manufacture capable of supporting the commerce of populous countries,
where such maneuvers and machines are not made use of, or known.

But these means are precarious, and sooner or later give way to a more happy
situation, where climate, soil, and government especially, concur in favoring,
without effort, all the activity and industry of which men are susceptible.
FAVORING, in political economy signifies, for the most part, not to shackle
industry with too many regulations; however favorable certain of these may be,
they restrain it in some respect or other. Trade is never better encouraged
than when left to itself.


Thus, in the final analysis, the power of furnishing at a low price belongs
incontestably to countries so favored, and they will obtain in all markets a
sure preference to those to which nature has been less kind, let their industry
be ever so great, because the same industry may always be added to natural
advantages.

Exterior commerce, more than any other, is intimidated by shackles, customs,
visits, chicaneries, and processes; by the manner of deciding them, and the
solicitations and delays they bring on.

The state which would favor such a commerce should, in the first place,
destroy all these obstacles. It is more to its interest so to do, as from
exterior commerce results an augmentation of the national revenue.

All things equal, relative to the price of merchandise, and to the facilities
with which direct exterior commerce can be carried on, it is more readily
established between two nations which have a similarity of political and
religious principles, Religious considerations had formerly a considerable
in^^^ence on civilized men, and on commerce. The Catholic fled from the
Protestant, the Puritan suspected the Quaker. A reciprocal hatred reigned
between the sects. Today, mankind being more enlightened, all sects connected
by commerce, and experience having shown that probity has almost always been
independent of religion, it is no more required to know whether a man goes to
the temple, or to confession -- It is asked if he fulfils his engagements with
honor. Yet this relation must still be counted among commercial connexions.
manners, customs, and especially of language: these decisive means of
connection cannot be combated but by evident advantages from which there results
less expense and more profit. Commercial people generally place profit at the
head of every thing.

Nations not having these affinities between them, ought, in order to
compensate for their deficiency, to give great encouragements, and tolerate to
the utmost degree the religious and political opinions of strangers, as well as
their manners and customs.

To obtain the preference in exterior commerce, neither treaties, regulations,
nor force must be depended upon. Force has but a momentary effect. It destroys
even that which it means to protect Treaties and regulations are useless if the
interests of two nations do not invite them to a mutual intercourse. They are
ineffectual if that attraction does not exist. Treaties, regulations, force,
all yield to the impulse or nature of things. FORCE OF THINGS. The political
law which governs all, in politics as in physics. There is a general force
whose action is manifest, which, in spite of wars, treaties, and the maneuvers
of cabinets, governs all events, and carries away men and nations in its
course. It is this force of things which overturned the Roman empire, when it
stood upon a basis disproportioned to its mass; which in the 14th century took
from the English one half of France, and in the 18th, has taken from them half
of the new world -- which delivered Holland from the yoke of Spain, and Sweden
from that of Denmark. It is this force which destroyed the projects of such
conqu^^^^s as Charlemagne, Zengi^, and Nadir. They ran from place to place;
they destroyed mankind to build empires. These empires died with them. This
force acts upon commerce as upon revolutions. It is that which, by the
discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, bereaved the Venetians of their trade to
the Indies, and made it pass over successively to the Portuguese, the Dutch,
the English, and the French. Finally, it is the force of things which will
decide the great question of the commerce of America.


This force of things in commerce is but the result of the circumstances in
which two nations are which attract one toward the other, and oblige them to
enter into an alliance, rather than with any other nation. These terminate in
their mutual interest: it is therefore necessary, in order to create a
perpetual commerce between two countries, to give each of them a preponderating
interest so to do.

CHAPTER II. Of External Commerce, considered in its Means of Exchange, and its
Balance.
WE are deceived in believing that commerce cannot be established between two
nations without gold or silver to balance their accounts. It will be
interesting to enter into some detail on this head, on account of the
deficiency of coin in the United States, and the necessity of reducing
themselves to the commerce of exchange, being the two principal objections
ignorantly brought against a trade with them. The scarcity of money in the
United States of America has been greatly exaggerated in France. It must be
scarce in all new states, where nothing shackles industry, where so many things
are to be created, and where, in every quarter, there are such quantities of
lands to be cleared. In order that money should be plenty in this state of
creation, mines would be necessary; and at the same time a want of hands, and
industry clogged with impediments, circumstances much more unfavourable to
foreign commerce than the scarcity of money in an active and industrious
country. One fact seems to prove to us, that in independent America money is
found in the most desirable proportion to population, at least by taking Europe
for the term of comparison. Contracts esteemed good, and of which the interest
is regularly paid, are sold there at the rate of six percent. per annum. Yet
the clearing of lands must produce a much greater benefit; why then is not all
the money swallowed up? why remains there enough of it to fulfill these
contracts, which produce no more than five or six per cent? Is it not because
money is not so scarce there as people in France imagine, where the actual
state of the Americans is confounded with the distress in which they were when
they combated for their liberty?


It has been frequently asserted that the balance will be against them; that
they can only offer an exchange in merchandise. It is therefore necessary to
prove that this great word, balance, is insignificant; that a great commerce
may be carried on without money, and that one of exchange is the most
advantageous of any.

When a nation pays with money the whole, or the balance of its importations,
it is said the balance of trade is against it, by which a disadvantageous idea
of its position is meant to be given. This is a prejudice easy to be
overturned, although entertained by men celebrated for their knowledge.

In effect, whence comes to this country the gold it pays? It is either from
its mines, and in that case it pays with one of its own productions; or it owes
it to artificers who exercise their functions in a foreign country, and even
then it pays with a production which originates within its dominions. As long
as a nation pays another, directly or indirectly, with its own productions, its
position cannot be disadvantageous. Therefore, the unfavourable word balance,
thus attached to the balance of an account paid in money, offers no exact and
nice idea of the favorable or unfavourable state of a nation.

Gold is also a merchandise; and it may be convenient to one nation, according
to its relations or connexions with another, to pay with money, without its
having, for that reason, an unfavourable balance against it.

There is but one case wherein the balance against a nation can be declared; it
is that when having exhausted its money and treasures, it remains debtor to
another nation. But things could not remain long in this state; so wretched a
soil, unequal to the consumption and exchange of its inhabitants, would soon be
abandoned; this, however, cannot happen. Importation presently becomes in
proportion to exportation; an equilibrium is established, and the pretended
unfavourable balance has not duration enough to give a right of supposing even
its existence.

There is as little truth and justice in saying a nation has the balance of
trade in its favor, when it receives in money balances due to it upon the
amount of its exportations. This balance, existing for a certain time, would
heap up specie in the country, and at length render it very miserable. This has
never been the case; yet it would have happened if this system had the least
foundation.

The circulation of money depends on too many causes, to deduce from its
abundance a certain sign of a favorable commercial balance; a thousand
combinations and events, which have no relation to that balance, draw money
from abroad or send it there; and in general, continued and various motions of
commerce, the tables of exportation and importation, according to which the
sign of a favorable or unfavourable balance is regulated, are too uncertain
and defective for the purpose, as well as for forming a judgment of the
quantities of coin or riches of a nation. I will give a striking example of the
deficiency of these calculations, of the estimation of a balance of trade, and
of the quantity of money. This example will prove that political calculators
neglect, or are ignorant of foreign events which overturn their calculations.

M. Neckar wished to inform himself (Chap. IX. Vol. 3d, of his Treatise on the
Administration of Finance) what was the sum b^ought to and preserved in Europe
from 1763 to 1777. He estimat^^ it at one thousand eight hundred and fifty
millions of livres, according to the register of Lisbon and Cadiz,
comprehending (...) even which e^tered by contraband, and he values at three
^un^red millions of livres that which went out of Europe during the same
interval.

It will only be necessary to quote two or three authenticated facts, to prove
the insufficiency of this ^^^^^lation founded upon the registers of
Custom-houses.

In stating the sum of money entered into Europe, it does not appear that M.
Neckar takes account of the gold and silver, which the conquest and possession
of B^ngal by the English, and their establishments in the East Indies, have
caused to pass into this q^arter of the world. But according to the calculation
of the secret committee, appointed by the Parliament of England, to examine the
state of English possessions in India, the sums drawn from Bengal from 1757 to
1771, amount to 751,500,000 livres. The detail of this calculation is given in
The Description of the Indies, Vol. I. page 249. It is necessary to take notice
here of an error crept into that work, which is, that the sum total is there
given in pounds sterling, instead of livres tournois.
To what will it amount, if there be added to it those drawn from the Carnatic
and from Oude, of which Nabobs have the shadow only of the property, from the
revenue of the Northern Circars, from the theft committed on the Emperor of
Mogul, from 1771 to the present day, of his twenty-six millions, from the
perpetual increase of territories and revenues, from the sale made in 1773 of
the Rohillas to the Nabob of Oude, which produced to the English upwards of
fifty millions? See Mackintosh's Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. I. page 340.


Finally, what will be the amount, if there be added to it the enormous sums
exported from the Indies by individuals, who have there enriched themselves?
The fortune of Lord Clive was beyond calculation; that of Mr. Hastings, against
whom a prosecution is now carrying on, is calculated at thirty or forty
millions. Another Governor has, according to several well-founded reports,
recently paid upwards of two millions of livres to silence his accusers. It is
true that a part of these immense riches have been employed to defray the
expenses incurred by the English in guarding their possessions in India; that a
more considerable one has been sent into Europe under the form of merchandise;
but it cannot be denied that a third part has been brought in gold and silver
to our continent. What is the amount of it? This is impossible to state. But
whatever it may be, it renders the calculation of Mr. Neckar doubtful. -- Let
the inexhaustible riches of the Indies be judged of by one fact, and
consequently the immense source from which the Europeans have drawn them, and
by another consequence, the money which must have come into Europe. Nadi^
Schah, who conquered Delly in 1740, took from India about forty millions
sterling. See Mackintosh's Voyages, Vol. I. page 341.
This money was circulated in Persia, and as that unhappy state is torn by
despotism and continual wars, See Mr. Capper's Voyage, at the end of that of
Mackintosh, Vol. II. page 454.
produces but little, manufactures nothing, and is consequently debtor to
exterior commerce, which comes almost entirely into Europe, it follows that
two-thirds of the sums stolen from India by the freebooter Nadir, have passed
over to the same quarter. These events, unnoticed by political calculators,
have certainly had great and universal influence upon the fluctuation and
circulation of money. That which makes it supposed that no metals come from
India, is the opinion that their importation is disadvantageous. But have the
freebooters who have pillaged that country for the last thirty years calculated
this disadvantage? They strive to secure their thefts, and do not speculate
like merchants: bulky merchandise would betray them.

With respect to the stated sums of money which pass from Europe or India,
there is the same defect in the calculations of Mr. Neckar. He takes no notice
of the events which obliged the English to remit considerable sums to India*
for instance, the two wars against the Marratas were prodigiously expensive,
that against Hyder Ally in 1769 was not less so. A single conflagration at
Calcutta cost nearly twenty-four millions of livres, which it was necessary to
replace: yet these sums are far from balancing those which are exported from
India.




Let the tables for comparing the exportation and importation of raw materials,
and of manufactured articles, be increased to what they may; let the greatest
care and fidelity be employed to render them perfect, the result will never be
more certain or decisive: for as long as prohibitory laws, which are always
accompanied by illicit commerce, shall exist, it will be impossible to know and
state exactly what comes in and goes out; This is a strong objection made by
the adversaries of Lord Sheffield, to which his Lordship has not satisfactorily
replied.

Nothing can be more imposing than the tables of importation and exportation,
and of the balance of trade in Great Britain, published by Sir Charles
Whitworth. Yet see with what facility the Count de Mirabeau reduces to twenty
millions of livres tournois, the ninety millions which Sir Charles Whitworth
estimates to be the annual balance of English commerce; and trust after this to
custom-house calculations. -- See Considerations on the Order of Cincinnatus,
in this volume.


and if there be a country where no such laws exist, Such a country does exist.
There are many States among the new Republics of America, which register
vessels as they enter, because duties are paid on impo^^^tions; but there are
none on exportation.
are exact registers of the exports and imports to be found in it? And if they
were, would it not be a constraint which the private interests of merchants
would frequently oblige them to avoid?

Moreover, does it appear that, in these general balances, which are supposed
to be paid in money, notice is taken of the operation of bankers, foreign
government, and those who go abroad, in exporting the public specie. It is very
probable there are a number of particular causes which insensibly diminish the
quantity of coin in those nations which have the balance of trade constantly in
their favor. Were no such causes to exist, the consequence would be that such
nations would be obliged to bury their gold and silver in the earth, to prevent
its falling into disuse; yet neither of these cases happen. Therefore money
necessarily passes from such countries to others.

M. Casaux has proved this to be true, with respect to England, in his
Considerations on THE MECHANISM OF SOCIETY. He there explains, that if the
calculations of Sir Charles Whitworth be true, England ought to possess at this
moment about four hundred thousand millions of livres ^n gold and silver, as
the sole balance of her commerce from 1700 to 1775. Yet it is certain that she
is far from having that enormous sum. She has not even a sum in proportion to
her population and contingencies. She supplies that deficiency by an immense
circulation of her bank-paper.


Knowledge is deceitful which is acquired from such consequences.

But how appreciate -- how estimate the increase of the riches and commerce of
a nation? -- By its population. If this sensibly augments, if ease and the
conveniences of life become more general, if the causes of indigence in an
increasing people be seen to diminish, or are confined to inability to work,
occasioned by accidental illnesses; it is evident, that the revenues of that
nation exceed its expenses, and that the balance of trade is in its favor; for
if the value of its exportation were inferior to that of its importation, a
considerable debt and impoverishment would soon be the consequences: and
impoverishment falls immediately upon population. It is therefore by rational
and well composed tables upon this subject only, that a minister of sound
judgment, profound and extended in his plans, will be prevailed upon to govern
himself. It is by them he will judge of the increase and advantages of exterior
commerce, as well as of national riches.

He will be very cautious of decorating with this title the amassing of gold
and silver, and equally so of making it the token of riches, or of judging of
their extent by the quantity of those metals. All such ideas are sordid,
dangerous, and false; sordid, because they attach to this sign the
representation of productions, and consequently the extension of commerce;
dangerous, because they accustom men to look upon gold as real riches, to
neglect the thing for its shadow, Could gold and silver be preserved from
adulteration and the attempts of tyranny and ignorance, they would have a much
better title to be considered as real riches. Gold being an universal agent, he
who possesses it may emigrate to wherever he pleases, and take his gold with
him. This metal is therefore every thing with nations unhappy enough to make
arbitrary exceptions to general maxims, upon which public credit is founded.
But how dearly do they pay for their ignorance of the advantages of public
credit! How dearly do governments themselves pay for their errors and outrages!
All their measures are forced -- nature is liberal in vain; incessantly
employed in repairing evils which continually present themselves, she has not
time enough allowed her to add to our happiness. When it was said that money
had no particular country, governments were emphatically told, that it was
necessary to do without great quantities of it: it will never be rejected till
the inestimable advantages resulting from a respect for public credit shall be
properly known. The less individuals love and heap up money, the richer, more
enlightened, and better governed will a nation be. To be attached to money, to
hoard it up, is a sign of an alarming crisis, of a deficiency of judgment and
faith in administration; from whence comes the proof of what has been said in
the text, that 'a writer who extols gold as a sign of riches, and recommends it
to his fellow citizens, is deceived, or has a bad idea of their situation.' In
the last case he would do much better, if instead of preaching this pernicious
doctrine, he encouraged government to give an immovable stability to national
credit.
and make them strangers to their country; false, because that display of
figures announces the quantity only of money which continually disappears; and
which, when carried to a certain degree, is of no farther consideration. It has
not yet been remarked, that thousands of millions is a vague expression, and
does not furnish a complete idea. The imagination cannot exactly conceive for
such a sum an employ which would serve as the measure of its power and effect.
It is known what could be done with twenty or an hundred millions of men, but
it is not known what could be effected with an hundred thousand millions of
crowns; yet they are heaped upon paper to give an idea of power.


Enquiries on the quantity of coin are like those on the balance of trade. To
establish both one and the other with some degree of certainty, it is necessary
to assemble notions and details, of which the elementary principles vanish, or
incessantly vary. In general, the mass of gold or silver is divided into three
principal parts. -- The first under the form of money, serves for daily and
unavoidable expenses. Each individual, as soon as he is charged with the
support of himself and family, must have at least some pieces of money for
daily exigencies, and the payment of imposts. To this must be added that sum
which is reserved for casualties. -- This custom is more or less observed in
all countries, in proportion to the probability of disastrous events. It is
impossible to calculate this first part. -- It is however evident, that it
ought to be in proportion to the population, and to increase with it; and that
a decrease of population would soon take place, were many individuals totally
deprived of a pecuniary contingency sufficient to procure them such necessaries
as cannot be dispensed with, and which they neither make nor receive
themselves. It appears also, that this part of the coin remains in the country
by reason of its continued application in little sums to daily wants, and of
the absolute stagnation of that which is laid up in reserve.

The second part is destined, under the same form, to the great operations of
commerce. It is equally impossible to fix its quantity, on account of an
infinity of combinations which continually change and cause these metals to
pass from one country to another. Daily charges, customs, etc. retain a part;
but these objects belong equally to our first division.

The third part contains uncoined gold and silver, under whatever form they may
have: it is, like the second, subject to numbers of continual variations, which
leave no satisfactory means of determining its quantity.

To pretend to ascertain the quantity in the mass, by payments of uncertain
commercial balances, and by the addition of specie produced from mints since a
new coinage has taken place, is not a more certain means, because it would be
equally necessary to observe the continual action of commerce upon these
metals, under all their forms, and of the combinations it produces, which
successively arise from one another. In thus estimating money it is forgotten,
that it is an universal agent, which, by that character alone, must necessarily
change its situation perpetually; since commerce has produced an affinity among
men, by wants, which they have created to themselves, of their reciprocal
productions. It is equally unobserved, that different circumstances reduce gold
to the state of an ingot; that consequently the same piece may pass several
times under the die in the course of a certain number of years. This is a
reflection which M. Neckar seems not to have made when he stated the money
existing in France at so considerable a sum. It will be known when the
recoinage of the old Louis is finished, what we ought to think of his
calculations. But the sum is far short of 957 millions, as estimated by that
minister. It is more than probable, that it will never amount to more than two
thirds of it.

At this moment, fourteen months after the arret for a new coinage, it amounts
to no more than 550 millions, and every thing indicates a rapid decline.




The proceedings in the administration of finances are more useful and certain;
by laying aside the pomp of false riches, and by considering gold and silver in
a point of view relative to their particular properties. They supply our wants
as means of exchange only; they ^re notes to the bearer, which having every
where the same value, are every where negociable. Thus they are ambulatory;
they pass, repass, are accumulated or dispersed like the waves of the sea,
continually agitated by successive winds blowing from every point of the
compass. To undertake to make them stationary, would be striving to change
their nature, to deprive them of that property from which they derive their
value: this ridiculous enterprise is, notwithstanding, a consequence of the
system which causes them to be looked upon as real treasures. Their
disappearance is dreaded, and yet their circulation is clogged, and the mind
loses sight of the use of the most simple and universal means of creating real
riches, without which metals would be useless, and consequently of no value.

On the contrary, disdaining vulgar opinions, and seeing nothing in gold and
silver but the means of exchange, but proper agents to facilitate it; the mind,
freed from the fear of the want of them as riches, conceives the idea of doing
without them as agents, at least about man's person. It is astonishing, that
among so many travelers who have gone over the United States of America, not
one of them has given a detail of the manner of exchanging several necessaries
of life; they are reciprocally furnished in the country with what they are in
want of, without the interference of money. The tailor, shoemaker, etc.
exercise their professions in the house of the husbandman who has occasion for
their commodities, and who, for the most part, furnishes materials, and pays
for the workmanship in provisions, etc. -- This kind of exchange extends to
many objects; each of these people write down what they receive and give, and
at the end of the year they close an account consisting of an infinity of
articles, with a very small sum; this could not be effected in Europe, but with
a great deal of money. Thus it appears, that an easy means of doing without
great sums of money is given to country people by instructing them in writing
and arithmetic; that consequently the sovereign who should establish schools
for the purpose of teaching this most necessary art and science, would create a
considerable means of circulation without the use of coin, and that this
expense, which seems to alarm so many governments, is in fact one of the most
lucrative speculations which the treasury could make.
What a vast field is this opened to industry! These metals are in that case
reserved for the best uses to which nations who obtain them from abroad can put
them. They are sent out to seek materials for industry, new commodities, and
especially increase the number of citizens; of every species of riches this is
the most sure and fruitful. Thus, when gold is reduced to its exact value, that
its real use is known, the advantageous purposes to which it is proper, are
more justly calculated. It is then perceived that paper credit may have the
same properties as gold itself; and to succeed in giving them to it, nothing
more is necessary than to preserve the most inviolable respect for the
principles which support public confidence; for upon what basis rests the value
and general use of money, if it be not upon the certitude that it will be
received every where in payment for things which men's wants may require,
because of its conventional value? Why should a paper which presents the same
conventional value, the same certitude and solidity, be refused in payment? I
will add more -- A more solid basis than gold and silver have, may be given to
paper money: I say paper money, without attaching to this expression the idea
of constraint to receive it as such: this obligation diminishes its value -- I
would say paper credit, if the word credit did not seem to exclude its
principal quality, that of being always susceptible, and in an instant of being
converted into money without the least loss.
for we have no guarantee that the value of these metals will not be all at
once diminished by the discovery of new and rich mines; we cannot calculate
their quantities concealed in the earth, and men incessantly rake up its bowels
in search of them. Why should not discoveries be made in other countries, like
that in the last century by two shepherds in Norway, of the rich mines of
Konsberg, where very considerable masses of silver are found? The King of
Denmark has one of 560lb. weight in his cabinet.
Therefore in countries where precious metals are scarce, but where lands may
be successfully cultivated, banks should be formed, whose operations should
chiefly rest upon title deeds and productions deposited; in a word, upon such
objects only as gold and silver should represent. It is not true that much gold
and silver are necessary to establish banks, or create notes which may be
thrown into circulation. A proof of the contrary arises from facts continually
before our eyes. The multitude of bills of exchange which circulate and cross
each other in every direction, have not all of them, for origin and security, a
deposit of gold and silver. Neither are they all paid when due with these
metals. Commerce produces an abundance of such papers, which falling due on the
same day, are discharged by each other without the intervention of specie,
especially in cities where public banks are established to facilitate this kind
of payment. These are called transfers, and the principal object of Caisses
d'Escomptes and ^anks is to facilitate them by the payment of bills fallen due
by those which have still some time to ^^n. In fine, these Caisses d'Escomptes
and banks, are themselves causes and striking proofs of the little difficulty
there is in supplying, by confidence, the places of gold and silver. First
established by deposits in specie, they soon circulate their notes f^r sums
more considerable than those deposited: and what surety is there for the
payment of such notes, if it be not by other bills not due, which the Caisses
and banks receive in exchange for their own notes payable at sight, to which
public confidence gives the same value as to gold and silver.


In countries where these metals are already in circulation, but are still
foreign productions, easy and certain means should be sought after to render
exchanges less dependent on the security or abundance of specie. Paper credit
should be naturalized there, because its infallible effect is to double or
treble the quantity of current coin, and even to replace it entirely, where, as
in England, public confidence has never received a wound. These observations
might be more extended if a treatise on the nature of banks and Caisses
d'Escompte were in question. But this is not my present object; I have
considered exterior commerce in its means of exchange only, like metals and
paper credit, and in its balance for the purpose of applying these principles
to the relations and commerce of France and the United States: and more
especially to clear up some difficulties to the French, who seem to have a bad
opinion of this commercial intercourse, on account of the want of money in
America, and to encourage the independent Americans, who seem to dread the
pretended inconveniences arising from its deficiency.

I think I have proved:

1st. That the balance of trade is but an insignificant word: that the balance
paid in specie is no proof of a disadvantageous commerce on the part of the
nation which pays it, nor advantageous to the nation which receives it. Observe
what a respectable author, well versed in the matter, and whom we shall
hereafter have occasion to quote, thinks of it.

"These commercial balances, calculated in different states, are pitiful; when
I see consequences drawn from ridiculous* and labored official accounts, MI
FANNO DAL RISO CREPARE.

"To consider France and England only, the two principal manufacturing
countries, and the most commercial ones in the world, what omissions,
negligences, double employs, errors, corruptions, nocturnal expeditions, duties
evaded, and contraband trade! The prodigious quantity of wool which is sent
from England is certainly not registered, no more than the silks, gold laces,
gauzes, blondes, cambries, brandies, and many other articles which are
fraudulently introduced there. The same in France: no account can be taken of
the immense quantities of drapery, hosiery, and small hardware, which the
English send in exchange." Voy. en Italy, de M. Roland de la Palatiere, tom.
i. p. 352.




2d. That the tables of that commercial balance deserve no faith; and that the
only method of estimating the increase of trade, is by the increase of
population. The errors in these pretended balances must be continually insisted
upon: consequences dangerous to the people are frequently drawn from them.

Financiers who pillage the kingdom, say to Princes on presenting them ^hese
fa^lacious calculations, "that things are in a prosperous way; that commerce
flourishes, that imposts may be laid on, loans negociated, etc. These sophisms
are seducing: let Princes accustom themselves to judge of public prosperity by
population, and the general ease of the people; let them be eyewitnesses of
this, and mistrust a momentary appearance of prosperity, which frequently
covers profound misery, and they will not be so often deceived.

A King of Sardinia paid a visit to a part of Savoy, the nobility of which had
been represented to him as being poor and miserable: they came to him elegantly
dressed in clothes of ceremony, to make him their court. At this the King
expressed his surprise to one of the gentleman, who said to him, 'Sire, nous
saisons pour votre Majeste tout ce que nous devons, mais nous devo^s tout ce
que nous saisons.'




3d. That it is impossible to judge exactly of the quantity of money existing
in a country, and that all calculations on that head are founded upon an
uncertain and defective ba^^s, because it is impossible to collect all their
elementary principles.

4th. That metals are not re^l riches.

5th. That considered as agents of exchange, it would be more advantageous to
substitute paper credit in interior commerce, and to apply them to uses for
which paper is unfit, to wit, all the purposes of exterior commerce. There
results from these demonstrations, that commerce may be begun between two
nations without the aid of money; that the quantity a nation has of it to
exchange for foreign productions is in proportion to its confidential interior
establishments, which advantageously supply its place.

In three words, a good soil, paper credit, and a government anxious to support
it, are the true means of opening the resources of a nation, of procuring
abundance of specie, as well as an extensive exterior commerce.

I have not considered this commerce in its influence upon the manners of the
people; such a discussion would here be useless, because, whatever that
influence may be, exterior commerce is a forced effect of the respective
situations of France and the United States, as will hereafter be made appear. I
examine this matter as a politician, not as a philosopher, and I pray the
reader not to forget the distinction.

CHAPTER III. Application of the foregoing general Principles to the reciprocal
Commerce of France and the United States.
That France has every Means of procuring a great Commerce, and those which
must assure it to her in the United States; that her Productions are proper for
them; and that her particular interior Circumstances oblige her to engage in
this Commerce.

THESE truths will not be contested when the fertility of the soil of France
shall be considered, her various and particular productions, and the
temperature of her climate, which favors those the most simple and necessary.

These advantages constantly assure her workmanship at a lower price than those
of nations endowed with the same activity, but which have not the advantages of
such favorable circumstances.

Her manufactures are numerous, and her population is considerable in
comparison with that of most other nations. Yet these are far from the degree
to which they may be extended; for in considering France, room for a more
extensive population is soon discovered, and an immensity of means for a great
number of manufactures, which only wait for the will of government to be
established.

What other nation has more activity? more industry? or unites to so great a
degree, all the advantages of civilization, and the matter and means of the
most varied and extensive interior and exterior commerce, independent of
completion? What other would have been able to resist, for so long a time, the
chain of misfortunes, and repeated faults of which she has been the victim? The
force of her constitution, rather than her apparent prosperity, ought to be
calculated by this resistance. France is not what she might and ought to be.
There is no doubt but she will become so if she opens her eyes to her true
interests, if, unshackling her interior, she does not neglect her exterior
commerce, and particularly that which the United States wish to open with her.
The productions of her soil and industry are proper for them. She can export in
exchange, from independent America, the raw materials for which she may have
occasion. These two countries may therefore carry on a direct commerce of
exchange between them, and so much the more advantageous, as the raw materials,
which must constitute it, would cost them more in any other place. These truths
will not be doubted when the double catalogue of the respective wants of France
and the United States, or of their importation and exportation, shall have been
examined.

Intelligent patriots are of opinion, that it cannot be advantageous to France,
in her present situation, to engage in the commerce of the United States. --
They observe, that her manufactures being inferior to those of the English, she
will be worsted in the American markets; they add, that instead of encouraging
this commerce, government would perhaps act more wisely by preventing the
interior abuses which stop the progress of cultivation and industry.

I am far from denying the necessity there may be of stirring to reform such
abuses, ^d to direct our efforts to culture and the improvement of
manufactures; but it is easy to demonstrate, that exterior commerce will in a
very short time infallibly bring on such a reform, and that France in her
present state is in the greatest need of this exterior trade.

In effect, an active and industrious nation, whose soil is fertile, ought
always to have markets for the sale of its commodities to animate its industry.
Its culture and manufactures would languish if the limits of its consumption
were perceived. It is even necessary that these markets should be
superabundant; that one may succeed the other, in case of unsuspected events,
which might cause a momentary change in the ordinary course of things.

What cause has thrown Ireland into so continued a state of languor, although
one of those countries the most favored by nature, and the best situated for
exterior commerce, if it is not the deprivation of that commerce? An
embarrassing exuberance of productions was feared: the cultivation of them was
presently neglected, and this negligence increased waste lands. This island
would at length have offered a spectacle of the most deplorable misery, of a
complete depopulation, if, by a restitution of the liberty of commerce, an end
had not been put to so cruel a discouragement which choked industry, by making
it fear a want of markets for the vent of its productions.

Let our patriots, therefore, cease to look upon foreign commerce as contrary
to the reforms which are to revive our interior trade: to encourage the first
is not to proscribe the second, because one cannot succeed without the other.
But, on the contrary, the seeds of activity are sown in the latter, by
extending the boundaries of consumption.

Alas! is not France evidently in need of them? Are not her magazines crowded
with a superfluity of the most necessary productions, for which she has no
market? Such as, amongst others, her wines and brandies. Such is the situation
of Aunis and Saintonge -- plentiful vintages are there literally feared, and
these provinces are at this moment overcharged with wine, for which they have
no exportation: the people are miserable in the midst of abundance. See Note,
Chap. V. Sect. 1.
The United States offer to her an immense consumption; why does she refuse to
supply them?

Even if her wines and brandies were not in such superfluity, it would be
prejudicial not to support the price of them by foreign consumptions. The
greatest scourge of industry, and especially of manufactures, is the low price
of those liquors which are seducing by their strength. On this account prudent
manufacturers carefully avoid wine countries. It would be superfluous to give a
detail of their reasons; but certainly the politician, the most jealous of a
free extention of individual enjoyments, will never become an advocate for the
indulgence of men in those articles which deprive them of their faculties and
reason.

France ought to desire the commerce of the United States. She ought also to be
anxious for it on account of her manufactures, to employ her population which
is in want of work. Consequently workmanship is cheap; whence results
indigence, beggary, and strife. Means are every day sought to diminish and
prevent crimes -- Let property or employ be given to those who are without
them: this is the secret -- It must notwithstanding be agreed, that property is
preferable to employ in workshops; under this point of view, commerce with the
United States, in opening to us a great market, will be a means of diminishing
mendicity and vices in France.
Work and productions are increased by opening new markets. Thus, for example,
vineyards will remain, which a want of consumption would soon cause to be
destroyed; thousands of laborers, who languish, will be employed; society will
be increased by thousands of individuals; more corn, more cloth, etc. will be
necessary: hence an increase of interior consumption and population.

When we examine the question, if exterior commerce be advantageous and
necessary to a nation; a newly constituted state, whose population is far from
being in proportion to its soil, where there is space and property in land for
every one, must be distinguished from that which is ancient, rich in
productions as well as in men; or, to speak with more precision, a state where
the unequal distribution of property takes men from the fields, shuts them up
in cities, and prostitutes their faculties to the fancies of the rich.

Certainly such a new state cannot increase its foreign commerce before it has
cleared great quantities of lands, and is become considerably peopled, and has
a surplus of men and productions.

Such a state, while necessary, will undoubtedly follow this counsel.

But this counsel would be improper to another state, which, advanced in its
civilization, covered with a population without property, having manufactures
and money in abundance; whose industry and territorial riches wait for demands,
and whose culture languishes for want of markets. A foreign commerce is
necessary to this state to vivify it.

Such is the situation of France; neither soil, industry, activity, nor the
thirst of gain, is there wanting; other pernicious causes slacken her interior
commerce. If the merchant has not a certainty of markets, he does not buy nor
give orders; the manufacturer employs fewer hands, has less occasion for the
productions of the earth. Languor then descends from manufactures to
cultivation, and diminishes population.

The reverse will be the case in the supposition of a vast exterior commerce,
and will lead to the improvement even of our manufactures; for the necessity of
improving to obtain a preference will oblige manufacturers to study the taste
of the Americans, and to conform themselves to it, to vary the productions of
their industry; and will oblige them not to relax, that they may not be
surpassed by rivals.

It is here necessary to make some reflections on the general inferiority found
in our manufactures, on comparing them with those of the English. This fact has
furnished Lord Sheffield with his principal argument, to maintain that America
will always prefer the latter. It is necessary to clear up this point, which
seems not to be well understood.

Manufactures of luxury, of convenience, and of necessity, must be
distinguished in a manner hereafter pointed out. Lord Sheffield and all
foreigners agree, that France has the advantage in the first class of
manufactures. Our manufactures of silk have proportionably a much greater sale
abroad than that of our woollens. It is that, independent of taste, o^, if we
will, of fashion, which we possess, and which opens to us a great consumption,
the raw material is in a great measure one of our own productions; an advantage
which puts it in our power to surmount many general inconveniences, whose
effects are more sensible upon our other articles of exportation, such as
woollens, the production of which has less relation with the manufacture.
His Lordship agrees even that France makes finer cloths than those of England;
but with respect to manufactures of convenience, or such as are intended for
the consumption of the people, we must, in spite of patriotism, agree on our
part, that we are in many articles inferior to the English. This will appear by
the sequel. It would be ridiculous and even dangerous to flatter the nation in
this particular; the illusion would keep it in a state of mediocrity. It is for
a better constituted patriotism to prove to the nation, that it may rise above
mediocrity, and to show it by what means this is to be effected. Should any
body wish to know the cause of this double difference between the French and
English manufactures, it is as follows: --

There is in England a greater number of men, among the people, in easy
circumstances, than in France, and who are consequently in a situation to
choose and pay better for such articles as they like. It is a known fact, that
the common people of England, although loaded with taxes, are well clothed and
fed; The goodness of things manufactured is so generally requisite in England,
that merchandises destined for exportation are there distinguished from those
for interior consumption. There are great warehouses wherein the sales are for
exportation only; the object of others is interior consumption. People who
judge hastily conclude from hence, that those for exportation are badly
manufactured. They are deceived, the difference is in the choice of materials.
THE ENGLISHMAN SPARES NOTHING FOR THAT WHICH HE CONSUMES. The workm^nship is
the same; it would cost in general more to manufacturers to have two sorts of
workmansh^p, a good and a bad one, than to have one only which is good, and a
manufacture estab^ished upon a bad kind of workmanship would soon be decried. A
shoe destined to foreign commerce is as well made as another; but it does not
last so long, because the leather is not chosen from the best kind; and so of
the ^est.
the rags of misery are not found with the poulle au pot. A memorable
expression of Henry the fourth of France, who, in a conversation with his
favorite Sully, said, he hoped to see the time when the poorest of his
subjects would have it in their power to put a fowl into the pot for their
Sunday's dinner.
The English manufacturer having a greater demand for articles of necessity,
and being better paid for them, can make improvements in his manufacture.

Should it be required to know from whence comes the easiness of circumstances
so general in England, independent of the soil and position, and the advantages
of that liberty which reigns there, it results from the consideration attached
to industry in the opinion of the public; from the laws sure protection
accorded to every individual against the agents of government; and the
haughtiness and insolence, to which they are naturally inclined (because in men
of slender education these are the effect of power,) being continually
repressed, and their being prevented from trampling upon the citizen, who must
be obedient. He is obedient to the law, and not to him who puts it in
execution. THEE and THOU, as terms of contempt, are unknown in England: SIR, is
the general designation of every individual. A man accused of the greatest
crimes, and who has the most miserable appearance, is never spoken to in the
singular number when he is interrogated by his judges; and as he becomes an
object of pity when he is convicted, decent appellations, generally in use, are
not changed with respect to him. Can one suppose that this respect for man is
prejudicial to public prosperity? Man is elevated by it; it gives him energy,
and inclines him to ease. Contempt, which in other places is affected for the
people, leads them to misery, and retains them in it.
In fine, it is the consequence of not blushing to be a tradesman, artificer,
or workman, from father to son.

In France there are individuals excessively rich; but the people are poor. The
first have it in their power to pay extremely dear for articles of luxury and
fancy, which cause an improvement of manufactures of this kind. Finer cloths,
as it has been before observed, are to be found in France than in England; but
their quantity is not great, because there is not an extensive demand for those
of the first quality.

On the other hand, the property of the people being very inconsiderable, they
pay badly, and the consequence is, that things of convenience or necessity are
badly manufactured for them.

I will not here enter into the examination of causes which occasion such a
state of things, nor of the means of changing it. I will leave the discussion
of such means for another chapter; but the following conclusions must
necessarily be drawn from these facts: the perfection of manufactures depends
upon the demand, and the demand upon the means of payment. Now, because the
French have not those means, they must be sought after in a foreign country.
Increase foreign demands for French manufactures, and they will be seen to
improve very rapidly. This is the effect which the commerce of the United
States will produce in France. These States contain a people accustomed to be
well clothed, to make use of well manufactured things only, and capable of
paying for good workmanship by their productions. Charged with the furnishing
of articles for American consumption, French manufacturers will strive to outdo
their rivals; and they can easily accomplish this when Government shall be
willing. Nature has given them the means. They will become superior in almost
every thing when once they shall no longer be obstinately counteracted.

Therefore, the commerce with the United States will be the cause of
improvement in French cultivation and industry. Consequently it is necessary to
embrace and pursue it.

CHAPTER IV. That the United States are obliged by their present Necessities
and Circumstances to engage in foreign Commerce.
SOME writers, among whom are found the celebrated Dr. Price, and the Abbe
Mably, have exhorted the independent Americans, if not to exclude exterior
commerce entirely from their ports, at least to keep it within very contracted
bounds. They pretend, that the ruin of republicanism in the United States can
happen only from exterior commerce; because by great quantities of articles of
luxury and a frivolous taste, that commerce would corrupt their morals, and
without pure morals a republic cannot exist.

Alas! what can the United States import from Europe, continues Dr. Price,
except it be infection? I avow it, cries the Doctor, I tremble in thinking on
the furor for exterior commerce, which is apparently going to turn the heads of
the Americans. Every nation spreads nets around the United States, and caresses
them, in order to gain a preference; but their interest cautions them to beware
of these seductions. Price's Observations, page 76. See the Abbe Mably, what he
says of these observations, from page 146 to page 163. See also what the Count
de Mirabeau has added to the Observations of Dr. Price, in his Reflections
printed at the end of his translation of this work, page 319. London edition,
1785.

He has, as a severe philosopher, treated on exterior commerce, and made
abstraction of the actual situation of the Americans.




I am far from contradicting, in its basis, the opinion of these politicians.
Moreover, I think, with Dr. Price, that the United States will one day be able
to produce every thing necessary and convenient; but I am also of opinion, that
these two writers have considered the independent Americans in a false point of
view; that they have not sufficiently observed the state of their
circumstances; in fine, that their circumstances and actual wants oblige them
to have recourse to foreign commerce. This is a truth which I propose to
demonstrate; for I will prove that the independent Americans are in want of the
necessaries and conveniences of life, and in some states, of luxuries, and
that their habits and nature, added to other circumstances, will always prevent
their renouncing them entirely.

I will prove, that having no manufactures, they cannot themselves supply these
wants, and that they can have no manufactures for a long time to come.

That although they already possessed them, they ought to prefer to national
ones those of exterior commerce, and that they should rather invite Europeans
to their ports than frequent those of the European states.

Finally, that by the same reason which makes it impossible to exclude exterior
commerce, in case of wants which alone it can supply, it is equally so to fix
its boundaries.

When the nature of man is attentively considered, it is seen that it
incessantly disposes him to render his life agreeable. If he has a property, he
strives to improve it; if the soil he cultivates be fruitful, and demands but
little in advance, the desire of increasing his enjoyments stimulates him to
torture his land to draw from it its various productions. One idea put in
practice gives birth to another; one want satisfied creates a second, to have
the pleasure of satisfying this also. Such is the nature of man; his activity,
which leads him from desires to enjoyments, from one change to another, is the
source of what are called manufactures. A manufacture is but the means of
giving to a production of the earth, a form which adds to it a new degree of
agreeableness and utility. Want and desire of manufactures are therefore in the
nature of man; so that if we supposed Europe entirely annihilated, manufactures
would soon rise up in America, because each individual strives to render his
existence agreeable by means the most speedy and efficacious. Perhaps the
character and life of savages, who are supposed to have no manufactures among
them, will be opposed to these reasonings? Men are deceived in judging thereby;
for these people, which we look upon as only one degree removed from a state of
nature, work up and manufacture the earth's productions. Thus from their corn,
before it is ripe, they extract a gela^^^ous juice, with which they make
palatable cakes. There (...) ^re the arrival of Europeans, they knew how to
make (...) liquors, tools, utensils, arms, ornaments, etc. They (...)
themselves to these; hunting took them from a sedentary li^e, and did not give
them time enough to extend their ideas.

The pastoral life of the Arabians has conducted them one or two degrees
farther in the art of manufacturing, because that kind of life affords greater
leisure, and gives more uniform and constant productions. Those shepherds,
whose riches consist but in their flocks, and who live on milk alone, and are
clothed with their wool only, have a passionate desire for coffee, sherbet, and
sugar. The desire of increasing their enjoyments is the cause. Let it be
therefore agreed, that man by his nature is inclined to enjoyment, and
consequently to manufactures.




Manufactures, like the wants of civilized men, may (as was observed in the
last chapter) be divided into three classes: 1st. those of necessity; 2d. those
of convenience; 3d. those of fancy or luxury. Food, and the natural exigencies
of mankind, are comprehended in the first class.

It is from the wants of convenience especially, that manufactures have their
origin. Without doubt, skins of sheep were sufficient to defend men from the
severities of cold; a cabin or a hut from the intemperature of the atmosphere;
but man is no sooner preserved from one evil than he seeks to get rid of
another. Skins are insusceptible of being well joined together; use makes them
hard; a cabin is frequently thrown down, is confined and smoaky; whence arise
the wants of convenience, which are transformed into enjoyments, whose
accustomed use changes them into necessities.

When man has every convenience, he then thinks of ornament. Hence the wants of
luxury; they are entirely in the imagination, and procure imaginary pleasures
only. Therefore to wear any laced clothes, or drink coffee out of a china
rather than a delfen cup, is a want created by luxury or fancy.

The nature of these three kinds of want being pointed out, it is necessary to
know what those of the Americans are. They have the two first of them. Their
habitudes contracted in their infancy* from European emigrants, and their
commerce with the English, have accustomed them to the kind of life and taste
of the latter, and it is well known that English industry has been particularly
directed to necessary and useful arts.

The independent Americans, at least those who inhabit great maritime cities,
have borrowed from the English a taste for luxuries; they seek for gauzes,
blond lace, silks, etc. It is however with pleasure I observe, that if this
taste of modes has infected London within these few years, its ravages have not
been extended with the same rapidity in the United States as in Eu^ope. Their
situation, austere religion, morals, and ancient habits, their rural or marine
life, prevent their seeking after elegance and dress, and keep them from
ostentation and voluptuousness. Although they may perhaps be changed a few
degrees, the evil is not yet sensible, at least in the Northern States Luxury
is certainly to be found in Virginia; and when we speak of luxury with respect
to free America, it is necessary to distinguish carefully the Southern from the
Northern States; cities from the country; maritime cities from interior ones.
By these distinctions many contrarieties in the account of superficial
travel^ers may be explained.
Therefore our observations ought principally to rest upon the two first
classes of wants. Now it is impossible that the Americans should ever renounce
them; they will be perpetually led and attached to them by their nature and
habitudes, and by the manner in which their population is increased.

By their nature, because they are men; and it has been proved, that man is
endowed with that activity which perpetually disposes him to add to his
enjoyments.

By their habitudes, because, as it has been observed, they contracted that of
all those wants; and it is well known, that a taste for pleasure is not to be
exterminated when rooted by habitude. How can it be required of man to deprive
himself of wine and liquors to which he is accustomed, and in which he places a
part of his enjoyments, except we would render him unhappy? I will not quote
hermits, sick persons, or philosophers, who have had that empire over
themselves; but let not a like prodigy be expected in a whole nation. An
association of three millions of philosophers has not yet been, nor will be
seen to confine themselves to the regimen of Pythagoras, It is not that we
ought not to believe that one of the great means of regenerating the old people
of the Continent, and of supporting republicanism in the United States, would
be to give to children such an education as Pythagoras exercised at Crotona. --
SEE THE LIFE OF PYTHAGORAS.
or the diet of Cornaro.

The severe sacrifice of tea, which the independent Americans made at the
beginning of the war, will perhaps be also quoted. The enthusiasm of liberty
and influence of example were able, during some time, ^o overcome their
habitudes; It is assured that abstinence from tea was not every where
faithfully observed, which appears very probable on reflecting that there was a
party which fain would have violated it. I have known several persons whom the
deprivation of tea had made ill for a long time, although they had tried
illusive means, by substituting the infusion of agreeable simples for that of
the tea-leaf.
as religious enthusiasm has combated, sometimes successfully, the passions of
an hermit. But there is no cause powerful enough to produce a like effect,
except in the crisis which makes the sacrifice necessary and easy. The reason
of the dependence in which the Americans would put themselves with respect to
the Europeans, and the fear of distant corruption, are motives too feeble to
carry men to that point of heroism! It is not sufficiently demonstrated to them
that they cannot drink wine from Madeira without being some day corrupted by
it, and without preparing the way for great calamities.

The manner in which population is renewed and increased in America, does not
make it probable that its inhabitants will ever be able to renounce the want of
European productions.

A prodigious number of individuals emigrate every year from all parts of
Europe to America, who carry with them wants and inclinations which they have
from education and habit. If they find them in America, they continue to
gratify them; if they are unknown there, they naturalise them, and it is the
first thing they go about; for they do not so much perceive the new pleasures
they are going to enjoy, as those of which they are deprived; so great is the
force of our first habits and customs. Remembrance, although frequently mixed
with the cruel idea of servitude, abandons man in the grave only.

According to this inclination, natural to all men, let the immense variety of
wants and appetites be calculated which are going to transplant themselves from
Europe to the United States; and let it be judged, whether it be possible to
put bounds to or destroy them.

To succeed in this, it would not only be necessary to shut out foreign
commerce from all the American ports; American industry must be circumscribed,
and the source of their wants stopped up; it would be necessary to imitate the
Lacedemonian law, which ordained that nothing should be worked up but with the
heavy hatchet, the more effectually to banish the luxury of elegant furniture.
In a word, a miracle must be operated upon the Americans, to take from them all
remembrance of what they have been, of all they have seen, smelt, or tasted;
and the same enchantment must deprive European emigrants of their ideas; as it
would be absurd to hope for a like prodigy, the force of things, which drags
the independent Americans into exterior commerce, must be submitted to. It is
with regret that I write this fact, on considering it philosophically, but it
appears to have been demonstrated politically. No person wishes more than I do
to see the United States separate themselves from all the world, and in this
situation to find again the austerity of the Spartan regimen, without its cruel
principles of military disposition. It would be a smart stroke in politics; but
this unhappily is no more than a dream.
All is reduced to two words: America has wants, and Europe has manufactures.

In the United States some of the inhabitants fill up the leisure afforded by
agriculture (in which the Europeans cannot hope to become their rivals) with an
attention to manufactures. And they have others confined to the most necessary
arts; connected with cultivation, fisheries, and the construction of vessels.
But even these manufactures are but few in number, and insufficient for the
wants of the United States. They are therefore obliged to have recourse to
Europe. It is not that they neither have, nor can have almost all the raw
materials employed in our own manufactures. They have hemp, flax and cotton.
The four Southern States gather great quantities of cotton. Their poor are
clothed with it winter and summer. In winter they wear cotton shirts, and
clothes of wool and cotton mixed. In summer their shirts are linen, and their
outward clothes of cotton. Women's dress is entirely of cotton, and made up by
themselves, women of the richest class excepted; yet a woman of this class has
a deal of cotton worked up in her house, and this callico equals in beauty that
of Europe. Those from the South furnish a deal of cotton to the States of the
North, which cannot grow it, the climate being too cold.

There is scarcely any part of the United States without good flour and saw
mills. The Northern States have others for flattening iron. It is in the
construction of mills especially, that the Americans distinguish themselves, in
varying their employ and utility, and in their distribution.




But, if they had raw materials in plenty, they ought to be advised not to
establish manufactures; or, to speak more justly, manufactures could not be
established; the nature of things ordains it so. Let us discuss this question,
as it is an important one.

There are many reasons for men's engaging in a new country in agriculture
rather than in manufactures. There, where two individuals can easily live
together, they marry, says Montesquieu. The labor of the field offers to them
more means of living together, of augmenting and supporting their family, than
working at manufactures: in these the dependence of the workman, his precarious
and changeable state, his moderate wages, and the high price of provisions in
cities, where most manufactures are established, put it out of his power to
think of having a companion; and if he has one, the prospect of misery which
she must have before her eyes after his death, imposes on him a law contrary to
propagation, to avoid the cruelty of causing children to be brought into the
world only to be unhappy. Journeymen manufacturers, and in general men in a
state of dependence, whose subsistence is precarious, and who have children,
certainly love them less than the inhabitants of the country who have a small
property. The paternity is a burden, and consequently often odious to the
first; their children are ignorant of the soft caresses of paternal love. What
kind of generation must arise from such a connection!


In a new country where land is not dear, where it requires not much in
advance, or an expensive cultivation, and ^s at the same time fruitful, the
number of little and happy families must rapidly increase.

What a difference in other respects from this pure and simple country life,
where man is constantly in the presence of nature, where his soul is elevated
by the spectacle, where his physical principles continually regenerate by a
salubrious air, and in reviving exercises, where he lives in the midst of his
relations and friends, whom he makes happy: what a difference from that to the
life of manufacturers condemned to vegetate in dismal prisons, where they
respire infection, and where their minds are absorbed, as well as their lives
abridged! This conduct alone ought to decide the Americans to reject the
painful state of manufactures. The Idea of property is one of the strongest
ties by which man is attached to life, to his country, to virtue, and I will
add even to health. The satisfaction of a manufacturer, who at the end of the
week has a guinea in his pocket, is far from that of the little country
proprietor, who is seldom possessed of such a sum; but who gathers in his own
field every thing nece^sary. He loves it, sees it always with pleasure, takes
care of its cultivation, and, by a consequence of this soft disposition, he
attaches himself to the animals which assist him in that cultivation.

The labourer sees, as he works, the possibility of increasing the number of
his children; and he has the pleasing hope of leaving them after his death a
little corner of earth which will keep them from indigence.

The labourer is happy because his contracts are with the earth only, which
gives liberally and disinterestedly, whilst the interest of the master who pays
the manufacturer embitters the wages which he receives.

The labourer is still happy, because he is only amongst his equals; inequality
is the source of malice. The superior is malicious to support his oppression.
The slave is vindictive to destroy and revenge it.

The labourer is amiable and generous, because it would be necessary to abandon
all cultivation, if there was not between husbandmen a reciprocity of services
and confidence.

Perhaps it would not be difficult to prove that health and goodness are
diminished in proportion to the increase of manufactures, cities, property, and
the desertion of rural life; and that vices and crimes are increased in the
same proportion.

This is not the opinion of the sensible and interesting author of the Study of
Nature: "When I was at Moscow," says he, (Vol. III.) an old Genevois, who was
in that city, in the time of Peter I. told me, that since different means of
subsistence had been opened to the people by the establishment of manufactures
and commerce, seditions, assassinations, robberies, and incendiaries, had been
less frequent than formerly.

But ^his would not have existed, and there would have been the same public and
private virtue, if instead of making the Russians manufacturers, they had been
made proprietors of lands. Husbandmen are honest people, says M. de St. Perre
himself. -- And workshops, as I have just observed, do not offer that necessity
of reciprocal service which gives the habitude of goodness; they present
interest struggling against interest, rich and indolent stupidity striving to
cheat active indigence. If workshops do not make men rascals, they dispose them
to become so; they make them egotists, insensible, uncouth, and bad fathers.

Therefore, the fact quoted by this author does not prove, that to prevent
crimes, it is necessary to establish manufactures; but that it is better to
have manufactures peopled with degraded workmen, than forests with banditti; it
is a lesser evil, but it is still an evil.




Besides there will be, for a considerable time to come, more to be gained in
the United States, by the earth, which yields abundantly, than by manufactures
-- and man places himself in that situation where the greatest and most speedy
gain is to be acquired.

As population must, for many ages, be disproportioned to the extent of the
United States, land will be cheap there during the same length of time, An idea
of the price of lands in the United States, may be formed from the following
article taken from the Gazette of Philadelphia, of 9th of December, 1784:
Observe that the ground of Pennsylvania begins to be dear, and that the
inhabitants begin to emigrate to Kentucky. -- By this advertisement there are
offered to sale, ^5,000 acres of land, situated in the county of Northampton,
State of Pennsylvania, upon the Delaware. -- A public road, a navigable ^iver,
fertile soil, excellent for culture -- meadows -- places for mill^ -- great
forests -- plenty of fish ponds, etc. at half a guinea an acre.

Another quantity of 25,000 acres, upon the Susquehannah, with equal and even
greater advantages, at the same price. -- Good title deeds, -- facilities of
payment. -- A reserve of three hundred acres only will be required in each
district for the maintenance of the clergyman of the parish; -- one hundred
guineas when there shall be fifty families, to build a parsonage house -- ten
guineas a year for five years, and provision for the schoolmaster.


and consequently the inhabitants will for a long time be cultivators.

Those whom ambition, thirst of gain, or ignorance, should incline to establish
manufactures, will, from that moment, be disbanded from it by the dearness of
workmanship. This dearness is already very considerable, Three, four and five
livres are frequently paid in the cities of the United States for the day's
work of a carpenter, blacksmith, etc.
and may become still more so, as the cause which occasions it must naturally
become more extended.

What is the cause? It has already been intimated so as to be foreseen.

Cities are built in all quarters; This is a great evil, as will be hereafter
proved, and which will contribute more than any other to the ruin of republican
spirit.
lands are cleared and establishments made every where. In the state of
Kentucky, for instance, where, in 1771, there were scarcely one hundred
inhabitants, there are now nearly thirty thousand; and these men have emigrated
from inhabited coasts or countries. Thus hands are taken from the commerce and
agriculture of these last, which is consequently the cause of the increased
price of workmanship.

From this dearness it has been concluded in Europe, that the people in America
were wretched; a contrary conclusion ought to have been drawn. Wherever workmen
govern; wherever they are paid a high price, the people are necessarily happy;
for it is of them that the various classes of workmen are composed.

On the contrary, wherever workmanship is at a low price, the people are
wretched; for this cheapness proves that there are more workmen than there is
work to execute, more want of employ than can be supplied. This is what the
rich desire, that they may govern the workmen, and buy the sweat of their brows
at the lowest rate possible. To be convinced of this truth, look at England and
France; workmanship is very dear in London but cheap in Paris. The workman in
London is well fed, clothed and paid; in Paris he is quite the contrary.

"It frequently happens," said an American one day to me, that I meet in the
United States a ploughman, conducting his plough and horses, and eating a wing
of a turkey and a piece of good white bread. I have seen, added he, a vessel
arrive at New York, full of Scotchmen, not one of whom was unemployed the next
day.




It is the reverse in America, the workman gives the law, and so much the
better, he receives it too often every where else.

This dearness of workmanship is prejudicial to manufactures, and still so much
the better. These establishments are so many tombs which swallow up generations
entire. There are several manufactures at Amiens, and it is remarked, that the
hospitals are more filled with manufacturers than with masons or other like
artizans. A manufacturing life makes more people ill and their complaints more
dangerous; it is because this kind of workmen becomes sooner debauched, and
goes sooner to the hospital, being mostly single, and without any domestic
attachment.
Agriculture, on the contrary, perpetually increases population.

By preventing, or at least retarding the rise of manufactures within their
provinces, the Americans will stop the decadency of morals and public spirit:
for if manufactures bring gold into the States, they bring at the same time a
poison which undermines them. They resemble a number of individuals whose
nature and morals are at once corrupted: they form and accustom men to
servitude, and (...) in a republic a preponderance to aristocratical
principles, and by accumulating riches in a small number of hands, they cause
republics to incline to aristocracy.

Therefore the independent Americans will do wisely to leave to Europe the care
of manufacturing for them, because she is irresistibly dragged into
manufactures; and as their population and consumption must rapidly increase, it
is not impossible that Europe may one day confine herself to this kind of
occupation, and that America may one day become her storehouse of grain and raw
materials, of which she will not be in need. In this case nothing will be seen
in Europe but cities and workshops; in independent America nothing but fields
well cultivated. I will leave it to be decided which country would have the
most happy fate.

Under the same point of view, the independent Americans will still act wisely
by leaving it to the Europeans to furnish them with necessary articles; and in
seldom frequenting the cities and seaports of the ancient continent. In
effect, an European transported to independent America is in the proportion of
one to one hundred, and sometimes to a thousand. -- His example has therefore
but very little influence; the luxury of which he makes a parade in passing by,
excites less consideration* or respect than contempt and ridicule. If he leaves
a remembrance of himself, it is soon effaced by the general motion: there are,
moreover, some Europeans, who, struck and edified by the manners and customs of
free America, have good sense enough to respect and conform themselves to them.

It is the reverse when an American goes on shore in Europe, almost alone, with
his simplicity of manners in the midst of a vortex of men who esteem the eclat
of exterior appearance only; who, agitated and led by the general ton,
sacrifice every thing to the furor of making a great figure by the brilliance
of dress, equipage, and pomp: this American must at first be torn down and
tormented, because he finds himself thrown into a circle of habitudes contrary
to his own. Afterward he becomes familiarised by little and little, and if he
does not quite get a taste for them, at least his attachment to a simplicity of
life and manners is necessarily weakened. Carrying back with him to his own
country this disposition of mind, he introduces it insensibly into the minds of
those who are about him, upon which it has some influence -- upon the minds of
his children and friends. Their taste for simplicity becomes lukewarm by his
example, and the following age sees public virtues fall into indifference.

It will be less dangerous to the public spirit of the independent Americans to
admit the Europeans into the United States, than to go themselves into Europe;
from which it results that it would be very impolitic to encourage the former
to become the carriers of their exterior commerce.

I have insisted upon this reflection because there seems to have appeared in
some States a disposition to give premiums for distant navigation. They ought
to reflect, that they have but few hands, and that as few as possible should be
taken from culture. They are in the situation I have spoken of in my principles
of exterior commerce, where a nation gains by making carriers of others having
less soil or employ. They should also recollect, that republican morals are
better preserved in the bosom of agriculture than upon the sea and in foreign
voyages, which give to men communications with other morals and governments.

It is a general question in the United States, by what means it is possible to
put bounds to exterior commerce, and stop the progress of luxury: stay at home,
-- cultivate, cultivate, I will repeat to them; this is the secret whereby you
will prevent the increase of luxury; a secret much preferable to sumptuary laws
and prohibitory regulations, which some states have it in contemplation to make.

There is no power great enough to set, by regulations, such boundaries to
exterior commerce as will not be exceeded: to circumscribe it, for instance, to
merchandises of convenience, without the importation of those of luxury. The
nature or force of things only has such a power. That force has, as has been
before explained, the union of the natural circumstances of a nation; these
circumstances alone mark the limits of commerce. A nation which cannot pay for
luxuries with its own production, does not purchase them. The savage can only
procure with his furs, brandy, gunpowder, and woollen coverings; he buys
neither silks nor laces.

If, therefore, the productions of the United States be scarcely sufficient to
pay for the importations of necessity and convenience from Europe, merchandises
of luxury will not be imported: if these be carried to it, it is because it can
pay for them. There is no merchant who likes to ruin himself.

If, on the contrary, the United States have productions proper for the ancient
continent, in quantities sufficient to procure, by their exchange, not only the
most necessary and convenient things, but even those of luxury, nothing can
hinder the latter from being sooner or later imported, by means of exterior
commerce.

In truth, to increase demands of this nature, the public opinion, which before
treated opprobriously a taste for modes, must totally change, and the
particular opinions of certain sects equally yield to it.

But notwithstanding the powerful influence of opinion upon merchandises of
luxury, the fate of this kind of commerce will be more particularly determined
by the state of the independent Americans, for when rich they will adopt them.
This fact will appear certain, if what has been said on the nature of the human
heart be recollected, and its inclination to improve man's situation, and to
increase his enjoyments.

Taste for a rural life alone, if the Americans preserve it, will retard the
progress of luxury, which springs up in cities, from satiety, want of something
to do, and from lassitude: employment preserves the country from those moral
ills.

There is one last consideration, which ought to persuade the independent
Americans to employ themselves in cultivation, and reject both manufactures and
exterior transports; which is, that in wishing to undertake every thing at
once, the scarcity of money, necessary at least for the mechanical part of
these operations, will always be more perceived, whilst, by giving themselves
up entirely to cultivation, they will procure from their soil productions
sufficient to pay for these manufactures from Europe, and to make up for the
scarcity of coin. The independent Americans have but little money; this
scarcity arises from two causes; first, from the kind of ^ommerce they
heretofore carried on with England, and afterward from the ravages of a seven
years war. As this commerce was purely one of exchange, and that in certain
states, as Virginia, the importations always surpassed the exportations; the
result was, that they could not but be debtors to England, and could not draw
money from that island.

It was a kind of commercial servitude, which the English looked upon as the
pledge and guarantee of the dependence of the Colonies upon the mother country.

The money they had came from their illicit commerce with the Sugar Islands and
European powers. The war, afterward, by changing laborers into soldiers,
caused a part of their lands to remain without cultivation. From that time
exchanges increased and money decreased. The little of it remaining in America,
came first from money carried and expended there by the English and French
armies, and afterward by the loans negociated in Europe by Congress.

But it is easy to conceive, after what has been said upon the quantity of
coin, how a nation, which, by an extraordinary revolution, is all at once
widely developed, its population rapidly increased, and is thereby obliged to
continual advances, for clearing of lands, for building, making of roads and
canals, to pay foreign debts, mostly in specie, and which has no mines, must
feel the scarcity of money, and the reason of it is clear: the want of it is at
present supplied, in Connecticut, by an exchange of commodities, o^ these
against labor.




They appear to be alarmed at this; what has been said upon the subject of
money ought to remove their fears. It has been demonstrated that a nation may
carry on a very considerable commerce without its aid. It will hereafter be
seen that the United States produce many raw materials essentially necessary to
France, and that she can make their exports with greater advantage than those
of any other country.

Thus it appears that these two countries may carry on together a direct trade
of exchange without money, consequently an advantageous one; for the exchange
between them of productions is more lucrative than an exchange of productions
for money; although this opinion may not be adopted by men in general, who
attach a greater price to gold than to merchandise, and continually forget its
representative value, to substitute for it a real one. It must be incessantly
repeated to them that money would be absolutely nothing without productions;
that a rich people is that which, by its industry, increases population, and
has consequently an abundance of productions; that the secret of increasing the
quantity of coin consists only in the art of multiplying necessary productions,
and it is this to which the United States ought to incline, without being
anxious about the money which they may have at present or in future.

Let us resume the different questions contained in this chapter.

My object has been to make it appear that the United States were forced by
their necessity and circumstances to engage in exterior commerce.

To convince my readers of this, I have proved that the independent Americans
had wants of necessity, of convenience, and even some of luxury, which they
could neither renounce nor supply themselves with.

That having no manufactures of their own, they were obliged to have recourse
to those of Europe: that they could establish none for a long time, having but
few hands, and that cultivation ought to employ all their cares.

That according to physical, political, and moral relations, they ought to
persevere in applying themselves to agriculture alone, and even give up all
thoughts of transporting to Europe, by their own means, their proper
productions.

That this was the only means of preserving their republican morals, and of
retarding the progress of luxury.

In fine, that by engaging in agriculture, and neglecting manufactures, they
will less perceive the want of money, and will find the means of supplying that
want, and of carrying on a very advantageous exterior commerce of exchange of
commodities.

These different points being firmly establish^d, it is at present necessary to
prove, that of all the nations of Europe, France is the most proper to enter
into a commercial alliance with the United States, and that their necessities
and productions are correspondent to each other. It is proposed to ^ay open
this truth, by presenting the double table of reciprocal importations and
exportations, to be made between France and free America.

CHAPTER V. Of the Importation to be made from France into the United States,
or of the Wants of the United States, and the Productions of France which
correspond thereto.
THE attentive reader will have already been able to judge, that if the
independent Americans do not deviate from the career which is open to them,
Europe will, for a long time, have to furnish them with manufactured
merchandise. It has been made to appear, that the clearing and cultivation of
lands, and all that relates to inferior commerce, such as roads and canals,
offered to their industry the most favorable and useful employ, especially
whilst imposts do not restrain their movements, and that a free constitution
equally honors every individual.

It is now necessary to take a cursory view of their wants, and to point out
those articles with which France may pretend to furnish them in competition
with other nations, if even she cannot do it more advantageously than her
rivals. I will follow, in this enumeration, the English publications which have
treated upon the matter, and particularly that of Lord Sheffield: he has
omitted nothing, because his country pretends to furnish every thing. I will
not descend to the minutiae his Lordship has done, but I will prove, in every
important article, the French, if they know how to profit by their natural
advantages, must obtain a preference.


SECTION I. Wines.
Wine becomes a real want of those who have once been acquainted with it. Happy
or miserable, rich or poor, every body makes use of wine. Wine is the delight
of the happy or of the rich: it helps the unfortunate to support his sorrow;
the poor think they find it an equivalent for the food they are without.

Ease has lately been too general in the United States, not to have introduced
the use of wine; and futurity, by augmenting their means, will only increase
their want of this liquor.

The wines which were most generally consumed in the United States, were, as in
England, Oporto, Madeira, and some from Spain. French wines, charged as in
Britain, with enormous duties, were introduced by contraband only.

Liberty has caused those Britannic shackles to disappear. French wines are
freely imported into the United States* and pay but little duty.

Such is the state of things, and it leads me to the dicussion of three
questions:

Does it suit the United States to cultivate vines, and to make wine?

Ought they not, in renouncing this cultivation, to give the preference to
French wines?

And what means ought the French to use, in order to obtain and preserve this
preference?

It would be absurd to deny that the United States can produce wine, because
the experiments hitherto made have been fruitless. Extended as they are, and
having countries as southern as Europe, it is impossible there should not be,
in many places, a soil proper for the vine.

The little success of attempts may therefore, without hazarding too much, be
attributed either to the ignorance of the cultivator, his want of perseverance,
or a bad choice of plants.

However that may be, if the Americans will hearken to the counsels of able
observers, and reap advant^ge from the errors of other nations, they will
carefully avoid the cultivation of vines. In every country where they have been
cultivated, for one rich man, they have made a number wretched.

The long and considerable advances which vines require, the preparation,
preservation, and sale of their produce, have put all the good vineyard plots
into the hands of rich people, who not cultivating these themselves, pay the
real cultivator very badly. The salary of the wretched vine-dresser is every
where inevitably fixed; the time he does not work not being calculated, and few
wine countries offer any employ by which lost time may be filled up; and
otherwise, the variations in the prices of the most necessary commodities
occasioned by a thousand causes, by the abundance or even scarcity of wine, are
not considered for him.

Would it be believed, that abundance is the most unfortunate thing that can
happen, either to the proprietor or the vine-dresser? In fact, the expense of
gathering augments, and the price of the thing diminishes. There is more work
to be done, more hands are necessary, and they are paid more wages; more
hogsheads are wanted, the expenses of carriage greater, more space is required,
the sale is less, and consequently the income. The day's work of a vintager
varies according to the scarcity or abundance of wine, from six to fifty sol^.
The price of hogsheads has likewise variations in a different price, from three
to fifteen livres. There are years wherein the price of the hogshead is higher
than that of the wine which it contains.

The proprietor who establishes his expenses upon his revenues, is every year
deceived by those of the vineyard. In one year he receives at the rate of 20
for 100; the second year his vineyard is perhaps destroyed by hail; the third
he is exposed to bankrupcy, or to suffer by it, or his wines turn sour; the
fourth he may have but a moderate produce, which will not compensate for his
preceding losses. In ten years time a proprietor would scarcely find an average
year which was tolerably good; yet, as men l^^e to exaggerate their riches and
mean^, each proprietor calculates his revenue upon the highest produce that his
vineyard has ever yielded: the greatest part of them spend in consequence, and
are ruined.




The scarcity of wines, or the sterility of the vineyard, is perhaps less
unfortunate than the abundance, at least to the proprietor. But it is cruelly
felt by the vine-dresser, and those wandering troops of day laborers, whom the
ingratitude of their soil, or a bad government, forces to go from home in
search of employ.

The numerous variations which have an influence upon the produce of the
vineyard, make it very inconvenient property, and triflingly advantageous. It
is a p^overb in France, that there is no property worse conditioned than that
of the vineyard.
The return must be wasted for when much has been gathered; payments must be
made when there has been but little. The proprietor m^st therefore have other
resources, whether it be to wait or to pay. The vine-dresser, unhappy enough to
have a property, The situation of a vine-dresser is different according to the
custom of countries. In some he is hired only by the day, and there he is
completely wretched. In others, as in Switzerland, he has half of the produce.
But an unjust and tyrannical tax, laid on by the proprietors themselves,
reduces this half to a quarter part.
without any of these resources, ruins himself sooner or later. He is obliged
to sell at a low price, Such is nearly the situation of most of the
vine-dressers of AUNIS, who are proprietors. They are at the mercy of the rich
farmers of that country. When winter comes, the vine-dresser has neither bread
nor money. He goes to the farmer, asks him for both: the farmer says I will
accommodate you, give me your note. The bushe^ of wheat is worth six livres,
oblige yourself to return me, at a certain epoch, the quantity of wheat which
shall be sold for six livres. He always takes care to six the time when corn is
at a low price. The obligation is passed, the moment of payment arrives; the
vine-dresser, who has corn, gives more than he has received. If he has none, he
is still more embarrassed; the farmer presses him -- you have wine, says he,
sell it me. But at what price? The farmer offers a very low one. It is refused
-- he threatens -- the poor vine-dresser is obliged to ruin himself, and this
scene is annually repeated.
or to consume his wines himself; thence results his stupidity and idleness,
his discouragement, his dull and quarrelsome humor, and especially the ruin of
his health. Too much wine in the time of abundance, no bread in that of
scarcity; these are the two alternatives which divide his life.

Therefore countries covered with vineyards are generally less peopled, and
present a picture of a degenerated, weak, and wretched population. For the most
part they want hands to cultivate the vineyard in a season when work cannot be
delayed. It is done by these bands of strangers, of whom I have already spoken,
and who come to sell some days work to the poor vine-dresser.

The cultivation of a vineyard cannot be better compared than to those
manufactures, of which the hopes of success are founded upon the low price of
workmanship, and which enrich none but the undertakers, and retailers or
shopkeepers.

The pernicious influence of the vine is extended, in wine countries, to even
those who do not cultivate it; for the cheapness of wine leads to excesses, and
consequently it becomes a poison for all ranks of society, for those especially
who find in it a means of forgetting their sorrows.

Therefore, as I have already remarked, industry carefully avoids these
dangerous vineyard plots. None of the great manufactures, whose success is the
consequence of order, assiduity, and labor, are seen in the neighborhood of
them.

The result of all these observations is, that the Americans ought to proscribe
the cultivation of the vine.

It would infallibly render miserable that class of society which should apply
itself to it, and in a republic there should be none who are wretched, because
want obliges them to disturb civil order, or, what is worse, because they are
at the command of the rich, by whom they are paid, and who may make use of them
to destroy republicanism. The mean language of shopkeepers, who humbly offer
their merchandise, has already begun to find its way into the American papers.


Considered with respect to the proprietors, the vine ought still to be
proscribed by the United States; because every profession or calling,
susceptible of too great a variation of fortune, which sometimes heaps up
riches to one person, and at other reduces to indigence individuals in easy
circumstances, ought carefully to be avoided. -- Economy, simplicity, private
virtues, are not attached to such changeableness.

They are found in the bosom of mediocrity only, from easiness of
circumstances, founded upon that kind of toil whose produce is constant. The
Indians are almost all cultivators or weavers, which is the reason why private
morals have been better preserved among these people than any where else, in
spite of the excesses of despotism.
Such is that of agriculture in general; it embraces diverse productions, which,
in case of accident, replace each other. What recompense would be considerable
enough for an ingenious man, who should give to humanity the means of
preserving potatoes for several years, especially if the process were simple
and not expensive? In that case want would be no longer feared. The
embarrassment about the legislation of corn would disappear, and misery perhaps
be driven from among men.


Finally, if it be insisted that wine is necessary to man, let it not stupify
him; it should be used with moderation, and its dearness alone may oblige men
to be moderate in the use of it. It being greatly the interest of the American
Republics to remove all excesses from individuals, in order to prevent this
degeneracy, they ought to keep perpetually at a distance from them a
production, whose dearness will prevent the abuse of it, whose cultivation
would render it cheap, and consequently bring on dangerous excesses both to
policy and morals. It will be objected, that men employed in agriculture have
need of wine to support them in their labor. This is but an opinion: there are
found, in countries where it is least used, vigorous and indefatigable men. In
truth, wine contains an active spirit which may supply the want of substantial
aliment, and it is for this reason the peasants have recourse to wine or
brandy, which is more within their reach. Give them meat and potatoes, and they
will easily do without wine.


The catalogue which I have just gone over, of the evils and abuses occasioned
by the culture of vines, will not induce the French to pull up theirs. But it
ought at least to excite them to increase in foreign markets the consumption of
wines, in order to keep up their price, and consequently to diminish a part of
the evils which they produce. This will be doubly advantageous, by an
additional exterior profit, and a diminution of interior ill. Nobody will deny
that French wine^ must obtain the preference in the United States. They are the
most agreeable, the most varied, and who^esome, if moderately used; the least
prejudicial, if used to excess. They ought to be the basis of our exportations
to America; no nation can raise a competition with us. Lord Sheffield himself
pays this homage to our wines; but in order to assure to them this advantage
for ever, the art of making, preserving, and transporting them must be improved.

In general we are at present far from this: I will quote, for instance, the
wines of Provence, which, by their strength, ought to be capable of supporting
the longest voyages; and by their analogy to the wines of Portugal, would have
the greatest success in the United States, if they were properly prepared.
These wines have hitherto been in the lowest repute in the North, in the Indian
and American colonies; and that because, on one hand, the fitters out of
vessels brought them without choosing, and on the other, the individual having
no idea of the culture of vines, nor of the preparation of wine, mixed the
white grape with the red, did not di^tinguish the plants, the soil, nor
situation; cured it by rate, without paying attention to the difference of
years and qualities; put into h^s tubs, to give, as he pretended, a higher
flavor to his wine, all sorts of detestable ingredients, such as salt, lime,
plaster, and pigeon's dung; put it into bad casks of chesnut-tree; lest in
them a year's sediment, and never drew off the wine, so that it was always more
inclined to turn sour th^n any other wine, and therefore became little fit for
a foreign voyage.
ignorance, old prejudices, discouragement of the people, impost on
exportation; all concur to retard the progress of improvement.

The United States (these states of so new a date) already furnish us the model
of an institution, which alone would encourage the culture of corn and vines,
and make the momentary inconvenience of abundant vintages, which ruin the
proprietor and farmer, disappear.

This institution, easy to be naturalized in France, would have two branches, a
deposit in the public magazines of the productions of the earth; certificate or
billets of deposit which would form an authentic title for the disposing
proprietor, transferable without formalities at the current price, like all
other public effects.

It is thus, that in Virginia means have been found to supply the want of
money, The Virginians have given another example which proves how easy it is to
do without money. Many countries near to the Ohio having none of it, the
general assembly resolved, they should pay their quota of imports in hemp and
flax, which should be deposited in the public magazines.
and to give at the time of reaping, a real and useful value to tobacco, which,
without that, waiting for a demand, lies heavy upon the proprietor.

This is not the place to examine this idea profoundly, neither to destroy the
objections which will be made against it. This project may constitute the
matter of a memoir by itself. I give here nothing more than the title. If it
were wished that this project should succeed, it would be absolutely necessary
to put away all possibility of an abuse unpunished. It would perhaps be
necessary, that government should take no part nor have any influence in it.
This precaution will be exclaimed against; but let us once more cast our eyes
upon England. If there be a government upon earth whose hands are tied, whose
steps are watched, whose actions are brought to light, to public censure, and,
consequently, whose secret attempts are less to be ^^a^ed by the people, it is
that of England. See what the astonishing Minister, who is now at the head of
affairs, proposes to hinder the intervention and influence of the English
govermnent in the new plan of redemption of the public effects and of their
decrease. He insists, that the commissioners who shall be charged with it,
shall be always independent of government; that they shall be public agents,
and that no force shall constrain them to alienate from its object the money
destined to pay off or lessen the public debt.

This minister clearly perceived, that the confidence of the people ought to be
gained at any price, for the establishment which exists but by confidence; and
that in such a ^ase, the sacrifice of power would signify nothing to a
government which is really willing to prevent abuses.

The advantages resulting from a plan like this are visible. Public
depositories would supply the defect of ability in those who could not lay up
the productions of the earth. They would prevent squandering, losses, and
scarcity, and establish a more constant uniformity in prices as well as in
quantities; want of confidence would at first perhaps hinder the use of these
magazines, caves, or cellars of these public reservoirs. But this would not
long (...) the case, if sincerity, order, and economy, reigned in the^^
^^tablishments. It is an advantage which might have been procured by means of
provincial administrations, and which perhaps will never be enjoyed but under
their auspices.

With respect to the ^ILLETS, or NOTES OF COMMODITIES OR PRODUCTIONS, it is
seen how greatly they would increase national riches, how quickly the misery of
the peasants would disappear, if these notes circulated as value in commerce,
and if the vine-dresser could change his note of deposit for productions of
which he was in need. The monopoly of rich cultivators would then be
overturned; of cultivators who suck up the whole subsi^tence of the
vine-dresser, and, by avaricious advances, reduce him to their will.




People in the United States complain of an abuse in the commerce of the French
wines, which abuse it is of importance to remedy in the most speedy manner, if
we would not destroy the commerce in its origin. Illicit commerce produced
there before the revolution good Bourdeaux wine, because it is a property of
smuggling to give that which is of superior quality, and at a cheaper rate.

Now, since the peace, wines sent from France have not been, as it is asserted,
of a good quality. It is impossible that from greediness they may sometimes
have been adulterated. But this transient abuse, which the merchant may easily
destroy whenever he pleases, by choosing in the United States commissioners
whose reputation is untouched; this abuse, I say, ought not to stop the
exportations of France. -- Wine, if it be good, will always find consumers. --
Nothing but intelligence and sincerity are necessary to succeed in this, for
nature has done the rest for France.

The Americans prefer, in general, the wine which is carried to them in
bottles, because they believe it less subject to become sharp, or to change on
the voyage. On the first view it seems advantageous to France to furnish its
wines with this envelope, because it is a new opening for its glass-ware. But
if it be recollected, what a prodigious quantity of combustibles glass
manufactures require, to the sensible destruction of forests, it appears
imprudent to encourage a commerce which cannot but augment it rapidly. At
least, before it be encouraged, it would be necessary to have very certain
accounts of the number of glass manufactories in the kingdom, of their
consumption of wood and charcoal, of their produce and exportation, and,
finally, of our forests and mines.

SECTION II. Brandy.
The rapid progress lately made in chemistry has discovered, in most of the
fruits of the earth, the salts and spirits which constitute the essence of
brandy; this discovery has been turned to advantage; there results from it a
considerable abatement in the price of that liquor, that is to say, a very
great evil; this proves, by the way, that there are discoveries in physics
which should not be revealed without having first considered their moral and
political effects, and having indicated to government the means of preventing
their inconveniences; it also proves, that a chemist ought not to be a chemist
only, but a politician also.

The brandies of France are generally locked upon as the best, that is to say,
the most delicate and least pernicious: therefore they obtain the preference
with people in easy circumstances.

A great deal of brandy is consumed by the common people; but this is
counter-balanced at home and abroad by spirits drawn from grain, fruit, or
sugar.

Rum, which is produced from the latter, has had, and ever will have, in the
United States, the preference over our brandies, by reason of its cheapness.
The American^, especially the Bostonians, import melasses from the sugar
islands, and distill it, and independently of their consumption, they resell a
great part of it to the inhabitants of the same Islands, who cannot distill it
for want of combustibles.

Beside rum, the Americans make strong spirits from grain, potatoes, etc. They
are indebted for this to the Irish and Germans who have gone to settle in the
United States. A pernicious present those emigrants have made them.

In Ireland the cheapness of spirits made from grain places them within the
reach of the poorest man. The lowest classes of society use them to an
incredible excess; and this excess contributes not a little to promote that
quarrelsome humor which characterises the Irish, to plunge them into
stupidity, and hinder them from rising to that degree of prosperity to which
the liberty of commerce they have lately obtained ought to carry them.

The Americans would already have experienced a part of that degradation of
which the excessive use of strong liquors is the cause, if they were not almost
all proprietors, in easy circumstances, and fathers of families; if instruction
and morals were not more generally propagated among them than among any other
people; and, finally, if the quick and considerable profits which workmen there
obtain by the high price of workmanship, did not give them a salutary ambition
which keeps them from intemperance. The temperance of the Americans proves,
THAT A MAN IS HONEST WHEN HE IS HAPPY. He is neither vicious nor criminal,
EXCEPT WHEN HE IS WRETCHED. What, therefore, is the first cause of his vices
and crimes? The cause of his wretchedness. The genealogy of almost all crimes
is -- no property or want of employ -- cause of wretchedness of the people --
wretchedness the cause of drunkenness -- drunkenness the cause of quarrels, of
idleness, of misery, of thefts. Thefts cause imprisonment and capital
punishments.

The first link only to which a defect of property is attached, remains to be
remarked. It is not necessary to name it. But it arises from this genealogy,
that in the actual order of things; the people being drawn into vices and
crimes, are less culpable than they are imagined; consequently they ought not
to be so severely punished, and that government should suppress too severe
pains. This truth cannot be too often repeated, and it ought to be joined to
every circumstance when opportunity offers, seeing that the list of bloody
executions is every where augmented, and that narrow minds, which see the
atrocity only of the crime, without perceiving its cause, incessantly demand
blood for expiation. There would be but few scaffolds if none but real
criminals mounted them.




Those of the United States, See Smith's Voyage to the southern United States,
where a description of the life of the Carolinians is given. This author makes
it appear, that they drink to excess the strongest liquors, although the
climate be extremely hot. By this they abridge their lives, and appear old in
the ^^ower of youth. Th^s is one of the causes of the mortality among the
English in the East Indies; they have introduced there the use of wines and
strong liquors, and they are victims to them. The Indians make no use of these,
and live to a great age.

In q^^ting Smith, the European readers ought to be put on their guard against
English partiality, which reigns throughout the work.


where the people have gone from simple and primitive manners, where luxury
begins to reign, where slavery still exists, are daily witnesses to the ravages
caused by the excessive use of spirits made from grain. All brandies, except
those from sugar and wine, are pernicious, especially when new. They cannot be
drank without immediately disordering the body. The most trifling excess is
sufficient to cause death.


A long habit is difficult, and often impossible, to shake off, especially when
it procures enjoyments. Therefore, it is not to be expected that the Americans
will ever renounce the use of these liquors. The philosopher sighs at this;
commercial nations, which turn to profit the misfortunes and caprices of
mankind, strive to take advantage of it. France will have the advantage, Lord
Sheffield agrees that the brandies of France are preferable to those of Spain
and Portugal, of which there is nevertheless some consum^tion in the United
States.
if she can reduce the price of brandies to the level of that of rum.
Government, in order to aim at this point, has already perceived the necessity
of lowering the duties on the exportation of these spirits.

But ought it to favor, with so much complaisance, the distillation and
exportation of brandies? I do not think so; this new opinion seems to be a
paradox; it will cease to appear so, when it shall have been examined with
attention.

The distillation of brandies cause a great decay of combustibles, one great
evil in a country where combustibles daily become more rare. All the provinces
of France, those even to which nature has refused the means of transporting
their wood to others, feel the scarcity of this article. Lorrain may be quoted
as an instance. The forests of that province decay, as it is reported in the
prospectus of a pri^e upon pit-coal, proposed by the academy of Nanci -- the
^earness of wood is excessive there. The cause of this inconve^^ence is not
difficult to assign; it is the necessary consequence ^f forges, glass-houses,
salt-pit^, etc. The academy requires pit-coal to be sought for, to serve
instead of wood. A more simple means would be to destroy forges and
glass-houses, and to get iron and glass from America.


The exportation of brandy produces but little to the revenue. To encourage
this article, it has been necessary to take off the impost, which at present is
no more than five sols per hogshead, whilst wine pays a duty of at least an
hundred sols, and in the Bordelois, from that sum to twenty-eight livres.
Government has, since this work has been written, suspended the duties paid by
the wines of Bourdeaux and Languedoc. This suspension was granted upon a
remonstrance, importing that there was an ^^ormous quantity of wines at
Bourdeaux, and which the holders dared not export, that they might not be
obliged to advance the high duties. This proves, that imposts occasion a
stagnation^


Government ought to have done the reverse, to have reduced the duties on
wines, and augmented those upon brandies.

The exportation of brandies is prejudicial to the consumption of our wines,
for it is the basis of all made wines in countries where wine is not produced.
It is put into a great quantity of water* to which are added bay berries, every
where to be found. Wine brandies are indispensable in this fabrication; no
other can supply their place, because they only can give to artificial wines
the winy taste which is essential to make them drinkable.

What immense gain to strangers in this process -- and what loss to France! A
barrel of brandy which pays a trifling duty on exportation, whose transport
costs but little, on account of its contracted bulk, may be added to five or
six barrels of water, which cost nothing, and by the aid of sugared
ingredients, which give colors, may enter into competition with six barrels of
wine, that pay considerable duties on exportation, and whose exportation and
transport are very expensive.

Therefore, in distilling and exporting brandies, we work for the interest of
our rivals: we give them an easy means of doing without our wines. What folly!
What would people say of an alchymist, who, having found the philosopher's
stone, should communicate his secret to his rivals, who would make use of it to
his prejudice.

And yet this operation, so prejudicial to France, has been favored by
government. It encourages distillers; that is, it raises up enemies against the
meliorating vineyards and wines, and especially against the art of preserving
the latter. It would be much more prudent and advantageous to discourage
distilleries. In fact, the distillation of brandies is for the vineyard
proprietor a last resource, which proves his ruin. In the Orleanois, six
barrels at least of wine are necessary to make one of brandy. The w^ne of this
countr^, when it is drinkable, is sold on an average at thirty livres a barrel.
The six barrels produce one hundred and eighty livres, and reduced to brandy
they scarcely produce eighty. Thus the proprietor suffers a loss of one
hundred. Brandies sent abroad, where they diminish the sale of wine, can bear
no exportation duty. Wines, on the contrary, pay a considerable one. Let these
calculations be answered. The English themselves ought not to admit the
brandies of France, because, in filling England with artificial wines, they are
prejudicial to their wine duty. The prohibition of brandies would, under this
double aspect, be advantageous to both countries.


SECTION III. Oils, Olives, dry Fruits, etc.
These articles are so many wants with the Americans of easy fortune, and
especially those in the northern States. Our southern Provinces, which produce
such delicious fruits, cannot in this respect fear any competition. They are
also articles which have hitherto best succeeded in adventures made from
Marseilles.

Moreover, all that Europe will be able to furnish of them, will find room in
the United States; they will accompany our wines, and we can ^oin with the same
ease and certainty of sale, per^umeries, anchovies, verdigrease, etc. as well
as an hundred other little things taken by the English from Marseilles, and of
which they have created a want to the Americans.

Lord Sheffield, in his work, makes Spain, Portugal, and Italy, furnish the
United States with these commodities. I wish he had been sincere enough to give
the advantage to France. France is so generally known to sell these productions
in the States of America, that it is equally astonishing this writer should
have been ignorant of it, or silent upon the subject. This fact, by proving his
partiality, ought to put readers upon their guard against his assertions.

SECTION IV. Cloths.
People governed by a free constitution are naturally grave and deliberate.
They prefer, in every thing they use, goodness to elegance, what is solid to
that which is subject to the caprices of mode. Therefore, as long as the
independent Americans enjoy their excellent constitution, they will prefer
clothes of cloth to those of the most brilliant stuffs.

Moreover, its beauty, pliancy, strength, and duration, render it more
generally fit for this use in any climate whatsoever: cloth secures the body
from the excesses of cold as well as from those of heat. It resists rain; in a
word, it unites every convenience; and if it be the universal clothing of
people in a middling state, it offers equally to the rich, but reasonable man,
a choice proper to satisfy his taste, and to proportion his expenses to his
means.

The manufacture of cloths is in the number of those complicated manufactures
which employ throughout the year a great number of workmen by the day;
therefore it will not be suitable to the Americans, so long as that class of
men which produces these workmen shall be able to employ themselves more
usefully in the clearing of lands, and in cultivation in general.

A manufacture of woollen stuffs, proper for the clothing of the country
proprietor, his family and servants, may, without doubt, be associated into the
labors of the field; but manufactures of this kin^, although very important in
themselves, can only be applied to coarse and unfinished stuffs. The
interrupted leisure of the peasant permits him to do nothing which is
complicated. Card, spin, weave, and bleach, is all that he can do. As long as
there are lands to be cleared, the leisure which agriculture affords will be
very short, because every season is proper for this employ, except when too
great a quantity of snow stops the work. The intervals of leisure become
regularly established, when the system of cultivation is fixed, and the soil
entirely disposed thereto. Then undertakings are calculated upon their
duration; but, in general, simple work, which requires no workshop, no
considerable apparatus, is that only which agrees with agriculture.
If it be necessary for him to go beyond these, he will find a greater
advantage in selling his raw materials, or even with their first preparations,
if they be simple, and to draw from the manufactures, properly so called, the
articles of which he is in need.

We owe little gratitude to those of our speculators who immediately after the
peace dispersed our cloths in the United States. If one spark of public spirit
had animated them, they would have perceived the precious and honorable
service which they were able to render to their country in these first
adventures, by giving to the Americans a great idea of the state of our
manufactures. These people were well disposed, by the succor France had given
them, to cherish its inhabitants, to esteem their character, and receive their
productions. They were well disposed to abjure the contempt and aversion with
which the English had inspired them for their rivals and their productions, and
to give France the preference in every thing. Why has avarice, by a miserable
calculation, rendered these good dispositions of no effect? Men were willing to
gain, to gain greatly; to make what is called a good stroke, in taking
advantage of the distress of the Americans, and forcing them to take those
commodit^es which were unfit for every other market. I do not accuse any body;
but I can certify, upon the authority of the most respectable eyewitnesses,
that some of these outcast cloths fell at the end of six months wear into
shreds.

The Americans were so struck by this, that Mr. Laurens, after having received
two millions, which France lent to the United States, employed a part of that
sum to buy English cloths. Complaints were made; he answered that it was his
duty to buy better and cheaper cloths.




This dishonesty has counterbalanced the service rendered them; for the
imprudent and wretched young man, whose throat is cut by an (...) owes him no
acknowledgment. A greater evil to France has been the consequence -- her cloths
have lost their reputation in the United States. But let the Americans
undeceive themselves; let them not attribute to the nation the fault of a few
individuals; let them not have a bad opinion of our cloths, because some bad
ones have been sent to them. The same accident would have happened to English
cloths if, in a like case, there had been English merchants avaricious enough,
and so far strangers to the public good, as to send their refuse to the United
States. English merchants love, as well as others, to get money, and there are
among them those who, for the love of gain, would trample under foot every
patriotic consideration. But the public spirit of the generality of them puts,
in England more than elsewhere, a check upon the shameful enterprises of
avarice; consequently the greater part of the merchants never abandon the
national interests in their speculations, neither the honor of English
commerce, nor the reputation of their manufactures. It is thus they are become
the principal agents for furnishing every species of manufacture to the whole
world. When it happens that any of them sacrifice national reputation to views
of private interest, honest patriots generally perfer accusations against them
before a public tribunal, and then the culprit is not suffered to answer by
clandestine memoirs to public and substantial accusations; this obscure and
cowardly resource is held in too great contempt to be made use of. There
remains nothing to the culprit but silence or falsehood; in both cases he is
dishonored in the opinion of the public, which affects and marks every
individual, without respect to rank, power, or riches.


The Americans who come among us, study the nature of the intercourse which we
shall one day have with the United States; they know that our manufacturers
possess all the means which give to English cloths their reputation; that they
make them in the same manner, and that the superfines are superior to those of
England; that in general dying is better understood with us, and carried to
greater perfection: in short, that it depends but on some circumstances easy to
be got over, to make the cheapness of our workmanship assure us the preference
to the English with respect to cloths.

Lord Sheffield, in avowing the superiority of our fine cloths, and of their
cheapness, observes, that the greatest consumption of the Americans is of
common cloths, with respect to which France cannot enter into a competition
with England. And he draws from it this consequence, that the inconvenience of
dividing the demands to compose assortments, and the consideration of the small
quantity of fine cloth necessary to form them, will cause these to be ordered
in England, notwithstanding the advantage there would be in getting them from
France.

But why should we not furnish common cloths to the United States, since the
labor of our manufacturers is cheaper than that of England? It is because the
English wool is cheaper than ours. The English grow their own wool, and stand
in no need of foreign wool, except a little Spanish, indispensable to superfine
cloths. On the contrary, we import more than half of the wool we manufacture
into cloth. M. la Platiere says there are thirty-five millions of sheep kept in
Great Britain, each of which, he affirms, produces on an average at least six
pounds of wool. It is the breed of sheep which gives to England such an amazing
superiority over all other nations in her woollen manufactures. France ought to
encourage the breed of sheep and the destruction of wolves. In the time of the
monarchy the^e was an office called LOUVETE^IE, or Master of the French King's
wolf-hounds, and his associates received a trifling recompense for the head of
every wolf they killed: of whom this fact is well attested. There is a small
district, the sub-delegate of which put into his account the price of ten
thousand wolves heads. The quantity appeared extraordinary to the min^ster. The
affair w^ examined. The sub-delegate was discharged. But he who prompted him to
the act went unpunished.
M. la Platiere saw this evil, and had courage to publish it in the
Encyclopediae Methodique. Platiere was called a man of pretensions. The same
title was given to Dr. Price in London, when he predicted the loss of the
Colonies. The ministerial heads of that country laughed at the prophet, but the
event proved he was right.

SECTION V. Linens.
There are two principal species of linen-drapery, which are subdivided into a
multitude of others.

The first species contains linen properly so called; that is to say, linen
which serves to make shirts, sheets, table linen, and all the linen made use of
for every purpose of cleanliness.

These linens are made with hemp, flax, or cotton; this last article is
employed when the two former ones are scarce: it is sometimes mixed with flax.

The manner of making these linens is very simple; they are made in all parts
of Europe. If there be a country where the manufacture of linens is encouraged,
it is in Ireland, particularly since its resurrection into the political world.
Parliament has established a committee which is particularly employed about
this manufacture, and which grants very considerable succors to manufacturers.
There is one who has obtained more than thirty thousand pounds sterling from
government, and whose manufacture employs two thousand men and women, and six
hundred children.

This committee names inspectors to examine the state of manufactures, and
afterward to make reports, or give a general description of their situation,
of the number of workmen they employ, of their produce, resources, wants, etc.
When these inspectors are honest, and men of understanding, their reports are
evidences of success. Then example has a singular influence upon industry.


Still more has been done in Ireland, to encourage the commerce of linen; great
edifices have been built, and destined to receive them, as well as those who
come to offer them for sale. The most considerable market being at Dublin,
three or four times a year, linen merchants from the North, who have
bleach-yards, come to Dublin with their assortments. They find in these
edifices, places for their linens and for themselves to lodge in, all at no
expense. -- They meet English buyers or others, who go there to g^ther together
all their purchases. -- Like depositories are established in the North; they
are essentially necessary to those manufactures, the articles of which are
gathered in the country. -- Where they exist, expenses are less, and work is
better paid for.


Those countries where religious or political despotism discourages industry;
where the numerous institutions of charity, invented to divert the attention of
despair from misery, nourish idleness; these countries are the only ones
wherein this manufacture does not merit the attention of the political observer.

Every where else, the country people employ, more or less, the leisure which
their kind of life affords them to spin and weave linen. Most of the farmers
and proprietors who enjoy a little ease, or who are not afraid of letting it
appear, sow hemp or flax, and draw from their soil and the work of their hands
the linen which covers their bodies and supplies their family.

The English have added other causes to those which produce low-priced
workmanship: their astonishing industry, their observing genius, their ever
calculating mind, have invented for the spinning, etc. of cotton, and for
weaving, several machines which still surpass the cheapness to be expected from
the leisure of the inhabitants of the country.

As these machines are insensibly introduced into countries, it may be expected
that the low price of linen-drapery will be every where established.

But notwithstanding the multiplication of these machines, nations which groan
under a bad government, or are grown rusty in old and wretched habits, will
always depend, for that article of necessity, upon those which have established
bounds to their government, but none for their industry, which must constantly
increase.

It results from these facts, that the United States will always have, in
proportion to the increase of their population and culture, less recourse to
strangers for that principal kind of linen-drapery whose manufacture is so well
associated with the labors of the field. The American women are renowned for
their industry in the conduct of their housen; they spin a great deal of wool
or flax; they would lose their reputation and be despised, if their whole
family were not almost entirely clothed with the cloth and linen made in the
house -- if the whole interior of their rustic habitation did not bear evident
marks of their cleanliness and industry.


Very fine linens must be excepted: they are destined for luxury, and the
individuals employed in manufacturing them are condemned to vegetate miserably
in cities, rolling perpetually in the same circle of mechanical labors.
Manufactures are much boasted of, because children are employed therein from
their most tender age; that is to say, that men congratulate themselves upon
making early martyrs of these innocent creatures; for is it not a torment to
these poor little beings, whom nature commands us to permit to take the air and
their sports, until they are of riper years, and their strength is become
considerable -- Is it not a torment to them to be a whole day, and almost every
day of their lives, employed at the same work, in an obscure and infected
prison? Must not the weariness and vexation which they suffer, obstruct the
opening of their physical and intellectual faculties, and stupify them? Must
not there result from this a degenerate race, inclined to automatonism and
slavery? For most manufactures require no other than mechanical labors, which
a machine would perform as well as a man. It is therefore impossible that a man
condemned to this kind of employ should not become a machine; and stupidity and
servitude are joined to each other. -- These truths cannot be too often
repeated, not to disgust the Europeans with the mania of manufactures; they are
too far advanced to retract; but to hinder the Americans from ever following
the same career.
It is the unhappy fate of all those who are born in Europe without property,
and will not debase themselves by ^omestic labor.

The United States, where laborious individuals may with so much facility
become proprietors, are far from that degradation; and if they are wise, they
will have, for a long time, the happiness not to see spun or woven among them,
any of those delicate kinds of thread and fine linens, which, sought after and
bought up by the opulent, are the real productions of European misery.

The second species of linens contains what is more properly called
linen-drapery; that is to say, cloth made of thread of different colors,
whether flax, or cotton; or these two substances mixed with others.

The greater part of this drapery requires too complicated a process, too
varied an apparatus, too continued a labor, to be manufactured otherways than
in those particular establishments, situated from necessity in the
neighborhood of cities, and which have no affinity with a rural life.

The art of making well the tissue, of mixing the colors, of contrasting them,
of imaginary agreeable designs, of preparing the linen when it is finished,
etc. this art, extensive, varied and delicate, requires the greatest attention.
The most important thing is to do a great deal in it at a little expense, and
it is the point to which the English are arrived, with respect to that kind
generally known under the name of printed callico.

This will be for a long time a considerable article of commerce, between
Europe and the United States, which consumes a great deal of it; and it is an
article wherein French industry, left to its natural force, and not being
restrained by any obstacle, need not fear competition. Lord Sheffield maintains
in his work, that France has not even linen enough for her own consumption. A
commercial dictionary, printed at Lions in 1763, assures on the contrary, that
France sends a great deal abroad. If the compiler of the dictionary spoke
truth, he might be answered according to the author of Les Etudes de la Nature
-- Of what use is it to a state to clothe foreign nations, when one's own
people are quite naked? -- These two writers may be made to agree, by saying
that France, restored to her energy, would easily furnish linens to foreigners
and her own citizens, and that various interior causes have hithe^to prevented
her from doing it.
In this, as in most other articles, the nature of things is entirely in favor
of France, and success depends wholly on the will of her government.

In the year 1785 the government of France invited, by an arret, foreign
manufacturers of these linens to come and settle in France.

But this invitation is not made in terms sufficiently clear, or flattering, to
induce strangers to come and settle amongst us; especially not such as have a
little energy and elevation in their characters, and it is of these alone that
we are in need.

Among different favors granted them, there is one which entitles them to the
enjoyment of their state or profession, and of their usages; in that which
shall not be contrary to the laws of the kindom, etc.

But what signifies all the vague expressions of enjoyment, of state and
profession, liberty and usages? What state is here spoken of? Is it of the
political, civil, religious, or domestic state? Englishmen, independent
Americans, have a political state, a political liberty, that is, a right to
take part in the administration of public affairs: is this state understood? Is
the liberty of having a temple for communion, for marriage according to that
communion, understood by the liberty of usages? Why are not these usages
specified?

And above all, what signifies these words, in that which shall not be contrary
to the laws of the kingdom. If they convey a clear meaning, do they not
completely destroy the preceding favors granted? or, at least, do not they
leave a great uncertainty upon that which is or is not granted?

Why is not a language clear and without evasion made use of, especially in
treating with strangers? Instead of an equivocal jargon, dangerous in its
nature, because it produces mistrust, and may give an opening for deceit, why
not say to them in clear terms, "If you come within our states, accompanied by
your wives and children, -- if you bring your manufactures, if you establish
yourselves among us, you shall enjoy all the rights of our subjects? These
rights are, to possess property in the fullest security, and not to be deprived
of it but by the laws, tribunals, etc. If you fix your abode among us, your
children will, without obstacle, be your heirs: you shall also preserve your
religious opinions. When there shall be a certain number of you, you shall have
a temple wherein to worship, according to your own manner, the Everlasting
Father; and you shall have ministers, and hold assemblies; shall intermarry
according to your rules, etc. If France be not agreeable to you, nothing,
absolutely nothing, shall hinder you from leaving it, and carrying with you
your riches." It shall be told that all this was meant to be said by the arret:
it was necessary then to explain it clearly, and why were these obscure words
added, -- in that which shall not be contrary to the laws of the kingdom?

How should a German, an Italian, an Englishman, who should be tempted to
establish themselves in France, be acquainted with your ancient laws and
ordinances? Will they turn over your innumerable folios? Certainly they will
not, they will stay at home; you will therefore have failed in your intentions.
On the other hand, do not they know that a century ago, and ever since that
time, thousands of ordinances were, and have been made against the Calvinists,
and that these ordinances are not yet repealed? Ought not they to be afraid
that these would be brought forth against them if they gave the least offense?
They will remain at home, and once more you have missed your aim.

It is the more necessary for monarchies not to disguise under a captious form
the advantages by which they seek to entice strangers; as free states; such as
Ireland and Independent America, do not subject emigrants to any capitulation
or constraint: they offer them all the rights of citizens the moment they set
their feet on free ground: and what rights! In Ireland that of voting at
elections; in the United States, that of being elected themselves; and
consequently the most seducing right, because it is the most proper one to
maintain the dignity of a man who has dignity; the most proper to give it to
him who has it not.

When a nation perceives the necessity of enticing strangers to settle in it,
nothing ought to be spared, especially in states far advanced in civilization.

It is a means of regenerating morals, if it be possible to regenerate them,
and especially to encourage industry; for in order to exist in a strange land,
and to gain in it consideration and confidence, emigrants are forced to have
good morals, probity, and exactitude. Their example cannot but have a salutary
influence upon the nation which receives them into its bosom.

Otherwise, having opinions, habitudes, and knowledge, different from those of
that nation, they may help it to break its bad customs, to give it a greater
extent in its views, more cosmopolitism, or of that character proper for
approaching nations to each other, and for diminishing national antipathies.

When the advantages which a country acquires by strangers who fix themselves
in it are considered, it is astonishing to see governments think so little
about them, and frequently not to respect their rights: They ought, on the
contrary, to protect a stranger so much the more as he seems less supported by
the laws than a citizen; that he is unacquainted with them; that he may easily
be the victim of artifice and chicanery; that it frequently happens that he
does not understand the language; finally, that being alone, he has neither
family, friends, nor patrons.

In this situation, the stranger ought to be environed by the safeguard of a
particular administration, which should watch over his safety; but it is the
reverse of this in many states. If a stranger be suspected, few examinations
are made; he is arrested -- liberty is left to a citizen; or at least he is
treated mildly; the stranger is imprisoned: the subaltern, insolent by reason
of the indifference of his superiors, treats him with severity: for what is
there to fear from him? Is the word with them all, -- set at liberty -- will
that stranger go and make the temple of chicane ring with his complaints? He
fears, lest it may be a new forest, -- he flies, cursing that inhospitable
country.


Thus, whilst we see in those states who understand their interests better,
Frenchmen direct the greatest part of their manufactures; few strangers are
seen to come and establish themselves amongst us.

I could quote, as a proof of what I advance, known facts, quite recent; but I
will not write a book upon every article of exportation; I will confine myself
to saying that great liberty, and few regulations, I might quote, as a proof of
what I have said in the course of this work, that even the regulations which
appear favorable to industry, are prejudicial to it; the new arret passed in
favor of French linens, subjects them to a stamp duty, under the pretext of
preventing fraud. The duty appears moderate, yet the manufacturers are sensibly
injured by it; moreover it restrains them, in subjecting them to the caprices
of revenue clerks; and this does not prevent fraud; therefore, to prevent the
manufacturer from being robbed, his money is taken from him, and the robbery
still taken place; he would prefer being l^st to defend himself against thieves.
are the two best means of improving the linen manufactures in all countries,
as well as in France.

SECTION VI. Silks, Ribbons, Silk Stockings, Gold and Silver Lace, etc.
There are upwards of seventy thousand looms and frames employed in these
articles, and one half of the silk made use of is produced in the kingdom.

The other states of Europe, except Spain and Italy, are obliged to procure
from abroad the whole of the silk necessary for the manufactures which they
have established, in imitation of those of France.

If there be added to the advantage which these circumstances give to the
French, their singular aptitude for the manufacture of every article of luxury;
their incredible fecundity in varying these articles; the absolute and general
empire allowed them over the taste and mode which preside in these
manufactures; an empire so particular, as to be every where copied; no doubt
will remain, that French silks, ribbons, silk stockings, and lace, will be
preferred to all others in the United States. Yet Lord Sheffield gives for
competition with France, England and Spain. It is to be observed that England
cannot unde^take with advantage those manufactures wherein gold and silver are
introduced, nor in general those which have for their basis the use of
brilliant metals. Fire is necessary as an agent in such manufactures, and a
coal fire is prejudicial to them. The atmosphere in England is perpetually
charged with sulphurous vapors, where contact tarnishes, in a very little
time, gold and silver lace, etc. and this perhaps is the motive, which more
than manners has banished, and will for ever exclude this kind of luxury from
England; and it is not a misfortune.


It is not to be feared that they will be manufactured there; from the cares
which the insect that produces the silk requires, to the arrival of the stuff
in the warehouse where it is to be sold, almost all is workmanship; and the
workmanship of Europe must for a long time, if not for ever, be even cheaper
than that of the United States.

The consumption Our design being to dissuade the free Americans from wishing
for manufactures, we ought not to lose the present opportunity of describing to
them the abuses and inconveniences inseparable from these establishments.
There is none which has had more success in France than that of silk. Yet see
the frightful description given of it by M. Mayet, director of the manufactures
of the King of Prussia, in his Memoir on the manufactures of Lions. (Paris,
Mo^tard 1786.) He indicates as causes of the decadency of the manufactures, the
drunkenness of workmen on Sundays, the infection of their dismal lodgings,
bankruptcies which are the result of ignorance and dishonesty, the cessation of
work during court mournings, which occasions some workmen to emigrate, and
others to steal, the misconduct of revenue officers, the monopoly of silk, etc.
abuses so much the more alarming, says M. Mayet, as they are, for the most
part, the offsprings of luxury, and which are produced either by acquired
riches, or the thirst of acquiring them; it seems as if they could not but
spring up in manufactures.

Who can recommend the establishment of manufactures, on reading the following
reflections of the same author?

The concurrence of manufactures necessitates their cheapness: to have a
preference of sale, it is necessary to sell at a lower price; the wages of
workmen must therefore be moderate, and they must gain no more than will find
them in necessaries: the workman must never be suffered to enrich himself. In
becoming rich, he becomes difficult, exacting, enters into combination, imposes
laws, becomes dissipated and idle, he causes the price of workmanship to
increase, and manufactures to fail. THUS RICH STUFFS OUGHT TO BE WATERED WITH
THE TEARS OF THE WORKMAN WHO MANUFACTURES THEM.

Ought not this last phrase to disgust the free Americans for ever with the
mania of manufactures of luxury? -- Let them reflect, that to supp^rt the silk
manufactures of Lions, the same author proposes to the King of France, to
sacrifice his taste for simplicity of dress, and to wear brilliant clothes, etc.


of these articles cannot be very considerable th^re, Lord Sheffield says, that
it is not the fifth part of Indian silks, etc. but what signifies this
calculation? The country which consumes the greatest quantity of silk stuffs,
does not, pe^haps, consume the twentieth part of that which Lord Sheffield
means by Indian silks.
if America takes advantage of that opening to which nature calls her. Ribbons
excepted, the rest are proper for great cities only; where vanity being
incessantly excited, makes dress a desirable and almost necessary object. But
these great cities will, without doubt, be very rare in the United States. It
is still more certain that the consumption of silks does not, at present, form
there a considerable article; that it will augment but very slowly, and in a
manner almost insensible. The Americans ought undoubtedly to be congratulated
upon it. Their manners will be good and simple as long as they do not contract
a want of these articles; but if they do not want them for themselves, they
will have occasion for them to form branches of their smuggling commerce with
the Spaniards. Nature invites them to carry on this commerce in an advantageous
manner, both by sea and land. This commerce will be better established by land
-- The risks there will be less -- The great rivers which water those immense
countries will savor it. A maritime commerce must be protected by a naval
force, and the nature of things will hinder the Americans from having one for a
long time to come.


It is known that wretched individuals, who vegetate in South-America, masters
and slaves, all sigh after nothing but luxury, pomp and dress. Elegant and
shining stuffs of France; her silks and laces will therefore be sought after,
demanded, and bought up with avidity.

However it may be with respect to this commerce, which exists but in futurity,
and which must be preceded by other circumstances, there is at present a
certain consumption of silks, ribbons, etc. in the United States; and the
French ought to be anxious to supply them.

I will observe upon this subject, that if the French government ordered that
the regular packet-boats going from France and America should receive as much
merchandise on board as their destination would permit, little ventures of our
silks, stuffs, ribbons, gauzes, stockings, etc. would be frequently sent out,
and these articles would serve better than any other to establish uninterrupted
connexions, and which by the insight they give, and the experiments which they
afford an opportunity of making, conduct nature herself to those great
commercial intercourses to which we ought to aspire.

The facilities which packet-boats offer for the sending out of merchandi^e of
value and of little encumbrance ought not to be neglected, since, in this class
of merchandise, we have things which have a decided preference. I will return
to those packet-boats which it is important to keep up and to increase, and it
is to be wished, that no monopoly of right or fact may take possession of them,
in order to carry one branch of commerce in exclusion of others.

SECTION VII. Hats.
Although a ^^ne hat be called a beaver, it does not follow that Canada and the
United Northern States are more favorable to the fabrication of hats than
France. Hats, purely of beaver, do not wear well, and are inconvenient on
account of their weight. The finest, handsomest, and best hats, contain but
little of the fur of that animal, which we esteem at too high a price, when we
think of the loss of Canada. Wool, the furs of the hares and rabbits; the hair
of goats, which, in fact, is wool, and camels hair, are more necessary for
making of hats than the fur of beavers.

The few hats made of beaver in the United States will be sufficient for their
consumption. -- The Americans must, however, be incessantly told this great
truth, that manufactures are not proper for them except in those articles which
are immediately associated with agriculture, and which facilitate its
operations. That of hats is not of this kind.

Europe will therefore furnish hats to the Americans. And of what great
importance is this object, when the rapid increase of their population is
considered? It may be affirmed, that every nation capable of sending them out
merchandise, will send them hats; but those of France will have the preference.
This manufacture had there its origin. The French alone have carried it
elsewhere, like many other things; but it has never ceased to improve in France.

French hats are always the best fulled and dyed, and the most agreeable. When
government shall have resolved to do for wools that which it has done for
mulberry trees, the manufacture of hats will be so much the more advantageous,
as we shall be less tributary to foreigners for the articles employed therein.

SECTION VIII. Leather. Shoes, Boots, Saddles, etc.
To what cause ought the great superiority of English leather to be attributed
over ours? Why is there in this leather-work of all kinds that neatness, that
seducing appearance, which we have not yet approached? It must be repeated,
that in England men honor the profession of a tanner, and pride themselves
upon it, whilst it is the contrary in France. An English tanner, shoemaker, or
saddler, does not quit his trade when he is rich; but makes his riches serve,
in proportion as they augment, to give luster to ^is profession, to multiply
his workshops, to extend his affairs, to become important even in the article
which has furnished him the means of doing it. The leather which comes from the
tanneries whose owner is in easy circumstances, is always well prepared,
because he can advance sums of money, and give to hides the time necessary for
their progress through his tan-yard. A poor tanner is always pressed by his
wanting to take the leather out of the tan-pit, where it is necessary it should
remain a long time to acquire a good quality. In general, it is impossible with
this penury, unknown to the English, that there should be time to manufacture
or fabricate good merchandise. Those who employ the leather, acquire no
reputation in their professions but in proportion to great provisions made
before hand, which puts it in their power to furnish nothing but leather
improved by being kept. It will be asked, how the wholesale dealers manage when
they begin business? They find credit, if in their apprenticeships, which
precede their establishments, they have acquired a good reputation. We may
readily perceive, that this hope of being some day well established with great
succors, is worth all the books of morality. The engravings of Hogarth, which
represent the fate of the idle apprentice, paint, to the life, English manners.
The intention of the workman is not to become SECRETAIRE DU ROI. A petty title
of bought distinction, which, in the language of ridiculous pride, is construed
into nobility.
He marries the daughter of the good master who has brought him up, and
succeeds him in the same business which he has contributed to extend.

It is not that the French tanner, who barters his profession against a brevet
of Secretaire du Roi, or commissary of war, ought to be blamed. He reasons
well. He sees that no consideration is attached to talents and industry, and he
delays not to buy himself a title. It is therefore wrong to joke merchants and
artizans, who, for money, get themselves enregistered in a privileged class. It
is an evil to the state, but it is not the fault of those who purchase. The
fault is due to the kind of disgrace from which government has not yet
delivered the ignoble.

It ought to be observed here, how fatal the speculation which established this
order of things has been to the nation. To procure money, offices were created;
which, by ennobling, induces the ignoble to purchase them; they are disgusted
with their situation by being dishonored, and for a few millions of livres,
which this pitiful operation slowly procures, commerce is ruined by having its
capital diminished: that commerce, which, by being supported, would continually
produce millions to the state.




This credit is then supported, not only by the certainty of success, but also
by that of seeing them become a constant means of consumption.

Such is the art of the English to support and increase their commerce in every
thing, and every where. If we could put it in practice, all our commodities of
leather would soon equal the perfection of theirs, since we do not otherwise
want materials. Their being beforehand with us, ought not to discourage any
body; but it is necessary to the success of this rivality, that government
should deliver the tanners from the shackles with which they have fettered
them, Two causes have singularly contributed to ruin the tanneries in France.
The considerable duties imposed successively upon leather (suppressed
afterward in part through prudence) and essentially the severe inspection that
the COMMIS (in this case a kind of exciseman) may make every hour of the day
and night at the tanners. Nothing disgusts a man, who has some energy, more
with his profession, than this disgraceful servitude, than the fear, than the
constraint which arises from the idea of being disturbed at every moment, by
his fireside, by contemptible satellites who live on the mischief only which
they do, and whom the certainty of impunity, interest and habitude, renders
unmerciful, insolent, and frequently perjured.

Considerable processes have been seen to arise from these visits, and very
rich tanners to quit a profession which promised them nothing but torment,
anguish, loss and law suits. It will be a long time before the evil which the
farm has done to the tannaries be repaired. Interested men, who think to
console us for real evils, which we suffer, by those which they suppose among
our neighbors, say and repeat, that the same vexation of COMMIS and of customs
produces in England the same effects. This may sometimes happen; but there is a
law to punish them, without a hope of pardon, when they overleap the boundaries
prescribed to them. And these boundaries are much more contracted than ours,
which the following fact will convince us.

Two officers of the excise, having taken it into their heads to follow a man
carrying a hamper of wine to the house of a particular person, entered with him
in contempt of the law; the master of the house called some constables and
charged them with the officers: they were taken before Alderman Hamett, who
read the Act of Parliament to the culprits, and sent them to prison, for having
violated the rights of citizens.

Mercure politic 1786, p. 286.
and suppress or diminish the enormous duties with which the tanneries are
loaded. The following is a list of duties paid on leather, whether it be French
or foreign; and it must be here observed, that the leather of France is far
from supplying our wants. We get the greatest part of that which we consume
from the Spanish and Portuguese colonies, from the Levant, and from the coast
of Barbary.

Green leather, French or foreign, pays on entering the kindom by the hundred
weight livres 1 sols 5 Leather worked up or tanned, pays afterward the
following duties Leather and skins 2 s. per pound Goat skins 4 Ten sols per
pound, which gives more upon leather 1 Goat skins 2 General average 4 6 and by
the hundred weight 22 10 Custom to the general farm 2 0 Total 25 15

Leather and skins pay a duty of a third of their value.

When in 1759 a duty was imposed, the king ordained that these two sols upon
leather and skins, and the four sols upon goat skins, should be reimbursed to
the manufacturer, when he should have sent his merchandise abroad.

But administration demanded and obtained leave to reimburse two-thirds only.

Since that time ther^ has been a new impost of ten sols per pound, which makes
the duty one sol more upon leather, and two sols upon goat skins.

This new duty has completed the ruin of the tanneries.

There is another abuse, which merits to be observed. It is that the
administration receives its duties undiminished upon leather half rotten,
scraped or tanned.

After these facts, it may be comprehended, that the tanners in France are
reduced to a small number, and are in general miserable.

An important note relative to the article of leather.

The note on the duties paid on leather, is true with respect (...) the reality
of the duties; but we have been convinced, since the note was printed, that a
middle price cannot be settled between hides and calf and goat skins. There are
at least two hundred of the two first for one of the last. We have been equally
convinced, that the hundred weight of skins bought at thirty-seven livres, and
sold after the tanning at sixty-four livres sixteen sols, produces to the
tanner a profit of no more than five livres five sols.

This easily explains how the tanners have been ruined.

TRANSLATOR.


SECTION IX. Glass Houses.
English glass ware is brought to great perfection, and England makes it a
great object of exportation. America ought to prefer English glass to ours,
because we ourselves prefer it to that of our own manufactory, common bottles
excepted, which we make better, and which are of a finer glass than that of the
English. But although this opinion may hurt the interest of those who have such
establishments, it is necessary to say, that France, far from encouraging them,
ought to wish for their destruction. This kind of manufacture destroys
combustibles, of which the rapid progress is alarming, when it is compared to
the slowness with which they are produced.

The English, seated upon their coal mines, are little uneasy about the
voracity of furnaces wherein glass is melted; but although it be said that we
have the same advantage, it is still permitted to doubt of it. And moreover it
is not sufficient to have immense coal mines under foot, it is necessary to be
able to work them at a little expense. Glass manufactories, placed within the
reach of mines, should not be too far distant from the sea, for the transports
becoming expensive, would give to the English an advantage over us, who, from
every part of their island, can easily get to the sea. Finally, our own
consumption of glass-ware, much greater than that of the English, may already
be too considerable, if it be compared with the means to which the ever growing
scarcity of combustibles reduces us. The scarcity of wood, which begins to be
manifest, becomes so much the more alarming, as combustibles which have been
attempted to be substituted for it have not succeeded, and that luxury and
population naturally inclined to increase, especially with commerce, the
consumption of combustibles will be doubled.


To be fully convinced that we ought not to put glass-ware into the list of
articles of exportation to America, it is only necessary to reflect upon the
situation of the United States. They have immense forests to clear,
consequently it is highly proper that they should establish glass
manufactories, and increase them as much as possible. The labor employed to
destroy the woods for the clearing of lands, at the same time that it disposes
the land to culture, will serve for the production of a very extensive object
of manufacture, therefore the utility of this destruction is double to the
Americans. This is what is done in New Jersey for the forges. It is impossible,
says the author of the CULTIVATEUR AMERICAIN, to travel across this province
without meeting with some little iron forges. If a proprietor has a great marsh
full of wood, and that he wishes to clear it, he begins by making a dyke at one
extremity to stop the water of the rivulets which run across it. He fixes in
this water the wheels necessary for the manufacture of iron, etc. And in a
small number of years the traveller, who had seen in passing by nothing but a
vast pond full of trees thrown down, and had heard the noise of hammers and
^nvils, sees well enclosed fields, vast meadows, etc.
It cannot be doubted, that this consideration will strike them, that they will
one day conceive the project of furnishing Europe with glass-ware, of adding
this article to those which they can exchange for such European productions as
are improper for little states to cultivate or manufacture within themselves.
It can be no more doubted, that France will gain greatly by seeing her glass
manufactories destroyed by those of the Americans, who will sell us glass-ware
in exchange for our wines, cloths, printed linens, silks, etc. In the mean
time, it would undoubtedly be a salutary measure, to open the kingdom to the
importation of foreign glass.

SECTION X. Iron and Steel.
The consumption of these two articles is immense in the United States; the
single article of nails amounts to considerable sums. This will not appear
extraordinary, when it is remembered, that all the houses, all the enclosures
of the Ameicans, are of wood, that they build a great number of ships, which
require frequent reparations.

It is the same with respect to saws, shovels, hoes, and in general all the
instruments necessary to agriculture and navigation.

The Americans are singularly curious in the choice of the first necessity.
They have therein the general taste of the English; they will have that only
which is good. On comparing those which they make themselves with the tools
made in France, it must be acknowledged that we are far from that perfection at
which they are arrived in them: this perfection is owing to the ease of the
labourer, and to the consideration attached to agriculture. Imperfection is a
necessary consequence of restraint and dishonor.

The Americans have attempted to make iron and steel. Many manufactories have
been set up at New York, in New Jersey, and in Pennsylvania: it is true that
these manufactures are few in number, but they will necessarily increase for
the reasons which I shall hereafter give.

England heretofore exported a considerable quantity of iron and steel: To
favor the exportation of these articles, the parliament had forbidden all the
establishment of mills and other machines in the United States for making of
steel. See 25 Geo. II chapter 29. sect. 10.

It may be judged by this circumstance to what a point the mother country, or
rather the monopolizers, can carry avariciousness; since the Americans were
forbidden to enjoy those advantages which nature had thrown before them.
Monopoly respects nothing. When these attempts are considered, ought we to be
surprised at the eternal misunderstanding between colonies and the mother
country, a misunderstanding which finishes either by the ruin of the former, or
their separation from the latter?


her mines not having yet furnished iron proper for certain instruments* she
had recourse to those of Russia, and especially to those of Sweden, whose iron
and steel are most esteemed. She did no more with regard to America than stand
between her and others, and this circuit augmented the expenses of the
colonist, without procuring him any benefit. This will exist no longer, because
the Americans are about to trade directly with the Swedes and Russians.

Lord Sheffield calculates, that one year with another England imported 50,000
tons of foreign iron, of which from 15 to 20,000 was afterward exported to the
colonies either in its natural state or worked up.

The profit to the mother country was, according to his Lordship, 12,000,000
lives, or thereabouts.

During the war, and since the peace, some exports of this kind have been made
from France to the United States; but they did not succeed. Accustomed,
according to the principles of monopolizers, who have hitherto directed our
foreign commerce, to furnish our colonies with brittle utensils, and otherwise
very imperfect, our merchants were willing to treat the independent Americans
like their slaves in their islands; The Chamber of Commerce of Marseilles, in
an instruction very well drawn up, addressed in 1784 to the merchants, had
recommended them to act contrarily -- "Recollect," said it, that you have not
ignorant or enslaved colonists to treat with, but a free people; and,
consequently, rapidly tending to perfection. If you wish to succeed, act with
fidelity, upon extended and liberal views, etc. etc.

I have not read this instruction. A man of letters, who has resided a long
time in the country, has given me the ideas of it, which I have related. We
must not be surprised to find in the merchants of Marseilles intelligence ON
COMMERCE SO RARE ANY WHERE ELSE. Less shackled, commerce must offer more solid
ideas.

The same energy is found in an excellent Memorial on the Franchises of this
city, lately published against the general farm, and of which we shall have
occasion to speak.


and the Americans refused our merchandise. They said, that we did not even
know how to make nails; and, in strict truth, they were right in their
assertion. They preferred the iron and steel of England, although the duties on
exportation increased their dearness.

It is probable enough that the English legislature will suppress them
according to the advice of Lord Sheffield; and this, joined to the benefit of
the economy procured by the discovery of Lord Dundonald, and of Messrs. Watts
and Boulton, for heating furnaces at half the common expense, will undoubtedly
produce a reduction in the price of iron.

This diminution is one of the causes which must necessarily hinder us from
attempting a rivality in this particular with the English; but there is
another, which is still more decisive.

In fact, the observations made heretofore upon the necessity of destroying our
glass manufactories, apply naturally to that considerable branch ^f iron-work,
of which the workmanship is the least expense, and which requires a great
quantity of combustible materials. The United States are obliged to destroy
their immense forests: France ought, on the contrary, to think of re-producing
hers: therefore, the founderies and forges will offer in America the advantage
of turning to profit woods, which, without these manufactures, it would be
equally necessary to burn: whilst in France, wood and charcoal becoming every
day more scarce and dear, renders these establishments more expensive. Now, as
the abundance in which iron mines are every where found, It is now proved, that
there are many of them in America. Mines of tin, and of very good copper, have
also been discovered there.
makes the price of iron depend almost entirely on that of combustibles
necessary to melt it, it is evident that the United States have over us, and
even over the English, a considerable advantage.

Moreover, forges are a part of the equipage necessary to country labor; for,
if it were necessary to seek at a distance the utensils of agriculture* the
progress of clearing of lands would soon be stopped -- the productions would
not pay the expenses. These would still be increased by the repeated necessity
of substituting new utensils to those which there would be no means of
repairing. As soon as the people have mines of iron -- as soon as they are led
by the nature of things, and by necessity, to establish founderies and forges,
it is not a long time before they renounce all foreign aid in the articles of
iron; Perhaps nails must be excepted. Their price will be a long time in Europe
lower than in America. If, a^ Mr. Smith asserts in his Treatise on the Wealth
of Nations, a young man of twenty years of age can make 2,400 (...) a (...),
let it be judged to what a degree of cheapness low priced workmanship ought to
reduce them; therefore, wherever workmanship i^ dear, nails cannot be made. Yet
we read in the American Gazettes, that there has been established in one of the
State^ a manufacture of nails. Will this succeed! -- Futurity will show us.
therefore, the Americans are, as I have observed* already provided with these
establishments: and as Engli^^ industry has established and directed them, they
are all at that degree of perfection which we have not yet attained.

Let it be remarked, that these manufactures being joined to a life of
agriculture, and carried on in the midst of it for its uses, can have none of
the pernicious influences which ought to be feared in those complicated
manufactures which are obliged to be concentrated in the enclosures of cities,
whose destructive employ exhausts the natural strength of men, by corrupting
their morals.

Therefore, to resume this article -- far from encouraging the exportation of
iron manufactured in France, we ought, for our own interest, to encourage the
importation of foreign iron, because manufactures of this kind take away
combustibles from things more pressingly wanted, and from less destructive
manufactures, where workmanship produces a greater profit.

This, however, is not the case with every article of curiosity of iron, steel,
or copper work, wherein the workmanship exceeds the other expenses. They belong
to that weak organization which the Americans ought not to envy. But it must
not be dissimulated, that a competition with the English will, on this head, be
difficult to maintain: their great ability and address in the distribution of
work and different processes, the invention of which has not been constrained
by any error Those false views cannot be too much deplored -- those narrow
ideas -- those fears of ignorance, which snatch from the hands of industry the
happy inventions which are proper to enrich a whole nation! Who can calculate
the riches that England owes to the sole application of the coining-mill, or
engine and dye, whose free use has been left to all the manufactures which it
was capable of improving in accelerating their effects? How many proceedings
more ingenious and expeditious has this machine produced? Happily for England,
there have no^ been found in her bosom those able ministers, who, seeing that
this machine is of use in making money, have drawn from it the profound
consequence that every one would make false money if the free use of it were
permitted: as if it was possible to make false money for a long time; as if the
mo^e general use of the machine did not awaken the public, and even private
interest, and render them more attentive to abuses which might be committed; as
if its use would not produce much more benefit to the revenue, than it could
deprive it of by the false coinage of money, which can never be either
extensive or dangerous. -- When, therefore, will those who hold the reins of
empire calculate like statesmen?

It is true that at present artists are permitted to have mills, etc. by
conforming themselves to certain formalities, -- always formalities? No other
are required in England than those of being able to pay the expense of the
machine, -- and has England perceived from it any pernicious effects? Has false
money overturned public order, impoverished the nation, or diminished her
revenues?

With what difficulty has the invention of the coining-mill made its way into
France? It is due to an industrious Frenchman of the fifteenth century, named
Briois. Persecuted for this discovery, he was obliged to take refuge in
England; the English received him favorably, and put his invention into
execution. Another Frenchman of the name of Warin, of the last century, wished
to procure the advantages of it to his countrymen; he experienced a like absurd
persecution; and without the support of the Chancellor Sequier, he would have
failed in his attempt. -- I do not allow myself to speak of the perfection to
which M. Droz pretends to have brought the coining mill at present; but by the
vexations he suffers, it may be judged that he has in fact simplified that
machine, that he has rendered fewer hands necessary, and the coinage of money
more perfect and expeditious; two advantages very precious in this art, as the
expenses of it cannot be too much reduced, and the exactitude and perfection of
the stamp of money are the surest means of disconcerting coiners. What fatal
genius is it therefore which pursues industry in France? That of companies, of
corporations, of privileges. As soon as a happy discovery attacks their
profits, they employ even the basest means to defend them; intrigue, falsehood,
seduction, are all legitimate with the people which compose those associations,
whilst the man of genius, standing alone for the most part, and who attaches
too great a value to his time to prostitute it to these maneuvers, gene^ally
experiences the most humiliating disgusts.


or false view of the administration of England, give them over us a
considerable advantage; yet it is not impossible (...) us to balance it, for
this distribution of work and proceedings are neither secrets nor superior to
French industry. Let government adopt and follow the trivial maxim -- 'Who will
have the end will find the means.' Let it in consequence not interdict any of
the means, and this industry will not have to envy the success of our rivals.

SECTION XI. Jewelry, Gold and Silversmiths' Articles, Clock-work, etc.
If the inhabitants of the United States concentrate their labors and pleasure
in a life of husbandry; if they continue to seek happiness, not in pomp, but in
nature herself, and in a simplicity of manners; in that simplicity which
naturally produces ease, and the population and prosperity of states; they will
not seek after, but disdain plate and jewels, to which we attach so great a
price. They will reserve precious metals for mints and commerce. It is not,
however, to be presumed, that this order of things should long subsist in great
cities, and especially in frequented ports; European taste and wants prevail in
America, Plate is used in the Southern States -- magnificence is seen there; on
which account, travelers having but little philosophy, speak highly of them:
-- but observe what is attached to this luxury, -- slavery reigns in the South,
and there are many poor. -- There are none in the Northern States, -- no plate
is there used.
and F^ench industry ought to be anxious to supply their consumption, seeing
that the French can undersell the English in these articles.

But it is probable that the plated ware (copper plated with silver) invented
in England will take place in the United States of that of silver plate, as
painted paper has replaced there much more expensive hanging; this new sort of
plate has for use all the advantages of the other, and costs a great deal less.

How comes it that the English are already so advanced in this branch of
industry, whilst there exists in France but one or two manufactures where
copper is plated on one side only, and silvered over on the other? How have the
English already carried this invention to so high a degree of perfection? How
have they made of it a matter of extensive commerce, whilst we are reduced to
the two manufactures wherein no progress is seen, and where the inferiority of
the workmanship disgusts those who would otherwise find it to their advantage
to make use of this kind of plate?

These manufactures have an exclusive privilege; there is the word --
Government fearing lest false money might be made in them, has forbidden even
the plating on both sides.

Reasoning would here be superfluous: it is sufficient to open the eyes to see
which of the two administrations has best served its country; whether it be
that of England, by not cramping industry, and in not giving way to fears,
whose illusion is shown by the most trifling observation, or ours, in following
a contrary plan. Again, was it apprehended, that counterfeit crowns would be
made by millions* as a sacrifice is made to this fear of an industry which
would certainly produce many millions of them?

Thus, when we consider all these articles, wherein trifling considerations
shall be our industry, and condemn to mediocrity our means of prosperity; when
we thence turn our attention toward the different spirit which governs
England, it is astonishing that industry still exists in France, and that the
nation does not fall into sloth, and remain there. Let us give thanks unto
nature, who has richly gifted us, and her guardian strength has hitherto
demonstrated itself superior to the malignant influence of the false science of
our administrators. A curious and more useful work would be, a faithful and
more rational history of all the errors into which the rage of regulating and
prohibiting has thrown administration. It is very probable that the result
would b^, that French commerce has always prosp^^ed, in proportion to the
inexecution of regulations; that in causing them (...) be rigorously executed,
foreign commerce has been ^avoured and enriched. The spirit of invention and
industry which our prohibitory regimen has developed on foreign nations, was
never perhaps suspected; neither the innumerable quantity of workshops which
are there constructed, in proportion to the multiplication of exclusive
privileges in France. Thus, that of the India Company has made Switzerland like
the East Indies, for the manufacture of muslins, and plain and painted linens.


Shall we remain behind the English and Swiss in clock-work? The Americans must
have watches; this admirable invention carries with it such a degree of utility
for even the poor classes of society, that it ought not to be considered as a
simple acquisition of luxury, especially in the United States, where the
distance of habitations one from another makes the necessity of it most fully
perceived.

But watches must be made good and at a cheap rate; these two conditions will
assure them a prodigious sale wherever civilization exists; time is there a
precious property, and its price renders the instrument necessary which divides
it: they will be made good and at a cheap rate, when able artists are
consulted. Paris has produced some very distinguished ones; they honored their
art because they had great sense and ingenuity, and had been well instructed;
but their pupils, for the most part strangers, and not having the same means of
gaining consideration, were afraid of our injudicious manner of despising the
hands which work at mechanical employments, and quitted the country. We have at
present a Swiss, M. Brequet, whose talents are equal, if not superior, to those
of the most celebrated English watch-makers. Happily for us, his character, his
elevated views, his obliging zeal, command respect in some measure, and place
him above prejudices. Let government consult him, and he will soon indicate
certain means whereby France may have a national manufacture of clock and
watch-work.

We are informed that he has presented to the Ministry a profound memorial upon
this subject.




This species of manufacture will always belong to great cities, where the
excess of population keeps workmanship at a low price, where the difficulty of
subsisting enslaves that crowd of weak and indolent beings which are under the
law of the rich undertaker. The United States are far from suffering this
difficulty of subsistence, this excess of population; they are therefore far
from these manufactures.

SECTION XII. Different Sorts of Paper, stained Paper, etc.
This useful production from old rags, thrown off by people at ease, and
gathered with care by the indigent, is daily improved in France. The
manufactory of M. M. Johannot d'Aunonay, produces finer paper than any other
manufactory in Europe, and the proof is simple. -- There is more demand from
Russia, England, and Holland, for this paper than the manufacturer can furnish;
this sca^ceness of paper d'Aunonay explains, for why, our shopkeepers still get
paper from Holland. To diminish this scarcity, these good citizens have
generously offered to communicate their process to all the manufacturers of
paper in the nation, and even to form schools, wherein the art of papermaking
may be taught. Many persons have profited by these offers; the states o^
Burgundy have lately sent three pupil^ -- These manufactu^ers have proved that
it was not more expensive to m^ke good and excel^^nt paper than that of a
middling quality. M. Le Clear, who has a great paper manufactory at Essone,
^ound with concern that his manufactory cost him a great deal, and produced bad
paper only: he communicated his regret to M. Johannot; the latter went to
Essone and produced good paper with common paste. This was certainly a great
service done to France, and a good example given to the sordid avarice of
monopolizers, who, not being able to do and embrace every thing, hinder others
from doing it. May these generous p^triots receive that honor which they
deserve: may their example be followed every where and by all. This will be to
them a more flattering eulogium, a more brilliant and lasting recompense than
c^rdons and ribbons, unworthy of true merit, because they are frequently the
price of intrigue, and the ornament of mediocrity. The pleasure of well-doing,
and the s^ffrages of honest men, are pure and unchangeable recompenses. -- The
artist who doe^ not know how to confine himself to these, will never do any
thing which is great.
The English themselves buy our paper for printing, and our writing paper will
not be long unequal to theirs, if it does not surpass it. Rags are more scarce,
and ccnsequently dearer, in England than in France, and they are artic^es of
illicit commerce between the two countries. There are very severe laws against
this commerce; but it is, and ever will be, carried on, as long as there shall
be any thing to be gained by it.


But if there be an object of commerce for which Europeans need not fear a
reciprocal competition; if there be an article which offers to all European
manufactures a certain and lucrative employ, it is that of paper: the
consumption will always be equal at least to the production, and its numerous
uses insure a still greater consumption, in proportion as population, commerce,
and knowledge, shall increase.

Every nation ought therefore to observe without jealousy, that each country
strives to have within itself manufactures of this kind.

The Americans cannot however enjoy this advantage for a long time to come:
besides the dearness of workmanship, their population cannot furnish them old
rags in quantities sufficient to establish paper mills whose productions would
be equal to the consumption of the inhabitants.

Will their population ever furnish them with this sufficiency? This is a
question difficult to resolve. In fact, in proportion to the knowledge which
nations may acquire, and to the liberty of the press, which may be enjoyed in
America, a prodigious quantity of paper must be consumed there; but can the
population of this country produce rags in the same proportion? It cannot
reasonably be hoped that it will. It is therefore probable that the American
markets will not for a long time be provided with any other than European
paper, and that this will find a place there. Rags are excessively dear in
America: but the time is arriving when, by an increase of population, they will
become plenty. In Pennsylvania they already make very good paper.


But since the use of paper is so advantageous to men, since it is so varied,
it behooves every nation to look upon foreign consumption as a supplement only,
as an open port in the case of a suspension of interior commerce. It behooves
every nation to keep paper at a moderate price within itself, and to attain
this end, means must be thought of to increase materials which serve to compose
this article, and to pursue the happy attempts already made to do it. In the
moment of writing this note, I have before me very interesting essays on
vegetables, and on the bark of several trees, to transform them into pape^;
these essays are due to the researches of M. Delille, to whose care the
manufacture of Montargi^ is indebted for a great part of its reputation. He has
far surpassed that ^cheffe^, whom our men of erudition have quoted with so much
emphasis. On seeing the books which M. Delille has printed, on paper made from
a species of mallows, and the bark of the linden tree; and on perceiving the
advantages which might be reaped from this invention, at least in packing and
stained paper, of which so great a consumption is made; we wish that this
invention may be more and more known, received and adopted, as a means of
remedying the want of rags and the dearness of paper, which ought to have more
influence than is commonly believed on the progress of knowledge.

It is almost impossible that this invention should not soon become general,
and it is greatly the interest of the free Americans to naturalize it among
them.

Strong lies of lime and pot-ash, and the intelligent use of vitriolic acid,
are great means of reducing hemp and flax to that kind of substance extremely
attenuated, soft and brittle, which is proper for making of paper. It might be
contrived by these means to supply the want of rags by old cordage. These would
even serve to make good paper, since being reduced to tow, it may easily be
bleached. The attenuation to be feared for linen is not so for the material of
which paper is made.


These researches are so much the more essential, so much the more urgent, as
the happy invention of colored paper for hanging is of a nature always to
cause a greater consumption of paper; and this manner of hanging with paper
will subsist for a long time, because it gives a neat and agreeable appearance
to apartments.

No other is known in the United States; it is there universal; almost all the
houses are neat and decent.

SECTION XIII. Printing.
The liberty of the press being a fundamental principle of the American
constitution, there can be no doubt that printing will increase there. But it
must be observed, that extensive printing requires workmen at a little expense;
that is to say, men without property, talents, or conduct; whom great cities
produce and employ in work which requires neither intelligence nor emulation;
and it has already been observed, that the United States, unless the rage of
great cities takes possession of them, will contain but few of these wretched
beings.

Printing will not, therefore, it may be presumed, be extended among the free
Americans, at least beyond that which is necessary for the public prints.
Gazettes are singularly multiplied in the United States. They will become still
more so with an increase of population, and this is an advantage, for they are
what that excellent patriot, Dr. Jebb, called them, "Sentinels which watch over
public liberty and the preservation of truth."
Their constant and considerable sale, permitting a greater expense in
workmanship, consequently draws about the press many individuals, because they
have, in a good salary, a view of the means of becoming proprietors or traders.
However, considerable works are sometimes printed in the United States, and of
which the edition is carefully enough corrected. I have seen, for instance, the
Memoirs, in quarto, of the Academies of Boston and Philadelphia, of the last
year, which proves at the same time that free America is not so totally without
typographical establishments, and that the inhabitants are not all such idiots
as a prejudiced German dreamed they were.


The furnishing of books of science and amusement must therefore make a
considerable object of importation into the United States. It is for France to
appropriate to herself this commerce, and to encourage the impression of
English books. Our workmanship being cheaper than that of England, and the
English making use of our paper, our binding being less expensive, why should
not all the books in which the Americans stand in need of be printed in France?

It will be said that we do not enjoy the liberty of the press, -- be it so: --
But it is only with respect to our books; Under the reign of Louis XIV. whose
ambition extended to every thing, it was seriously attempted to make the French
language universal. This absurd pretension was ridiculously supported by the
tyranny exercised upon books and authors. This tyranny could not but produce
bad ones, and consequently disgust strangers. Happily some judicious men had
the courage to make ^^crifices, and to get their works printed abroad. It is
these prohibited books which have enriched the French language and increased
the reputation of French literature. What authors are heard quoted in every
country? Rousseau, Voltaire, Helve^i^^, Montesquieu, etc. that is to say, men
who have been patriotic enough to violate the tyrant's laws of the press.
for undoubtedly the administration does not pretend to extend its coercive
principles to books written in foreign languages; it would not attain its end,
seeing that it does not do it with respect to French books; So that even more
than half of the libraries in France are composed of French books, printed
abroad, for which there are two causes -- the cheapness and goodness of the
books; the OCTAVO leaf printed, is commonly sold in Switzerland to the public
at nine derniers or a sol, and it costs three or four sols in France.
Prohibited books are sold at Paris at the same price as books permitted, which
proves the dearness of French printing. -- For to the original price of
prohibited books, there must be added the expenses of carriage, risks of entry,
the commissions of different agents, etc. With respect to the goodness of the
works, the best, as I have already observed, are printed abroad: Helvetius has
said with reason, "ON NE DIT LA VERITE, QUE DANS LES LIVRES, PROHIBES, ON MEANT
DANS LES AUTRES."
and by this impolitical rigor France would be deprived of a lucrative article
of commerce, certain, and of continual increase.

The Dutch, so active and vigilant in seizing the rising branches of commerce,
have for a long time speculated on books in the United States: many bibles and
books of prayer, for the use of the Americans, are printed in Holland. Lord
Sheffield is obliged to acknowledge, that printing in Holland is by far more
cheap than that of England, and of course must have the preference. They will
some day extend this commerce to classical books. A man of letters, who had
remarked the dearness of English books in France, and how difficult it was to
get them from England, thought of getting the best English works reprinted in
Paris. This was a speculation really patriotic -- he abandoned it after having
got a few volumes reprinted, probably because the consumption in France was
not great enough, and that of England was not open to him. He might at present
revive it; independent America presents a great opening to him.


SECTION XIV. Salt.
This article, so necessary to the Americans, and so abundant in France, must
not be forgotten in the enumeration of commodities to be imported into America.
The Americans will for a long time be obliged to get it from Europe; not that
they have no salt marshes upon the coasts, and salt pits in the interior parts
of the country; but these marshes, these salt pits, must have hands to work
them; and hands are better employed in the United States. Salt, during the late
war, was very dear in America; it was worth twenty times its ordinary price --
The deprivation of this article was very sensibly felt by the Americans, who
consume much salted provision, and give a great quantity of salt to their
cattle.
The salt exported from Europe will for this reason be a long time cheaper than
that of America: -- moreover, its freight will cost but little, as vessels from
Europe may be ballasted with it. The Americans ought to give the preference to
French salt; it is less sharp, less corrosive, and possesses a better quality
for salting, than any other European salt.

The three millions of inhabitants which the United States contain at present,
are supposed to consume sixty million pound weight of salt, without reckoning
that which is given to cattle, and that employed in salting provisions; of
which great quantity is consumed in the United States, and with which they will
carry on a commerce more and more considerable: I will not at present go into a
calculation of the immense riches which the furnishing of made salt to foreign
population, continually increasing, would produce to France. I ought to guard
against exaggerations: but it may not be improper to observe, that a
considerable part of the States of the North will never make any salt. It is
therefore possible that French salt may have a preference among them, as being
cheaper and more within their reach: the population of these states will be
more rapid than that of the others, and the commerce more varied and extensive.

SECTION XV. General Considerations on the Catalogue of French Importations
into the United States.
I will extend no further the list of articles which French commerce may
furnish to the United States: there are many others which I omit, because the
bounds of my work will not permit me to examine any more than the principal
ones.

If faith be given to the calculations of Lord Sheffield, and of other
political writers, it appears that the amount of the expectations of
Great Britain into free America was, upon an average, calculated upon three
years, taken before 1773, near three millions sterling, upwards of seventy-two
millions of livres tournois. How much will it increase in following the
progression of population, and clearing of lands? It is especially for this
future state of things that France ought to prepare her means.

Let it be also observed, that this commerce employed seven or eight hundred
vessels, and about ten thousand sailors.

Ought France to let slip so important a commerce, and a means so natural of
supporting her marine? For without commerce there can be no marine. Has not
she, in the richness of her soil, in a variety of her manufactures, in the low
price of her workmanship, in the industry and taste of her inhabitants, in her
population, and in the situation of her ports, an infinity of means sufficient
to establish in America a solid and extensive commerce? It must be continually
repeated, that if it be wished that peace should reign upon the earth, the
words preference and competition, which are frequently signals of discord, must
be used with circumspection. Why should there be any jealousy with respect to
this commerce? In the course of time independent America will offer a field
wide enough for all the European manufactures.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Articles which Independent America may furnish in return
for Importations from France.
ARRIVED at this part of my work, I cannot do better than consign to it the
letter addressed by M. de Calonne to Mr. Jefferson, Minister Plenipotentiary
from the United States of America.

LETTER Addressed to M. Jefferson, Minister Plenipotentiary from the United
States of America to the Court of France.
Fontainbleau, 22 d October, 1786. SIR,
The King's intention being to favor as much as possible the commerce of the
United States, I have the honor to communicate to you some dispositions made
for that purpose.

By a letter of the 9th of January, 1784, to the Marquis de la Fayette, I
informed him, that instead of two free ports, promised by the treaty to the
United States, the king had determined to grant them four, which has been
effected; and I promised him to consider the customs and duties on importation
and exportation which shackle commerce; observing to him, that these objects
required considerable application; they have not yet been completed. By another
letter I informed the Marquis, that his Majesty had suppressed the duties on
the exportation of brandy, a measure which he hoped would be useful to American
commerce; I assured him also, that the duties of the king and admiralty,
payable by an American vessel on its arrival in a port of France, should be
diminished; and afterward that such of them as remained, should be reduced to
a single duty, to be regulated according to the number of masts or draught of
water, and not according to the two uncertain estimation of gauging. This
reduction requires an exact knowledge of all the duties received in the ports,
and as they are of various species, the state which I ordered to be draw a up
of them has not yet been given in.

You know, Sir, the king has charged a particular committee, to examine our
commercial connexions with the United States, and that the Marquis de la
Fayette has laid before it a project analogous to the ideas contained in your
letter to the Count de Vergennes: but you must perceive, how imprudent it would
be to hazard, by a change of system, the produce of a branch of revenue, which
amounts to twenty-eight millions of livres, without falling upon any object of
the first necessity. After an ample discussion of every thing which might at
present favor the importation of tobacco from America to France, it has been
decreed, not that the agreement made with Mr. Morris should be departed from,
but that, after the expiration of it, no other of the same import should be
made; and that in the mean time the Farmers General should be obliged to
purchase annually about fifteen thousand hogsheads of American tobacco, coming
directly from the United States in French or American ships, at the same prices
as stipulated in the contract made with Mr. Morris.

You will recollect, Sir, that whilst the demands which had been made for wh^le
oil were under consideration, the Marquis de la Fayette made a private
arrangement with M. Sangrain, permitting him to receive as much of that article
as should amount to eight hundred thousand livres tournois, and that I had
granted passports to exempt this first quantity from all duties whatsoever. M.
Sangrain made afterward an agreement with the merchants of Boston for whale
oil, to the amount of four hundred thousand livres a year, for six years, for
which his Majesty has promised the same favors as enjoyed by the Hanse towns.

This manner having lately been examined under a more general point of view,
the administration, to which the committee has made its report comformable to
the request of the Marquis de la Fayette, and to your opinion, relative to the
entire abolition of all duties on oils, has discovered that it cannot consent
to it for the present, on account of engagements entered into with other
powers. All that could be done was to insure, for ten years, whale oil,
spermaceti, and every thing comprehended under these denominations, coming from
the United States in French or American ships, the same favors and moderation
of duties as are enjoyed by the Hanse towns.

His Majesty hopes commercial connexions between the United States and France
will become extensive enough to engage him to continue the effect of this
provisionary decision; and as it has been observed in the committee, that a
considerable duty was paid upon the making of the most favored whale oils, and
even upon national ones, his Majesty consents to abolish this duty with respect
to the former, and upon spermaceti coming immediately from the United States in
French and American ships; so that spermaceti and these oils will have to pay,
for ten years to come, no more than seven livres ten sols, and the ten sols per
pound, for all manner of duty; the last augmentation of ten sols per pound to
cease in 1790.

It has been determined to gain particular information upon the consumption in
France of rice from Carolina, and that encouragement should be given to the
exportation of that article.

Upon the representations which have been made, touching the considerable
duties paid on the entry of pot ash and pearl ash, as well as relative to those
of beaver skins and fur, and raw hides, his Majesty has suppressed all the
duties on pot ash -- on the fur and skins of beavers -- and on hides, coming
raw from the United States, on board American or French vessels. He will also
consider of proper encouragements to be given to every article of the skin and
fur trade.

His Majesty has equally consented to free from all duties, masts and yards of
every species, red cedar, green oak, in short, all timber proper for the
construction of vessels, coming from the United States in French or American
ships.

The committee having also represented, that there was a duty of five per cent.
upon the purchase of vessels built abroad, and that this duty was prejudicial
to the sale of American vessels, his Majesty has taken this into his
consideration, and exempted the purchase of all ships, which shall be proved to
have been constructed in the United States, from every duty of the kind.

Trees, small shrubs, and seeds of trees also, pay high duties, which his
Majesty has agreed to abolish upon such as shall be sent from the United States
to France, on board French or American ships.

It having been represented, that the state of Virginia had ordered arms for
its militia to be made in France, it has been determined, that the prohibitions
which have hitherto hindered the exportation of arms and gunpowder, as well as
the duties required in cases of particular permissi^^^, should be abolished,
and that whenever the United States shall wish to have from France, arms,
fusils, and gunpowder, they shall have full liberty to do it, provided it be in
French or American ships, and that those articles shall be subject to a very
moderate duty only, solely for the purpose of calculating the exportations.

Finally, his Majesty has received in the same favorable manner the demand
made to the committee to suppress the considerable duties hitherto paid on
books and paper of every kind. His Majesty suppresses all duties on articles of
this kind, destined to the United States, and put into French or American
vessels.

It is with pleasure, Sir, I announce to you these dispositions of his Majesty,
which are a new proof to you of his desire to unite closely the commerce of the
two nations, and of the favorable attention he will always give to
propositions which shall be made to him in the name of the United States of
America.

I have the honor to be, with a sincere attachment,

Sir, Your very humble and very obedient servant, (Signed) DE CALONNE.
Your nation, Sir, will undoubtedly see, with pleasure, the facilities the king
has just given to the exportation of the wines of Bourdeaux, Guienne, and
Touraine, and the suppressions of duties granted to that effect, by different
Arrets of Council, with which the Marquis de la Fayette will be able to
acquaint you.



EXPORTS OF AMERICA.
I WILL treat but of a few of the articles which America furnishes, on account
of the attention which they all merit.

SECTION I. Tobacco.
Of all the articles which France may procure from the United States, tobacco
is the most important one to the inhabitants of the two countries. If it cannot
be classed with our most urgent necessities, it follows them so close, that
excepting cases wherein the use of it excites disgust, the deprivation of it
ordinarily discovers the last degree of misery.

We must not be surprised at its general use. -- The man greedy of sensations
has found one lively enough in tobacco: it is perhaps the only one which he can
enjoy at pleasure without injuring his health, diminishing his strength, or
suspending his work or meditations. Tobacco awakens the mind agreeably, and
observers who have remarked the innocent pleasure, the species of instantaneous
comfort, which a little tobacco procures to a poor man, borne down by the
weight of affliction, have always wished that so simple an enjoyment should be
improved and become less and less expensive; and they cannot reflect without
horror on the crime of that fiscal industry, which, hardened by monopoly to
increase its profits, adulterates snuff so much, as to make it pernicious to
health.

The consumption of tobacco must therefore become more and more considerable,
and the commerce of this leaf, already very important, cannot be decreased but
by the diminution of its cultivation; which the policy of America will never
permit.

The cultivation of tobacco is by no means proper for the European States,
which have acquired population enough to apply another kind of cultivation to
all their good lands.

It is (...) the Alsaciens cultivate a little tobacco, and they boast of it;
but they would make a greater profit if they cultivated their lands for
provisions. This experience is decisive for France, where none of those rich
lands exist which are so well known in America. It is therefore the interest of
France to get tobacco from abroad, but it must be paid for by her manufactures:
she may enjoy this advantage more fully with free America than with any other
country. I will not repeat the reasons of it; I will observe only, that the
free Americans, having an immense extent of lands which cannot be cleared but
in the course of several centuries, must have, for a long time to come, tobacco
to send to Europe, since this production pays with usury the expenses of
clearing.

It is true, that the cultivation of tobacco in America must be farther and
farther from the sea, and that the expenses of carriage may become considerable.

But different considerations place this epoch at a distance; first, in
cultivating tobacco in none but absolute new lands, the cultivation is much
less expensive, and the produce considerably more abundant; consequently it
will cost much less in a new soil than when the soil requires more labor and
manure. Secondly, America, intersected in every direction by rivers and lakes,
has infinite resources for rendering water carriage every where easy, and
consequently never expensive. It is easy to multiply canals, and consequently
communications: no part of the world is so much favored in this respect as
America. Thirdly, The banks of the Ohio and the Mississippi offer immense lands
to be cleared: the Ohio falls into the Mississippi, which falls in its turn
into the sea: these two rivers are almost every where navigable, and the lands
near them produce already excellent tobacco, and will continue to do so for a
long time. It is impossible to view, without indignation, that narrow policy of
Spain, which would shut out the Americans from all communication with the sea
by the Mississippi. How is it, that she cannot perceive, that her mercantile
interest invites her, on the contrary, to favor this navigation, by erecting
store houses upon the banks of this river near to its mouth? Is she ignorant of
the advantages of depositories? And with respect to her political interest, is
there a greater one for her in these countries, than to make herself
immediately necessary to American establishments, within the reach of the Ohio?
Must she wait till they adopt other means? What will be gained by creating
discontent among a free people? If it be wished that these people should not
become powerful, they must be destroyed; and if this barbarity belongs not to
the eighteenth century, it is necessary to make friends of them. Expedients in
politics are childish and vain.
Fourthly, If the price of tobacco should be increased, France would not feel
the difference, if the free Americans, preferring the culture, continued to
want European manufactures, and gave the preference to those of France.
According to this system, the exchange of merchandise, manufactured in France
for the productions of the soil of America, may be still made with advantage,
if even these productions were sold in France below the first cost in America.
We have long seen the French commerce of the Levant produce great profits,
although the merchandise brought in return was sold at a less price in France
than it cost at the place where it was produced. This circumstance still exists.

Therefore the speculation, most to the interest of France, is to take as much
tobacco as she can consume from the Americans, and pay for it with her
manufactures. The tobacco leaf, of which the farmers general had the entire
monopoly, or exclusive sale, produced to the king a clear nett revenue,
annually, of between twenty-eight and twenty-nine millions of livres.


SECTION II. Fisheries, Whale Oil, etc. Spermaceti Candles.
Among the articles of subsistence which nature has liberally given to men,
fish is one of the most abundant, the most easy to be procured, and the most
proper to preserve their health and strength. Such is the powerful influence on
population, of the abundance of articles of subsistence, and especially that of
fish, that it is principally to this article of life that the empire of China
owes the incredible number of its inhabitants.
By what fatal privilege is this food confined in France almost to the rich?
Why does not fish abound in all places, where this tribute of the sea can be
received in its original state, and without being charged with the expenses of
two long a carriage? Since it is so well known, that it is advantageous to a
state, and to every class of citizens, to procure an abundance, and a variety
of eatables, let them come from where they will, or of whatever nature they be,
provided they be cheap (...) wholesome: why is this political rule departed
from, with respect to fish, to that aliment which nature produces every where
with such fecundity? Whatever may be the motives which may repel it by an
overcharge of duties, they can proceed from nothing but a culpable ignorance.

Fully convinced of the benefit which must result to mankind from an abundance
of provisions, and from the facility of producing this abundanc^, in receiving
from each nation the superfluity which nature has given it, I shall take great
care not to copy the narrow system of Lord Sheffield with respect to fisheries.
-- His Lordship agrees, that the independent Americans have, for the great
fishery, natural advantages, with which it is impossible for the Europeans to
contend.

In fact, the Americans are near that part of the Atlantic where great fish
abound; therefore their fishery must be l^ss expensive to them. If accidents
happen, they are soon repaired; all their operations are more prompt and sure;
having a better knowledge of these seas, they are exposed to less risks than
Europeans: finally, their proximity to the fisheries assures them provisions
more fresh, Such is the advantage of the Americans, that they furnish
provisions to the sedentary fisheries of the English. According to Colonel
Champion, the provisions of Europe are more dear, and not so good; the
difference in favor of the Americans i^ in the proportion of four to seven;
and it cannot be otherwise.
and puts it in their power to renew them more frequently; consequently their
fishermen enjoy more constant health, and have older officers and sailors among
them: these are inestimable advantages to America.

The English have very few of these advantages; the French scarcely any. -- But
ought we to conclude with Lord Sheffield, from this order of things, that
American fish should be charged with duties, in order to support the national
fishery, against this competition? the nature of things dictates to France more
wise and advantageous means. -- Fish is nourishing -- whatever is nourishing is
prolifi^: if the Americans fish at less expense than the French, so much the
better for the last; fish will be more abundant, and at a lower pr^ce in
France. Let France open her ports; the Americans will bring fish into them, and
will pay themselves with either the productions of the soil of France, or of
her industry; and the population to which this abundance and cheapness are
favorable, will increase the productions of French industry.

Moreover, it is necessary, either to renounce exterior commence, or to consent
that there shall be something to exchange on both sides. To wish to establish
and encourage a commerce with a foreign nation, and not to leave it to the care
of furnishing that which it collects with the greatest facility, is a manifest
contradiction. The enlightened policy of commerce is not to invade all the
branches of it, but to do nothing but that which can be done better and cheaper
than any other. Therefore, since the Americans have fish on their coasts, since
they are in the neighborhood of Newfoundland, leave to their industry that
branch which nature has given to them in preference; let us not dispute it with
them: first, because it would be in vain to do it, and in the next place,
because France may reap, without fishing, more advantageously the fruit of the
American fisheries.

"But," says Lord Sheffield, sailors must be found for the navy; and the
fisheries are the nurseries for them; therefore the fisheries must be
supported; and no fish consumed but that which we take ourselves; on which
account premiums are necessary.

There is no doubt but sailors are formed in the fisheries, but it is not in
throwing nets or hooks, in curing or preparing fish, that this is done; it is
by a frequent and long exercise on board vessels in laborious maneuvers, in
living, so to speak, among rocks, and in seas, which the vicinity or nearness
of opposite coasts makes continually dangerous: now this exercise of vigilance,
agility, and intelligence, is performed by the sailor in coasting and fishing
on the coasts of his own country. Let coasting be frequent, and let not this
fishery be discouraged in France, and it will not be necessary, in order to
form sailors, to send them so far to take fish, which they cannot bring to
Europe without great expense: by which the consumption is consequently limited,
and which deprives us of the inestimable advantage of receiving in abundance,
that which the independent Americans can take ^t much less expense.

Without doubt the exercise of the fisheries of the North forms intrepid
sailors; and this painful life must be consented to. But when nature has placed
men in a climate where they have but a few steps to make to the interior of the
country, The French fish but a part of the year; most of the fishermen are day
laborers, employed on land, which they leave in the month of February, and
return to it in July.
to find an occupation exempt from dangers and less fatiguing, when they can
get their bread upon land, under a clear and calm sky, if he reasons, how will
he be engaged to trust his life to boards, and to brave icy seas, to expose
himself during the finest months in the year to perpetual storms, which assail
these fishing banks, so frequently stained, by means of the most fatal errors,
with European blood?

It will be answered, by premiums, England gives considerable premiums to her
fishermen. -- But the inconveniences and abuses of the first premiums render
them of no effect. These abuses are chiefly as follows: The fishing vessel must
go to a certain port; the equipage must pass in review before the Officers of
the Customs; the ship must complete her cargo, or remain three months at sea to
do it: -- so that if in the first week she procured nine-tenths of it, she
would be obliged to keep the sea for the other tenth. The ship can take no
instruments but those proper for the fishery, to which the premium is applied;
the cargo cannot be discharged but in a certain port; there are general
formalities to be observed with respect to the salt which she carries out and
brings home; the owners are exposed to vexations from Custom-house Officers, to
law suits which they are obliged to carry on in courts of justice, far from
their residence. -- Judge if a poor fisherman can expose himself to these
inconveniences; this is what has caused fisheries to decline, especially those
of Scotland. -- It is what has given so much ascendancy to the Dutch, who have
no premiums. It is that which has rendered premiums useless. Other Governments
adopt this method of giving premiums: the same difficulties are attached to
them, and yet people are astonished that things go not on better.
by privileges, and by prohibitions or overcharges of duties, which are
equivalent to prohibitions on foreign industry.

But it must not be forgotten, that articles of subsistence are here in
question, that those forced means make them dearer, that their consumption is
then limited, and their effect restrained; that in forcing nature in this
manner, is doing it at the expense of population, for by this barbarous
regimen, men are destroyed instead of being produced, whilst permission to
bring into seaports the fish of those who have nothing better to do than to
take it, would infallibly increase population.

Moreover, to whom are these premiums and all other favors, with which it is
wished to combat the nature of things, distributed? Does the individual of whom
it is intended to make a sailor enjoy any advantage from them? Let not men be
deceived in this; they are the prey of the navigator, who goes out of his
closet but to walk about, and who directs his steps sometimes toward the sea
side. He begins by taking his own share, and be persuaded that the wages which
he offers to those whom he employs to conduct his perilous enterprise are
parsimoniously calculated; therefore the end is not attained.

If there be an absolute want of sailors who have passed their noviciate about
the banks of Newfoundland, and in the North seas, there is a more simple and
sure means, less expensive, and what is more important, one which is exempt
from destructive consequences, to form them. Choose from honest families young,
robust and intelligent men; insure to them a personal recompense, if, after a
certain number of voyages on board fishing vessels, they bring certificates of
good behavior, and of experience acquired by practice. Oblige them to go on
board vessels belonging to nations or cities, to which these difficult
fisheries are a necessary resource. It is there they will acquire real
knowledge. These, added afterward to sailors exercised in the coasting and in
the fisheries on their own coasts, will form for the navy experienced sailors.

Whale oil belongs to the fisheries: it is another great article of commerce
with the United States. All oil of this denomination is not produced by whales
only; great quantities of it is drawn from seals, and other species of fish.

The use of this oil is much restrained in France: By statements which deserve
some faith it appears, that in 1784, the importation into France of whale oil,
and that of other fish taken by the French, was 1,610,619 lb. Foreign oil,
2,748,099 lb. Portugal furnished almost half of the last.
that of the white of the whale, and of which such fine candles are made, is
little known there. The use of oil will become more general.

Lord Sheffield is of opinion, that sound policy makes its necessary that the
English should prohibit, or at least discourage by duties, American oil. It was
with this idea that the government of England imposed a duty of four hundred
and fifty livres tournois per ton on oils imported by the independent
Americans, to favor the oils of Canada and Nova Scotia.

This rigor should make this production, which has been hitherto proscribed,
received in France. The introduction of it is so much the more necessary, as
the French whale fishery is ruined. Bayon, formerly celebrated for this
fishery, has abandoned it; Dunkirk, which continues to fit out vessels,
furnishes but little of this oil, at a very high price.

Whether the French go to the North, or toward Brasil, they will labor under
a disadvantage: -- Without asylum in case of misfortune, their navigation is
always longer and more expensive than that of other nations which carry on a
whale fishery. It is therefore more to the advantage of France to receive
American oil, and to pay for it with her wines and manufactures.

The French government soon perceived the necessity of receiving the oils of
America. Had not this been done, an emigration of American fishermen into
Canada and Nova Scotia would have been the consequence. This was near
happening, some time after the peace, in the island of Nantucket. In despair on
seeing the ports of England shut, and not knowing where to sell their oils,
which alone supplied all their wants, the inhabitants had resolved to emigrate
to Nova Scotia, when, on the moment of departure, they received a letter from
the Marquis de la Fayette, whom they justly looked upon as their patron and
father. He persuaded them to be patient until the French government should
suppress or reduce the duties on oils, which have been reduced for a limited
time; but during this time the independent Americans are to enjoy, with respect
to their oils, all the advantages given to the most favored nation; Such are
the duties on whale oil, etc. paid in France, according to the tarifs of 1664,
and 1667; whale bone, cut and prepared by the French, thirty sols per cwt.
fins, three livres per cwt. a barrel of oil of five hundred pounds weight,
three livres. Whale bone from foreign fisheries pays, in the first instance,
nineteen livres, in the second, thirty livres, and twelve livres in the third.
The Hanse Towns pay nine livres in the first instance, and seven livres ten
sols in the third. -- It is the last duty which the American oils now pay.
and this favor, joined to all their other advantages, cannot fail to give
them a great superiority in this branch of commerce, as beneficial to France as
to them.

The white of the whale must be added, and the candles made with this
substance: they are known by the name of spermaceti candles, and serve instead
of very fine bougies or wax candles. The American Colonies exported of them,
according to Lord Sheffield, to the amount of five hundred thousand livres
tournois, in the years 1768, 1769, and 1770, calculating these candles at
thirty-two sols a pound. It is probable, that these would be better made in
France.

SECTION III. Corn, Flour, etc.
Foreign corn and flour enter France on paying a duty too inconsiderable to
make any sensible increase in their price. The principles laid down in the
preceding article, with respect to articles of subsistence, must be adopted for
the commodities of corn and flour.

The corn merchant, the most useful of all merchants (whatever the vulgar, who,
from a want of information, confounds a dealer in corn with a monopolizer, may
think of him,) fears arbitrary exceptions, sudden prohibitions, and unexpected
strokes of authority. This state of uncertainty prevents the solid
establishment of the true system of liberty, whence result innumerable
inconveniences, which no other system would bring on provided it were fixed,
and that it afforded a certain basis of calculation.

But how could a legislation for corn be formed which should not be one of
liberty, and which should nevertheless afford a like basis? This is impossible*
seeking, first of all, the particular rules for every case, when these are of a
nature not to be foreseen, is seeking for a chimera.

Not to fall into contradiction it is necessary to choose between arbitrary
power and liberty -- But that which is arbitrary presents nothing but a
perspective which is naturally discouraging. No property is safe under this
system; when it exists, the merchant and the cultivator are obliged to hazard
their property in a lottery, of which the chicaneries cannot be calculated; for
it is necessary to foresee the false informations, errors, and maneuvers, of
an interest different from their own, and even from that of the public, the
attempts of power, etc. and if all these considerations ought to enter into the
elements of their calculations, how can they found hopes on such a variable
basis?

Liberty consists, on the contrary, in the choice which every one may make of
that which is most agreeable to him, according to the circumstances of the
moment. This is a general rule; it is applicable to every case, and the hope of
gain is always accompanied by the decisive certainty that an individual will be
master of all his industry, and of combining his speculations according to
circumstances, which human power cannot govern.

From this demonstrated truth, that in every state of circumstances, the first
thing needful to the commerce of grain is a fixed rule, results the necessity
of embracing the system of liberty, and of protecting it in its fullest extent,
without opposing any restrictive condition. The English sometimes prohibit
importation or exportation. -- But it must be observed, that the English
previously fix the price of corn, which determines prohibitions. This is
therefore a fixed law, and which, consequently deranges not speculators like an
arbitrary law.


Governments should be determined by the necessity alone of this fixed rule, if
the system of liberty was not even demonstrated to be the best in every
respect. But this system is moreover the most certain preservative against the
alternatives of ruinous abundance and scarcity still more ruinous, which are
both calamities, wherever imposts are considerable.

Lord Sheffield observes, that Europe, not being constantly under the necessity
of recurring to American corn, the United States cannot put corn and flour into
the class of productions, which found an essential and durable commerce. We
have no simple expression in France for 'staple commodities;' words by which
the English term those sorts of productions of soil or industry, so naturalized
as to form an essential part of national riches, and of which the commerce is
favored by great establishments, such as public buildings, depositories, and
places or markets, destined to these productions. These are called the STAPLE,
whence the expression 'staple commodities' was naturally formed.

We have not, like the English, the happy liberty of making words: their
language becomes more rich, their elocution rapid, and we lose ourselves in
long circumlocutions, to describe a thing of which we want the name; an
inconvenience more pernicious to instruction than is believed. This remark is
not at present ill timed: it is to those who conduct affairs, who live among
them, whose vocation it is to treat thereon, to create words which explain them
clearly and properly.


Lord Sheffield is mistaken. It is a truth, which every man of observation is
acquainted with, that not a year comes forward without showing that some one or
more nations in Europe are in want of corn. This want of grain therefore being
occasionally extended to all Europe, France ought to be anxious to become the
magazine of it, since England was so formerly. Therefore it would be
advantageous to construct in the free ports opened to the United States
commodious depositories to receive and preserve American corn. By this means
corn would be always ready to be transported to the place where the best price
was to be had for it. These free ports being depositories where articles
necessary to the United States would be collected, the commerce of corn would
thereby acquire a continuation, advantageous to the two nations: --
advantageous to America, because the certainty of a place of deposit, safe and
little expensive, would cause grain to be sent more frequently; advantageous to
France, because, besides the continual possession of an important commodity,
and which would guarantee it from every maneuver of interior monopoly, these
depositories would furnish the means of a coasting trade, almost continual,
from the north of France to the farthest part of the Mediterranean.

France does not grow all the corn she consumes; This is a fact, though
contrary to the common opinion. Another fact, which proves the necessity of
admitting corn at a low rate, such as the corn of America, is, that
three-fourthe of the inhabitants of the province of Beauce, which produces such
fine corn, eat black bread and no other, and of which they have not even
enough. What must this scarcity be in other provinces where no corn is grown?
she is obliged to get it from the north, from Sicily, and the coasts of
Africa: that of the United States ought to be more proper for her, for two
reasons: First, it must be cheaper, being the produce of a cultivating people.
Secondly, the people have more various and general wants of fresh provisions
than the southern countries of Europe. The American may receive wines, fine
oils, and fruits of France, in exchange for his corn. The Neopolitan, the
Sicilian, and the African, cannot be paid in the same manner.

Finally, there is another consideration favorable to the importation of
American corn: it may easily arrive at Honfleur; I quote Honfleur, because this
port, from various circumstances, useless to mention here, is destined by
nature to become the depository of a great commerce, and that especially of the
United States with France. The project of making it a free port has been under
consideration; and it is to the greatest interest of France that this project
should be carried into execution.
there it may be stored up, and undergo all the processes necessary to its
preservation; processes which are become very simple and little expensive.
These consist in nothing but placing magazines in the open air, opened to dry
winds, and constructed in such a manner as to be entirely removed. This
operation, performed once a fortnight, in proper weather, needs only to be
repeated a certain number of times; after which the corn may be left in a heap,
without fear of its heating. Experiments of this kind have been carefully made.
The method of preserving corn used at Geneva may be quoted: The government has
established one of its greatest revenues in the sale of corn to the people, and
its interest has, consequently, led it to improve the art of preserving this
commodity. Besides, in depositories destined wholly to the corn dealers, the
same corn never remains long enough to render its preservation difficult. There
is some reason to believe that the salt air of the sea is favorable for it.
These establishments would keep up a considerable quantity of foreign corn
within the reach of the capital, a greater advantage than may be imagined.

There are still other motives which ought to engage the French to encourage
the importation of American corn. They have need of it for the vast magazines
which the land and sea forces, and frequently scarcity, oblige them to keep
stored.

What should hinder government from forming magazines of American corn in the
French sugar islands, which tempests, conflagrations, and other unforeseen
accidents, expose so frequently to famine, because contracted victualling is
carried on by monopolizers, who send but little in order to sell dear?

SECTION IV. Masts, Yards, and other Timber for the Navy.
France, like other European states which have a royal navy and fleets of
merchant ships to keep in repair, imports timber from Livonia and Russia. This
general magazine begins to be exhausted; the quality of its masts is not so
good as formerly. This commerce is, moreover, attended with the disadvantage to
France of requiring considerable remittances of money, without reckoning the
inconveniences of a dangerous navigation, frequently interrupted by ice; also
the competition of several nations, which their proximity and many other
circumstances naturalize, so to speak, in the ports and seas of the North;
advantages which the French cannot have.

These considerations ought to determine France to turn her attention to the
United States, to procure from them the timber necessary for her navy, and mast
timber especially. There is but one objection to this, and it arises from
prejudice. It is pretended in France, that the quality of American timber is
very much inferior to that of the Baltic. Some people go so far as to maintain
that it is improper for the construction of vessels. I have reason to believe
that this judgment is not only hasty, but dictated either by ignorance, or the
partiality of persons interested in the Baltic timber.

It is not in the laws of nature, that immense countries, whose aspects are as
varied as those of Europe can be, and in whose soil there are the same
diversities, should produce no timber but of a quality inferior to that of the
timber of Europe.

Better directed inquiries, and a more attentive examination, will soon destroy
this prejudice against the quality of American timber; a prejudice so much the
more disagreeable, as it would deprive the commerce between France and the
United States of an article important to the two nations.

If France will inform herself seriously of this matter, let her consult even
the enemies of America; let her consult Lord Sheffield, so moderate in his
eulogiums, when it is necessary to give them to the independent Americans. His
Lordship says expressly, that the negociators of the treaty of peace, who have
ceded the territory of Penobscot, to the east of Casco-bay, belonging to
Great Britain, deserve the severest censure; as this country produces, without
contradiction, the best timber. The coast, adds his Lordship, is covered with
timber proper for navigation and other uses, and in quantities sufficient to
the wants of Great Britain for centuries to come. The white pine, known in
England by the name of the Weymouth Pine, or the Pine of New England, abounds
in this territory; it is incontestably the best for masts, and grows there to a
prodigious height.

This is confirmed to us by men who have traveled and resided in the United
States. These men assure us, that the States produce all kinds of timber of
which we are in need, and that the white pine of the Connecticut, Penobscot,
and Ken^ebeck rivers is, at least, equal in quality to that of the north of
Europe. The ship-builders of Philadelphia esteem it so much, that they begin to
make use of it for side planks above the surface of the water.

Green oak, of which there are such fine forests in Georgia, unites the most
precious qualiti^^^ it may be procured from St. Mary's, of a more considerable
scantling than that which comes from the Levant and the island of Corsica; it
is compact, the worms never attack it, and its duration is unequalled. The
green oak of Carolina is the hardest timber known; -- the vessels built with it
are of a very long duration.

SECTION V. Skins and Furs.
In this trade Lord Sheffield looks upon the United States as dangerous rivals
to Canada; and it is not without reason that his Lordship is of this opinion.

The proximity of the great establishments which the independent Americans form
at present at Pitsburgh, and in many other places of their possessions beyond
the mountains, must insensibly give them great advantages in this commerce, and
make them partake with Canada a large share of the profits.

In fact, the regions situated between the waters of the lake Ontario, and
those of the Mississippi, intersected by the numerous rivers which fall into
the South and North-West of Lake Erie, of the Michigan, and of the Superior, as
far as the Ouisco^sing, A great river which falls into the Mississippi, at
seven hundred leagues from the sea.
and even to the lac des bois; the great undertakings in which the Virginians
are at present employed, to improve the navigation of the Potowmack, to the
foot of the Allegheny; the probability of another communication with the
ultramontane waters, by means of the western branches of the Susquehannah;
without omitting the facility with which the inhabitants of the state of
New York went to Niagara before the war, in going up the Hudson's river from
their capital to Albany, beyond that of the Mohawks, crossing the little lake
of Oneida, and by means of an easy carriage going down the river of Oswego, in
the mouth of which the Ontario seems an excellent harbor; all these reasons,
and many others which relate not only to geography, but to climate, proximity,
etc. must in a few years put the Americans in possession of the greatest part
of the fur trade.

These advantages will be still more certain, when the English shall have
evacuated the forts of Niagara, A very important one, which commands the space
of the thirteen leagues which separates the lakes Erie and Ontario.
the great establishment of the straight, A city founded by the French, on the
height of St. Claire, which carries the waters of the lakes Michigan and Huron
into the Erie.
and that of the Michillimakinack. A fort and establishment at the point, in
the island of this name, which commands the passage of the falls of St. Mary,
through which the waters of the upper lake fall into those of the Huron.


The annual sales in London of furs from Canada, produced in 1782, four
millions seven hundred thousand livres tournois, something more in 1783, and in
1784 they amounted to upwards of five millions. All these furs are paid for
with English manufactures, and the fourth part is prepared in England, by which
their value is doubled. Now, this rich commerce, carried on by way of Quebec,
will certainly fall as soon as the forts and the countries which they command
shall be restored to the Americans. It is from this consideration that the
restitution of these forts is withheld, to the period of which the English look
forward with pain.

SECTION VI. Rice, Indigo, Flax-seed.
It is not possible to speak of American rice without thinking of the
pernicious inconveniences which its cultivation produces. The wretched slaves
who cultivate it, obliged to be half the year in water, are exposed to
scrophulous disorders and a premature death. It is said, that this
consideration prevents the states wherein rice is produced, from abolishing
slavery. Free men would not devote themselves willingly to this destructive
labor. Rice is cultivated in Piedmont and in Italy, by people who have no
habitations, and are known by the name of Banditti, the fruit of the bad
political constitutions of that part of Europe. When these Banditti have
finished their work, the Sbirres conduct them to the frontiers, for fear of the
disorders to which their inaction and misery might incline them.


Were this even true, and that in the system of liberty means could not be
found to reconcile this culture to the health of the laborers, a sufficient
motive could not be drawn from it to condemn to death, or to cruel diseases, a
part of our fellow creatures, born free, equal us, They are of a different
color from that of the Europeans; but does the quality of man depend on
color? Are not the negroes organized as we are? Have not they like us, every
thing which belongs to the production of the species, to the formation of
ideas, and to their developement? If their black color ought to have any moral
effect, to have any influence over their fate, or to determine our conduct
toward them, it should be that of inducing us to leave them where they are,
and not to force them away from their country; not to punish them by the most
barbarous treatment on account of their color; not to drag them into a foreign
land, to condemn them there to the vile and painful life of animals. Do they
come and offer themselves voluntarily as slaves? Do they ask to leave those
torrid zones, wherein nature seems to have circumscribed them by their color,
as she has done by us in more temperate ones by our white complexions? Their
wants being few, keep them in ignorance; we add every thing capable of changing
it into imbecility, and we argue upon this degradation, of which we are the
culpable authors, to tranquilize ourselves on the just reproaches which nature
makes us! Can we boast therefore of our knowledge, as long as it remains an
accomplice in these horrors? See on this subject, 'l'examen critique des
Voyages,' de M. de Chastelux.
and with an equal right to live. Were the culture of this commodity even
absolutely necessary, this necessity would give us no right over the lives of
negroes; or it would be the effect of a state of war; for servitude was never a
right.

There is a species of dry rice no way dangerous to cultivate. Moreover, the
example of the Chinese and the Indians, among whom the culture of rice makes
not such ravages, ought to make us hope, that in imitating them life and health
would be restored to men of which we have never had a right to deprive them.

After having considered this production as a man should consider it, I must
now consider it as a merchant ought to do.

The French government has not yet taken a determined resolution relative to
the introduction of American rice. It is a wholesome and simple article of
subsistence, proper to supply the place of principal commodities. It cannot be
too often repeated, that the multiplication of articles of subsistence ought to
be encouraged; it would render life less painful to the people, increase
population, and consequently natural riches.

If France wishes to have a great and solid commerce with the United States,
she ought to admit all the productions of the United States.

The Americans exported annually, during the years 1768, 1769, and 1770, to
Great Britain and the south of Europe, a hundred and fifteen thousand barrels
of rice, worth six millions and a half of livres tournois. The exportation from
Charleston, from December 1784, to December 1785, amounted to 67,713 barrels.
It is the most considerable article of exportation after tobacco, wheat, and
flour. It deserves therefore that France should think of it for her commerce,
and endeavor to bring it into her ports, to be distributed there to other
European markets.

Indigo.
The same thing may be said of the indigo of the Carolinas and Georgia; it
makes a part of the important productions of the United States, and is consumed
in Europe; -- it is therefore necessary to open for its reception all the
French ports, and afterward to give it easy communications. The English
received of it annually, during the years 1768, 1769, and 1770, to the amount
of three millions of livres tournois. The exportation of dye-stuff, made in
1785, from Charleston, amounted to 500,920 pound weight.
It was principally consumed in England, Ireland, and the north of Europe, by
reason of its low price. The indigo of St. Domingo is much dearer.

The indigo of Carolina and Georgia has acquired a much better quality since
the first quantities of it arrived in England; but I have not learned that it
is to be compared with the indigo of Domingo. Travelers say, that Carolina
produces indigo almost as good as that of the French islands.

There are kinds of dying to which low priced indigo is proper; and, for this
reason, certain dyers use that of the Carolinas and Georgia. In these cases it
will always have the preference. Therefore American indigo should be admitted
as long as there is a consumption for it, for the Americans will continue to
cultivate it; and since this cultivation cannot be prevented, the most
advantageous thing is to strive to become agents in the general commerce of
America.

Flax-Seed.
North America sent to England and Ireland, during the years 1768, 1769, and
1770, flax-seed to the amount of two millions and a half of livres tournois; it
was all consumed in Great Britain. The advantage of paying for this seed with
Irish linens, gave it the preference to that of Flanders and the Baltic.
Flax-seed from these countries is, moreover, very dear.

It is the business of those French merchants, who may be interested in the
commerce with the United States, to consider what advantages they may derive
from this commerce. If the culture of flax becomes extensive in France, foreign
seed ought to be preferred for two reasons: -- the quality of the production is
improved by it, and there is more advantage in spinning flax in peopled and
industrious countries, than in letting it ripen to gather seed. It appears,
that flax-seed comes not in abundance, but from countries where there are not
hands sufficient to spin, or give the first preparation, even to the flax they
produce: it is then proper to cultivate it for its seed, which becomes a
considerable article of commerce: as long as this state of things subsists, it
must also be proper for peopled countries to get flax-seed from abroad.

Flanders seems to be an exception; but the exportation of flax is there
prohibited, for the purpose of encouraging spinning, etc. in this case
Flanders, being a country very proper for the cultivation of flax, may leave to
many cultivators of this plant no other resource than the commerce of the seed.
It is pro^bable, that if the flax could be sent from Flanders* after the first
preparation for spinning, nobody would think of gathering the seed.

SECTION VII. Naval Stores, such as Pitch, Tar, and Turpentine.
Before the emancipation of America, England received considerable supplies of
these articles from America, particularly from Carolina and the South. The
quantities of these articles amounted annually, during the years 1768, 1769,
and 1770, to twenty-seven thousand seven hundred barrels of pitch; eighty-two
thousand four hundred barrels of tar; and twenty-eight thousand one hundred of
turpentine: the whole amounting, in the port of exportation, to one million two
hundred and twenty-eight thousand livres tournois.

These stores were very valuable to the English, as well for their commerce as
for their proper consumption. Two considerable manufactures, established at
Hull, were supported by them; tar was there conver^ed into pitch, considerable
quantities of it were exported to the south, where it was received in
competition with that from the north of Europe. Turpentine, converted in these
manufactures into oil or spirit, furnished a considerable object of commerce.
England consumes a great deal of it in the preparation of colors, varnishes,
etc.

The American revolution has not made the English lose sight of these stores:
the want they have of them makes it imprudent to trust wholly to the
exportation of these articles from Russia and Sweden, where the English have
the Dutch for competitor^* Moreover, the navigation of America, less dangerou^
than that of the Baltic, is not, like the last, limited to a certain time of
the year; it is consequently more frequent and less expensive; so that these
stores will come for a long time from America at a lower price than from the
north. American tar is as good a^ that of Europe, thicker and more proper for
making pitch; it is preferred for sheep, even at a higher price. American
turpentine is inferior to none but that of France.

An English merchant has taught the Russians how to furnish as good turpentine
as that from any other nation: this production will be in great abundance
there, by the numerous and immense forests of firs in the neighborhood of
Archangel, where their crops are deposited.

The state of things shows to France what value she ought to attach to the
naval stores which may be furnished from America. The quantities of them
exported from Charleston become more and more considerable. In 1782, -- 2041
barrels of pitch, tar, and turpentine, were exported from Charleston. In 1783,
-- 14697 barrels. I know not how many barrels the exportation of 1784 amounted
to; but that of 1785 consisted of 17,000. The same increase is observed in
other articles. The most considerable is rice, afterward indigo; -- the other
articles are, tobacco, deer-skins, timber, wheat, butter, wax, and leather.
This exportation amounts to near four hundred ^housand pounds sterling.
The sandy soil near the sea, in North Carolina and the south of Virginia,
produces a great quantity of firs, from which tar and turpentine are extracted;
this is done without much trouble, and the facility of selling and preparing
the trees is a great encouragement.

SECTION VIII. Timber and Wood, for Carpenters and Coopers work; such as
Staves, Cask-heads, Planks, Boards, etc.
France, as well as England, ought to be, for their own interests, engaged to
favor the importation of these articles, of which the United States can
furnish such great quantities.

Timber fails in France, and will become more and more scarce; population
destroys it: -- yet timber must be found for houses, mills, etc. -- hogsheads
must be made for sugars; casks and barrels for wine, brandy, etc. These
articles of timber are principally furnished from the North to the ports of
France -- but they become dear, their quality diminishes, and the Americans
have the advantage in the carriage. It is necessary to give our readers an idea
of the price of some of these articles: an American very conversant in them has
furnished us with the necessary particulars.

White oak planks, of two inches and a half thick, sawed by the hand, were sold
in 1785, at fifteen plastres, or two hundred and sixty livres ten sole
tournois, the thousand feet.

Ordinary planks of fine white pine, an inc^ thich, fourteen or fifteen feet
long, and from a foot to fourteen inches wide, were sold at the same time at
seven plastres, or thirty-seven livres tournois, the thousand feet. -- Those of
a double thickness, double the price.

Planks, from two to five inches thick, and from fifteen to sixty feet long, at
twenty-one pounds New York money, or two hundred and seventy-three livres
tournois, the thousand feet. -- The same person said he had seen curbs or bent
timber, at ten shillings New York money a ton, the expense of cutting, etc. not
included.




The value of these articles, exported from America to Great Britain only,
amounted to two millions of livres tournois in the year 1770, according to a
statement drawn up in the Custom-House of Boston. The general exportations to
the English, French, American, and Spanish islands, and to the different parts
of Europe, are immense and become daily more considerable. Were not this timber
of a good quality, the increase of this commerce would not be so rapid. The
French have in this respect some prejudices, which it is of importance to
destroy. If the American staves are esteemed in making rum casks, etc. they
will undoubtedly preserve our brandies.

SECTION IX. Vessels constructed in America, to be sold or freighted.
It has been observed that the bulk of the commodities which might be exchanged
by the commerce between France and the United States, was, at an equal value,
much more considerable on the side of America than that of France. There
results from this, that in these exchanges, a great number of American vessels
must be subject to return to America in ballast. This state of things would
certainly be prejudicial to the commerce between the two nations, if some
compensation could not be established which should remove the inequality.

This compensation may be made in a very advantageous manner to both. The
independent Americans construct vessels for sale: if it be agreeable to a
nation to purchase of another the articles which this manufactures at a less
expense, and with more means, it follows, that the French ought to buy American
vessels; and, in fact, this commerce begins to be established.

Lord Sheffield reprobates this commerce with respect to his own country. --
"Its existence," says his Lordship, depends on its navy; this depends as much
on English ship-builders as on English sailors; therefore, of all trades, that
of ship-building is the most important to be preserved in Great Britain. The
advances, according to his Lordship, are of little consequence, and these
vessels not being destined to be sold to foreigners, what they cost ought to be
considered so much the less, as the expense is incurred in the country.

Lord Sheffield presumes also, that ship-building will be encouraged in
New-Scotland, Canada, the Island of St. John, etc. Finally, his Lordship
declares, that the encouragement of ship-building in the United States is
ruinous to Great Britain; that it is the same to those who may purchase
American built vessels; because, notwithstanding their cheapness, these vessels
are little durable, from the nature of their materials. This observation
relates particularly to vessels built for sale, which, his Lordship says, are
very inferior to those which are bespoken.

It cannot be denied, that it is of consquence to a nation which attaches a
great importance to its navy, to have ship-builders. The repairs, etc. of which
vessels are constantly in want, would be badly directed, if there were not, in
the class of workmen to whom this industry belongs, men capable of constructing
a vessel, and habituated to this construction. What is still more, as soon as a
nation has a navy, it is greatly to its interest to possess every means of
improving it; and the possession of these means is so much more secure when
there are establishments in the country which, in this case, support emulation,
by the constant exercise of the art.

But it does not follow, that to preserve such an advantage, a nation ought to
have no other vessels than those which are home built: it is here necessary to
distinguish ships belonging to the royal navy from merchant ships. The first
are alone sufficient to employ a requisite number of able builders, and to
supply every thing which the construction and repairs of vessels require. But
merchant ships, of which a considerable number is wanted, may be procured from
abroad, if those of an equal quality can be had at a price considerably less.

Will it be said, that a nation becomes so much the more powerful at sea, as
the construction of vessels is encouraged in her ports? that under this point
of view it is necessary to be cautious not to furnish the independent Americans
with the means of forming a navy, which would render them formidable? that it
is at least unnecessary to hasten these means?

If this consideration were true, it would in some measure impose on France a
law to encourage the United States to form their navy; for, however formidable
her own may be, she has too many natural obstacles to remove for her navy to be
the effect of any thing but painful efforts, and consequently that it should be
an establishment very difficult to maintain, -- very expensive, and subject to
long intermissions. And since it is necessary to speak constantly of a
threatening rivality, -- of an armed rivality, -- France has the greatest
interest, to balance more surely the force of her rivals, by calling to her aid
the naval force of a friendly people, -- of a people to whom nature has been
prodigal in the means she has given them of having a considerable one.

But the policy which refused to purchase American vessels, for fear the
Americans should become formidable at sea, would be badly founded. A sure
manner of retarding the establishment of a navy, by a nation which possesses
the means and materials; the power and activity which such a great
establishment requires, is to employ it continually in the construction of
vessels for sale, and to habituate it to this kind of commerce. If this nation,
and such is the position of the United States, has nothing to fear interiorly
from any other power, it will certainly despise all such military preparations,
whose profit and utility will not be so immediately perceived, as the frequent
gains of peaceful commerce. Therefore, let the independent Americans be
persuaded to build vessels for sale: let them not be provoked to build ships
for defensive and offensive operations, and they will neglect the great means
with which nature has furnished them, of having a respectable navy: they will
even neglect them, when greater riches, and a more considerable population,
shall facilitate to them the use of their natural means.

Far from suffering by this new arrangement of things, France would gain
thereby. This idea will undoubtedly appear extraordinary, because, in
abandoning workmanship to American ship-builders, France is deprived of it: but
how easily may she compensate this apparent loss! In fact, when nothing is to
be had without labor, it is then considered as real riches: therefore, it
ought to be employed with a prudent economy, especially in the system of
national rivalities. The workmen who will not build vessels, will make cloth,
with which vessels may be paid for. The expense of manufacturing these cloths
will be paid at home, as that for the construction of vessels would have been;
by which means these will be had at a cheaper rate. This labor and expense
will therefore produce greater advantages, and place the nation in a more
desirable relation with its rivals.

Finally, Lord Sheffield, whose narrow policy is here refuted, proposes that
ship-building should be encouraged in Canada, New-Scotland, etc. But do
physical circumstances favor these countries as much as the United States? Can
England reap real advantages from this encouragement? It is a question with
which several writers have combated Lord Sheffield, and on which I cannot
decide.

But if England had this resource, France would be without it. Vessels built in
America will always cost her less than her own, or those constructed elsewhere:
she ought therefore to favor the introduction of the first.

A celebrated minister, whom France has reason to regret, thought as follows:
his design was to get a part of the vessels of the French navy constructed in
Sweden; he thereby expected to make great savings: they will be greater and
more real, in getting the vessels constructed in the United States.

The English themselves will not be able to resist the force of things; they
will sooner or latter return to the use of American vessels; for these cost but
a third In New England the constructors of vessel make their bargains at the
rate of three pounds sterling per ton, carpenter's work included. On the
^^^mes, the price i^ nine pounds sterling for the work alone of the carpenter.
of what English vessels are built for; and the cheapness is the first law of
commerce.

The bad quality attributed to American vessels is a fable, arising from the
following circumstances: in the contention for independence, the Americans
built vessels in haste, to arm them as cruisers: they were forced to make use
of wood which was green, and unprepared; other things were either wanting ^o
these vessels, or precipitately prepared. Consequently the vessels were
imperfect; but this imperfection was but accidental. A cruise is a lottery,
wherein no notice is taken of the goodness and durability of the vessel. It is
sufficient that it be a good sailer, this is the essential quality.

Peace has re-established the construction of vessels in the manner it ought to
be; and there are American vessels built before the war, and some thirty years
ago, which for goodness and duration are not inferior to any English vessel.

More progress has been made in America than any where else in the art of
ship-building; this is easily explained: -- it must not be forgotten, when the
independent Americans are spoken of, that they are not recovering from a state
of barbarity. They are men escaped from European civilization, employed* so to
speak, in creating their country and resource^* no shackles restrain their
efforts, every thing in Europe is looked upon as perfect, and made use of,
without thinking of improving it. These two essential differences cause a very
considerable one in the intensity of industry.

Boston has produced a man astonishing in the art of ship-building. Long and
closely employed in the search of means to unite swiftness of sailing in
vessels to their solidity, Mr. Peck has had the greatest success. It was his
hand which produced the Belisarius, the Hazard, and the Rattlesnake, which were
so particularly distinguished during the late war by ^eir swiftness of sailing.
Vessels constructed by this able builder have qualities which others have not;
they carry a fourth more, and sail faster. These facts are authenticated by a
number of experiments.

The English themselves acknowledge the superiority of American ship-building:
The finest vessels, says Colonel Champion, are built at Philadelphia; the art
of ship-building has attained in that city the highest degree of prefection.
Great vessels are built in New York, also in the Chesapeak, and in
South Carolina: these last, made of green oak, are of an unequalled solidity
and durability.

The American Proverb says: That to have a perfect vessel, it must have a
Boston bottom and Philadelphia sides.

The French, if connoisseurs be believed, are very inferior to the Americans in
the minutiae of ship-building. This superiority of America ought not to
surprise us: it will still increase. The independent Americans who inhabit the
coasts, live by the sea, and pride themselves in navigation. As they have
competitors, their genius will never sleep, nor will its efforts be shackled in
any manner whatever. In France, the people are, and ought to be culiva^ors; the
marine is but a subordinate part, and by the nature of things, it must enjoy
but a very precarious consideration. Honor, which affects the head of every
Frenchman, is distributed but at Paris and at Court; and there men are, and
must still be, far from perceiving the importance of attaching merit to the
improvement of ship-building; it must therefore languish, or yield to that of
the Americans. Hence it results, that the French, in preserving every thing
which can maintain amongst them an able class of ship-builders, must buy
vessels of the Americans; because every convenience is united to that of
facilitating their reciprocal importations and exportations, of which the bulks
are so different in one nation from those of the other.

This circumstance is attended with the advantage of procuring the French
merchant an American vessel at a less price than if he had ordered it to be
built, or if he bought it in America, because it will always be more to the
interest of the American to sell his vessel, than to take it back in ballast.

Such is the fitness of American vessels for the French marin^, and especially
for merchant service; such is that fitness for all the European powers who have
harbors and seaport towns, that I think a sure and commodious road in Europe
would soon be assorted with American vessels for sale, if every thing which can
encourage a like depository were granted to the port wherein this road might
be. This market for vessels will be established; -- the English reject it.
France will, in a short time, encourage it.

SECTION X. General Considerations on the preceding Catalogue of Importation*
from the United States into France.
The list which I have gone through of the articles with which the independent
Americans may furnish Europe in exchange for her merchandise is not very long;
but these articles are considerable, and important enough in themselves to
merit the attention of European merchants: they are sufficient to destroy the
prejudices of those who, under the false pretext of the inability of the
Americans to furnish articles of exchange, disdain a reciprocal commerce with
the United States. These articles are not, however, the only ones which France
may receive from them. Independently of pot-ash, so precious to manufactures,
and of which the scarcity becomes daily more sensible, iron, vegetable-wax,
wool, flax, hemp, etc. may increase the number. The English received of pot-ash
to the amount of four hundred thousand livres per annum, during the years 1768,
1769, and 1770: pot-ash being the produce of the wood burnt by the Americans,
and as the burning of wood must increase with the number of people, the
quantities of pot-ash must have increased with population.

I ought to hope that the work, once known in the United States, will excite
the independent Americans to cooperate with me, in what I have proposed to
myself, which is to spread instruction on every thing which relates to their
country. They will make known to Europe, in a more extensive and complete
manner, every thing which can maintain that reciprocal commerce in favor of
which I write: they will assemble in a work correspondent to this, all that I
have been able to expose but imperfectly: they will rectify my errors. I invite
them to apply to this interesting subject: I pray them to give it for a basis,
more philosophical, and philanthrophical principles, than those which have
hitherto directed the jealous industry of each society. For each, led on by a
blind ambition, has wished to embrace every thing, to do every thing at home,
and furnish every thing to others; each has taken for principle to receive
nothing from others, except it be gold; each has accustomed itself to look upon
every production, manufactured or unmanufactured, which it sent abroad as a
profit, and all those which it received as so many losses. Such is the false
principle, according to which all the European nations have directed their
exterior commerce.

What would be the consequence of a like system, if it continued to prevail?
All nations would be strangers to each other, and exterior commerce absolutely
annihilated; because it tends to take from this commerce that which supports
it. For the gold which is wished for in payment for exportations is refused to
those who would obtain it: all nations look upon the necessity of giving it
alike; that it is disadvantageous -- and strive to avoid it. If, therefore, on
one side, none will take return in kind, and on the other, nobody will
dispossess himself of his gold, what will become of exchanges? what will become
of commerce?

Nature, which intended to make men so many brothers, and nations so many
families; -- nature, which, to unite all men by the same tie, has given them
wants, which place them in a state of dependence one on the other; -- this wise
nature has, by the distribution of her gifts, anticipated and condemned this
exclusive system. She has said to the inhabitants of Nantucket, The rock which
thou inhabit is rude and stormy; renounce, therefore, the desire of drawing
from it the delicious wines and fruits which more calm and temperate climates
produce. Look at the sea which surrounds thee, -- that is thy property and thy
treasure: I have made it inexhaustible; and if thou know how to make use of
it; if thou will confine thyself thereto, all the enjoyments of the other
continent are thine: a single stroke of a harpoon, dexterously thrown, will
produce a thousand times more wine in thy cellar, than if by a painful
cultivation thou continuest obstinate, in acting contrary to my intentions.

Nature holds the same language to the other inhabitants of the earth: she
tells the French to use all their efforts in the fruitful soil which she has
given them, and to cease traversing foreign seas to obtain, at an immense
expense and much risk, the fish and all which the inhabitants of Nantucket
procure with greater facility and more success and economy.

Why should not all nations understand a language ^o simple, so wise* and so
proper to produce universal harmony? But how are they to be made to understand
it? By what means are they to be prevailed upon to adopt it? What means are
proper to engage nations which might have a direct commerce between them, to
sign a treaty of commerce, which should leave each at liberty to furnish that
which it could export better and cheaper than others; and thus establish
exchanges on the immutable laws of nature?

As soon as nations shall be enlightened enough to perceive the advantage of
such a treaty, from that moment it will cease to be necessary, and every other
treaty will be still less so. It will then be seen, that they all center in the
single word liberty. It will be discovered that liberty can put every thing in
its place; that liberty alone, without negotiation or parchment, can every
where give birth to an advantageous industry. Finally, that every where, and at
all times, she has sported with those commercial conventions, of which
politicians have so ridiculously boasted; of those conventions wherein the
contracting parties are incessantly on the defensive with respect to each other
-- incessantly disposed to deceive, and frequently multiply the seeds of war in
a work of peace.

Under such a system of liberty, there would be no longer occasion for
craftiness in national policy with respect to commerce: -- of what use would it
be? No more strife; for it would have no object: no more jealousy or rivality;
no more fear of making others prosper and become rich; because the riches of
each state would be advantageous to the whole. In a word, according to this
system, each nation would wish the other more means, in order to have more to
give and more to receive. Commerce would become what it ought to be, the
exchange of industry against industry; of enjoyments against enjoyments, and
not against deprivations: finally, a state of riches, without poverty on any
side.

What people have more right and title than the Americans, to be the first in
adopting so philanthropical a system, and which is so conformable to the laws
of nature -- at least to do nothing which shall retard it among them? Let their
Congress, -- that respectable assembly, which may become the light of nations,
and from whose deliberations universal happiness may result, -- remain faithful
to the indications of this nature; let it interrogate her constantly, and give
every nation the same salutary habitude.

If Europe refuses to admit the productions of the United States, let Congress,
rejecting the poor policy of reprisals, open, by a great and republican
resolution, their ports to all European productions. What evil can result from
this to the independent Americans? If European prohibitions rendered their
means of exchange useless, European merchandise must of course be without a
market in America; or, falling to a mean price in the United States, it would
become profitable to the Americans in paying for it even with gold.

The law may be given to an idle and degraded nation, but never to one which is
active and industrious. This always punishes, in some manner or other, the
tyrannical proceedings of other nations. The force of things is alone
sufficient to revenge it.

It is a misfortune to the United States, in not having been able to establish
at first the noble system of which I have spoken, and to be obliged to have
recourse to the miserable means of other governments, -- that of imposing
duties on foreign merchandise to pay their debts. Every imposition but a
quit-rent upon land is a source of errors. The pretended protecting duties
imposed in Europe are one consequence of these errors, and of which the effect
leads government astray, so far as to persuade them, that they possess a
creative force equal to that of the Divinity himself. And what are these
enterprises by which men would force nature? Miserable hot-houses, -- wherein
every thing is hastened to finish the sooner; wherein industry vainly exhausts
itself to support an unnatural existence; and wherein a vigorous whole is
frequently sacrificed to a corrupted part.

Let the Americans carefully avoid these erroneous enterprises: to insure
themselves therefrom, let them consider the state of Europe. The Europeans have
no longer any judgment in matters of impost: simple ideas are lost, and become
impossible to be realized by the metaphysician, which it is necessary to employ
to combat ignorance, prejudices and habitudes: all ideas of justice and
propriety are confounded. A truth cannot be advanced without meeting, at every
moment, false notions to combat. The man of information is fatigued, disgusted,
and frequently at a loss what to answer to objections proceeding from habits of
error. He perceives with concern, that the laws of happiness cannot be written,
but upon tables from which there is nothing to be effaced: and such, I flatter
myself, is the situation of the United States. They are yet virgin states --
they are unacquainted with the institutions which end in chaos, wherein the
love of public good loses all its force.

Montesquieu observes, that the enterprises of merchants are always necessarily
mixed with public affairs; but that in monarchies, public affairs are for the
most part suspicious in the eyes of the merchants. But prosperity and national
glory depend on commerce, as much in monarchies as in other constitutions. It
is therefore the interest of monarchies to give to merchants that hope of
prosperity which they have in republics, and which inclines them with ardour to
every kind of commercial enterprise.

Provincial administrations are the surest means of producing this happy
effect. If they were already established, the French would comprehend, how
absurb it is to imagine that the United States will not discharge their public
debt; how impossible it is that Republicans should make use of the
dishonorable resource of bankruptcy and deception; and that their public
spirit, their morals, and interest, require them to discharge this debt,
contracted for the most legitimate and honorable cause that ever existed; and
which is otherways but an atom when compared with their immense resources.
French merchants would then give themselves less concern about the manner in
which their merchandise was to be paid for in America. For in the improbable
case of a want of American productions, or of precious metals, they have, as a
last resource, the paper of Congress and the States; which paper it is an
advantage to acquire, by the price at which it is obtained, by the interest it
bears, the certainty of its being paid, and by the consequent transmission
which may be made of it in commerce to the Dutch merchant, to whom the paper of
the whole world becomes necessary the moment it merits confidence.

I have mentioned precious metals. The Americans are in the neighborhood of
the countries which produce them. These countries are the abodes of indolence,
which dispenses no^ with necessaries. Skins, etc. of animals, and some metals,
are every thing that can be given there in exchange for articles of
subsistence, which the inhabitants have not the courage to make their lands
produce, and for the necessaries, for which they find it more convenient to pay
with gold than with their industry. The independent Americans will become
factors, advantageously placed between European manufactures, and the
inhabitants of regions condemned by nature to the sterile productions of
metals. All the powers of Spain cannot prevent this, nor ought even to
undertake it. This new consideration promising to the French payment, so
foolishly desired in gold, ought to encourage them to prepare for a commercial
connection with the United States.

CONCLUSION, And Reflections on the Situation of the United States.
IT will be proper to finish this volume by some explanations of the pretended
troubles which agitate the United States. These explanations are necessary to
destroy the unfavourable impressions which must be made by the unfaithful
recitals of gazette writers, who, from servile prejudices or mean interest,
affect to spread doubts of the happy consequences of the revolution. If we
believe these people, the independent Americans are plunged into inextricable
embarrassments, forced to become bankrupts, given up to the most violent
anarchy, exposed to the tomahawk of the implacable Indians, etc. How is it
possible to resolve to carry on a commerce with people whose situation is so
deplorable? Ought not their ruin to be feared rather than their fortune hoped
for, in the connexions which it is wished to form with them?

It is necessary to refute these falsehoods. It is so much the more so, as
ignorance easily leads people, little acquainted with republican constitutions,
into error; and that, led astray by the prejudices of their educations, a great
number of Frenchmen look upon this form of government as a state perpetually in
a ferment, wherein life and property are continually exposed to the greatest
dangers.

These prejudices lead to the belief of the most puerile and absurd fables. The
least attention is not paid to circumstances. Would the United States have a
Congress of magistrates if it we^^ true that the people were at war with them?
For how could Congress and the magistrates defend themselves? They have no
other defense but the respect which each individual has for the law, this is
their only force. It is the obligation that the constitution imposes on them,
in common with the meanest citizens, of being obedien^ to the law, as the last
means which constitute their only safety, and which maintains, in all cases and
every where, the authority which the people have confided in them. They cannot
employ a physical force farther than the people are willing to lend them,
because they have neither an army nor soldiers in pay.

A diversity of opinion exists wherever there are men. It belongs not to one
constitutions more than to another; but the essence of a republican government
is to leave to each individual the liberty of expressing his sentiments on
every subject.

In the United States, legislation is more and more formed in proportion as
things relative to each other are verified, extended, and multiplied. Is it
astonishing that debates should arise on account of the different laws which
are proposed, discussed, and adopted? These debates become public, animate
conversation, and make it highly interesting. But is this anarchy?

The word anarchy is one of those words which has been most abused and
misapplied. It is therefore necessary to explain it.

Where anarchy reigns, there is neither chief, government, laws, nor safety.
Each individual becomes the defender of his own person, the social contract is
broken, and there is no longer any confidence or transactions, because there
can be no more contracts. Authority, changing at every instant its rules,
principles, and aim, becomes cruel or contemptible; it destroys, or is
destroyed. Such a stare exists not long; or if it does exist, it soon divides
society into armed herds, enemies to each other, and which subsist but in
proportion as they fear and counterbalance each other's power.

Is any thing like this seen in the United States? Are there disputes even
about the principles of the constitution, the fundamental laws, or the proposed
end? Has not every thing relative to this been long since agreed upon? The
present debates relate wholly to some rules of administration: it is upon the
best manner of serving the public cause, and of supporting it, that minds are
still in a salutary agitation; and this agitation hinders not more the regular
course of public affairs and transactions, than the debates in the English
Parliament hinder the monarch from naming to offices and conferring rank --
than they stop the course of justice, or are impediments to the affairs of
every class of citizens.

The word anarchy is proper to states which, like Egypt, have twenty-four
sovereigns, and neither laws nor government. It is applicable to the
degenerated constitutions of Asia, where the administration is divided into
several departments, independent of each other, traversing one another in their
views and pretensions, the operations of one part interfering with those of the
other, all having the power of making particular laws, or of suspending the
effect of those which exist. There a real anarchy reigns, because it is not
known where the government is, nor in whom the legislative power is vested.
This incertitude brings on disorder, renders property unstable, and endangers
personal safety.

None of these evils exist in the United States. America is not yet gnawed by
the vermin which devour Europe, by indestructible mendicity: thieves render not
her forests dangerous; her public roads are not stained with blood shed by
assassins. How should there be assassins and robbers? There are no beggars, no
indigent persons, no subjects forced to steal the subsistence of others to
procure one to themselves. Every man finds there lands to produce him articles
of subsistence: it is not loaded with taxes, but renders to each, with usury, a
recompense for his labor. A man who can live easy and honorably, never
consents to dishonor himself by useless crimes, which deliver him to the
torments of remorse, dishonor, and the vengeance of society.

The ravages of the seven years war were undoubtedly terrible; but as soon as
the faulchion could be converted into a p^ough-share, the land became fertile,
and misery disappeared. The American soldiers were citizens; and they were also
proprietors before they became soldiers; they remained citizens in uniform, and
returned to their professions on quitting it: they did not fight for money, nor
by profession, but for their liberty, their wives, child^en, and property; and
such soldiers never resembled the banditti of the old continent, who are paid
for killing their fellow creatures, and who kill on the highways for their own
account, when peace obliges their masters to disband them. There has been seen
in America (what the annals of the world present not in any state, except that
of Rome) a General, adored by his soldiers, divest himself of his power as soon
as his services became no longer necessary, and retire into the bosom of peace
and obscurity: a numerous army, which was not paid, was seen generously to
consent to disband without payment; the soldiers to retire, each to his home,
without committing the least disorder, and where each tranquilly retook either
his plough, or his first trade or profession; those trades which we in Europe
look upon as vi^e.

The following advertisement is taken from the American papers, in which there
are a thousand others of a like nature.

Two brothers, Captains who distinguished themselves during the war, returned
at the peace to their trade of hat-making; -- they inserted in the gazette an
advertisement as follows:

The brothers Bickers inform the public, that they are returned to their old
profession of hatters, which they had abandoned to defend the liberty of their
country. They hope that their fellow-citizens will be pleased, in consideration
of their courage and services, to favor them in their business, and pr^fer
them to others. What European Captain would put his name to a like
advertisement?

This is what results from liberty: but what is inconceivable in most European
states, a military spirit reigns there, and its prejudices are predominant. War
is the road to glory, ambition, and fortune; and to preserve t^ this profession
its luster and preponderance, it is an established principle, that a standing
army is necessary to maintain order in society; that it ought always to
threaten the citizens, although peaceful, to keep them in submission to
authority. This useless burden, this pernicious spirit, is unknown to the
United States; -- public spirit, much more favorable to good order, takes its
place, and peace and safety reign without marechauss^e o^ spies, or that police
which disparages the morals and characters of citizens. Public spirit supplies
the place of all these means, whilst they will never supply the want of public
spirit; nor, like it, produce the happiness of society.

In vain will prejudiced men exclaim, that this is declamation -- I offer them
facts. It is necessary to read the American gazettes -- not those altered by
the English gazette-writers, but those which are printed in America: these only
can give a just idea of the situation of the United States.

The American should rather despise Europe, in remarking to us the continual
slaughter we make of thieves and assassins; in comparing the immense number of
dungeons, prisons, hospitals, and establishments of every kind, instituted to
cure or palliate the incurable ulcers of the old institutions: in comparing
this disgusting list with the very few murders and thefts committed in the
United States, with the hospitals, truly domestic and humane, which are
established there, with the happiness of each American family and their simple
manners; and in proving to us, by their example, that a wise liberty regulates
the social man, and renders useless those ruinous machines with which he is
crushed, lest he should do any harm.

These are the men, the laws, and the government, which Europeans have
calumniated. These men who are destined to regenerate the dignity of the human
species! -- These laws which scourge nothing but crimes, -- which punish them
every where, and are never silent in the face of power! -- This government,
which is the first that ever presented the image of a numerous family, well
united, and completely happy; wherein power is just, because it circulates
through every hand, and rests in none; wherein obedience, because it is
voluntary, anticipates command; wherein administration is simple and easy;
because it leaves industry to itself; wherein the magistrate has little to do,
because the citizen is free, and that a citizen always respects the law and his
fellow creatures! These are the prodigies which we calumniate: we, Europeans,
enslaved by antiquated constitutions, and by the habitudes given to us by
prejudices, of which we know not either the barbarity or the frivolousness! We
speak well, but act badly; why, therefore, do we calumniate men, who not only
speak but act well? If it be not permitted us to have their virtues, nor to
enjoy their happiness, let us not decry them; let us respect that superiority
to which we cannot attain.

It will, perhaps, be objected, that the government of England has deferred the
conclusion of a treaty of commerce with the United States, under the pretext
that their constitutions were not yet sufficiently established. But can it be
imagined that the English, who trade in Turkey, with the Algerines, and at Grand
Cairo, were serious when they decried and rejected commercial connexions with
the United States, under the pretense that their legislation was not yet well
enough established?

It cannot be doubted that the difference of position between the French and
English merchants, respecting their governments, has a great influence upon
their reciprocal prosperity; and for this reason, it should be incessantly
repeated to the French government, that if it wishes to insure prosperity to
its commerce, it ought to adopt the means, which are, liberty of acting, -- the
right of protesting against the attempts made on that liberty, -- and the
certainty of justice, -- without respect to persons: -- these are the basis of
the genius, industry, and greatness of a state; and without which, a great
commerce cannot exist: this basis may be easily conciliated with the French
constitution.

Paris, February, 1789.
APPENDIX; CONSISTING OF AUTHENTIC PAPERS AND ILLUSTRATIONS. Added by the Editor
Return of the whole Number of Persons within the several Districts of the
United States, according to "an Act providing for the Enumeration of the
Inhabitants of the United States;" passed March the 1st, 1791.
The return for South Carolina having been made since the following Schedule
was originally printed, the whole Enumeration is here given complete, except
for the North-Western Territory, of which no Return has yet been published.

DISTRICTS. Free white males of 16 years and upwards, including heads of
families. Free white males under 16 years. Free white females, including heads
of families. All other free persons. Slaves. Total. Vermont 22,435 22,328
40,505 255 16 85,539 N. Hampshire 36,086 34,851 70,160 630 158 141,885 Maine
24,384 24,748 46,870 538 NONE 96,540 Massachusetts 95,453 87,289 190,582 5463
NONE 378,787 Rhode Island 16,019 15,799 32,652 3407 948 68,825 Connecticut
60,523 54,403 117,448 2808 2764 237,946 New York 83,700 78,122 152,320 4654
21,324 340,120 New Jersey 45,251 41,416 83,287 2762 11,423 184,139 Pennsylvania
110,788 106,948 206,363 6537 3737 434,373 Delaware 11,783 12,143 22,384 3899
8887 59,094 Maryland 55,915 ^^^339 101,395 8043 103,036 319,728 Virginia
110,936 110,135 215,046 12,866 292,627 747,610 Kentucky 15,154 17,057 28,922
114 12,430 73,677 N. Carolina 69,988 77,506 140,710 4975 100,572 393,751 S.
Carolina 35,576 37,722 66,880 1801 107,094 249,073 Georgia 13,103 14,044 25,739
398 29,264 82,548 807,094 791,850 1,541,263 59,150 6^4,280 3,893,635 Free wh.
males of 21 years and upwards. Free males under 21 years of age. Free white
females. All other persons. Slaves. Total. S. W. Terr^y. N. ditto. 6271 10,277
15,365 3^1 3417 35,691

Schedule of the whole Number of Persons in the Territory of the United States
of America, South of the River Ohio, as taken on the last Saturday of Jaly,
1791, by the Captains of the Militia within the Limits of their respective
Districts.
WASHINGTON DISTRICT. Free white males of 21 years and upwards, including hds.
of families Free white males under 21 years. Free white females, including
heads of families. All other free persons. Slaves. Total of each county. Total
of each district. Counties.
Washington Sullivan Green Hawkins S. of F. Broad
1009 1792 2524 12 535 5872 806 1242 1995 107 297 4447 1293 2374 3580 40 454
7741 1204 197^ 2921 68 807 6970 681 1082 1627 66 163 3619 28,649 MERO DISTRICT.
Coun^.
Davidson Sumner Tennessee
639 855 1288 18 659 3459 404 582 854 8 34^ 2196 235 380 576 42 154 138^ 7042
6271 10,277 15,36^ 361 345^ 35,691

Note. -- There are several Captains who have not as yet returned the Schedules
of the numbers of their Districts, namely; -- in Green County, three -- in
Davidson, one -- and South of French-Board, one District.

September 19th, 1791. W. BLOUNT.
By the Governor, DANIEL SMITH, Secretary.
Truly stated from the original returns deposited in the office of the
Secretary of State.

T. JEFFERSON.
October 24, 1791.


In point of size the towns in the United States may be ranked ^n this order:
-- Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, etc: In point of
trade, New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Charleston, Baltimore, etc.

From the preceding tables it is indubitable that the number of inhabitants in
the United States considerably exceeded four millions in the year 1791,
exclusive of those in the Northern Territory, and some other districts. If to
this we add Dr. Franklin's calculation, "That the number of the inhabitants of
America is double every twenty years," this number must be increased to
considerably above eight millioas in the year 1811, exclusive of emigrants from
the Old World.

The English reader, we hope, will not be offended, if, in this place, we say a
word or two on the population of Great Britain. It is a current opinion, that
the population of our island is yearly increasing. The fact is quite the
reverse: but the assertion would signify nothing, if there were not
incontestible proofs or it. The proofs are these: -- Number of houses in
England and Wales, taken from the return of the surveyors of the house and
window duties; wherein they are stated distinctly, charged, chargeable and
excused.
Total of houses in 1759 986,482 -- in 1761 980,692 -- in 1777 952,734 Total of
houses according to the hearth-books in 1690, as stated by Dr. Davenant (see
his works, vol. i. page 38) 1,319,215


In Scotland the number of houses paying the house and window duties was, in
1777, only 16,206.

If the district returns of the parishes are examined, it will be manifest,
that a calculation of five perso^^ to every house is a large allowance. From
all which thi^ result is obvious -- That the number of inhabitants in England
and Wales is considerably short (...) five millions! that, perhaps, including
Scotland, the whole island of Great Britain does not exc^ed that number.

The curiosity of the present moment may allow us ^o cast our eye upon France,
concerning this subject. The intendants of the provinces of France were
ordered, in the years 1771 and 1772, to make a return of the number of
inhabitants in their respective districts. The return of 1772 states the number
to be 25,741,320. See Recherches sur la population le la France, pa^ M. Moheau.

It would be a right measure in every government to cause a survey to be made
annually of the number of inhabitants. It is done at Naples by order of the
King, and is published annually in the Court Calenders. (...) will probably
follow the example.

Observation on the Population of America. Written by Dr. Benjamin Franklin.
Printed at Philadelphia in the (...) 1755.
Tables of the proportion of marriages to births, of deaths to births, of
marriages to the numbers of inhabitants, etc. formed on observations made on
the bills of mortality, christenings, etc. of populous cities, will not suit
countries; nor will tables formed on observations made on full settled old
countries, as Europe, ^^it new countries as America.

For people increase in proportion to the number of marriages, and that is
greater in proportion to the ease and convenience of supporting a family. When
families can be easily suppo^^ed, more persons marry, and earlier in life.

In cities, where all trades, occupations, and offices are full, many delay
until they can see how to bear the charges of a family; which charges are
greater in cities, as luxury is more common; many live single during life, and
continue servants to families, journeymen to trades, etc. hence cities do not
by natural generation supply themselves with inhabitants; the deaths are more
than the births.

In countries full settled the case must be nearly the same; all lands being
occupied and improved to the height, those who cannot get land must labor for
those who have it; when laborers are plenty, their wages will be low; by low
wages a family is supported with difficulty; this difficulty deters many from
marriage, who therefore long continue servants and single. Only as cities take
supplies of people from the country, and thereby make a little more room in the
country, marriage is a little more encouraged there, and the births exceed the
deaths.

Great part of Europe is full settled with husbandmen, manufacturers, etc. and
therefore cannot now much increase in people. Land being plenty in America, and
so cheap as that a laboring man, who understands husbandry, can in a short
time save money enough to purchase a piece of new land sufficient for a
plantation, whereon he may subsist a family, such are not afraid to marry; for
even if they look far enough forward to consider how their children, when
grown, are to be provided for, they see that more land is to be had at rates
equally easy, all circumstances considered.

Hence marriages in America are more general, and more generally early, than in
Europe. And if it is reckoned there, that there is but one marriage per annum
among one hundred persons, perhaps we may here reckon two; and if in Europe
they have but four births to a marriage (many of their marriages being late) we
may here reckon eight; of which, if one half grow up, and our marriages are
made, reckoning one with another, at twenty years of age, our people must at
least he doubled every twenty years.

But notwithstanding this increase, so vast is the territory of North America,
that it will require many ages to settle it fully; and until it is fully
settled, labor will never be cheap here, where no man continues long a
labourer for others, but gets a plantation of his own; no man continues long a
journeyman to a trade, but goes among these new settlers, and sets up for
himself, etc. Hence labor is no cheaper now in Pennsylvania than it was thirty
years ago, though so many thousand laboring people have been imported from
Germany and Ireland.

In proportion to the increase of the colonies, a vast demand is growing for
British manufactures; a glorious market wholly in the power of Britain, in
which foreigners cannot interfere, which will increase in a short time even
beyond her power of supplying, though her whole trade should be to her colonies.

Of the Western Territory.
It is a mistake in those who imagine that the new state of Kentucky comprises
the Western Territory of North America. That new state includes but a small
part of this great domain. The state of Kentucky is described to be bounded on
the south by North Carolina, on the north by Sandy creek, on the west by
Cumberland river, making about two hundred and fifty miles in length, and two
hundred miles in breadth; whereas the whole Western Territory is infinitely
more extensive. The limits are unknown; but that part of it which was surveyed
by Captain Hutchins, geographer to the Congress, he has given us a short
account of. From his account, because it is known to be authentic, we have
extracted the following.

The part he surveyed lies between the 33d and 45th degrees of latitude, and
the 78th and 94th degrees of longitude, containing an extent of territory,
which, for healthfulness, fertility of soil, and variety of productions, is not
perhaps surpassed by any on the habitable globe.

"The lands comprehended between the river Ohio, at Fort-Pitt, and the Laurel
mountain, and thence continuing the same breadth from Fort-Pitt to the Great
Kanhawa river, may, according to my own observations, and those of the late Mr.
Gist, of Virginia, be generally, and justly described as follows.

"The valleys adjoining to the branches or springs of the middle f^rks of
Youghiogeny, are narrow toward its source; but there (...) a considerable
quantity of good farming grounds on the hills, near the largest branch of that
river. The lands within a small distance of the Laurel mountain (through which
the Youg^iogeny runs) are in many places broken and stony, but rich and well
timbered; and in some places, and particularly on Laurel creek, they are rocky
and mountainous.

"From the Laurel mountain to Monongahela, the first seven miles are good,
level farming grounds, with fine meadows; the timber, white oak, chestnut,
hickory, etc. The same kind of land continues southerly (twelve miles) to the
upper branches or forks of this river, and about fifteen miles northerly to the
place where the Youghiogeny falls into the Monongahela. The lands, for about
eighteen miles in the same course of the last-mentioned river, on each side of
it, though hilly, are rich and well timbered. The trees are walnut, locust,
chestnut, poplar, and sugar or sweet maple. The low lands, near the river, are
about a mile, and in several places two miles wide. For a considerable way down
the river, on the eastern side of it, the intervals are extremely rich, and
about a mile wide. The upland for about twelve miles eastwardly, are uncommonly
fertile, and well timbered; the low lands, on the western side, are narrow; but
the uplands, on the eastern side of the river, both up and down, are excellent,
and covered with sugar trees, etc.

"Such parts of the country which lie on some of the branches of the
Monongahela, and across the heads of several rivers that run into the Ohio,
though in general hilly, are exceedingly fruitful and well watered. The timber
is walnut, chestnut, ash, oak, sugar trees, etc. and the interval or meadow
lands are from two hundred and fifty yards to a quarter of a mile wide.

"The lands lying nearly in a north-westerly direction from the Great Kanhawa
river to the Ohio, and thence north-easterly, and also upon Le Tort's creek,
Little Kanhawa river, Buffaloe, Fishing, Weeling, and the two upper, and two
lower, and several other very considerable creeks, (or what, in Europe, would
be called large rivers) and thence east, and south-east to the river
Monongahela, are, in point of quality, as follows.

"The borders or meadow lands are a mile, and in some places near two miles
wide; and the uplands are in common of a most fertile soil, capable of
abundantly producing wheat, hemp, flax, etc.

"The lands which lie upon the Ohio, at the mouths of, and between the above
creeks, also consist of rich intervals and very fine farming grounds. The whole
country abounds in bears, elks, buffaloe, deer, turkies, etc. An unquestionable
proof of the extraordinary goodness of its soil! Indiana lies within the
territory here described. It contains about three millions and an half of
acres, and was granted to Samuel Wharton, William Trent, and George Morgan,
Esquires, and a few other persons, in the year 1768.

"Fort-Pitt stands at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers;
in latitude 40 31 44, and about five degrees westward of Philadelphia. In the
year 1760, a small town, called Pittsburgh, was built near Fort-Pitt, and about
two hundred families resided in it; but upon the Indian war breaking out (in
the month of May, 1763) they abandoned their houses, and retired into the fort.

"In the year 1765 the present town of Pittsburgh was laid out. It is built on
the eastern bank of the river Monongahela, about two hundred yards from
Fort-Pitt.

"The junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers forms the river Ohio,
and this discharges itself into the Mississippi, (in latitude 36 43) about one
thousand one hundred and eighty-eight computed miles from Fort-Pitt. The Ohio,
in its passage to the Mississippi, glides through a pleasant, fruitful, and
healthy country, and carries a great uniformity of breadth, from four hundred
to six hundred yards, except at its confluence with the Mississippi, and for
one hundred miles above it, where it is one thousand yards wide. The Ohio, for
the greater part of the way to the Mississippi, has many meanders, or windings,
and rising grounds upon both sides of it.

"The reaches in the Ohio are in some parts from two to four miles in length,
and one of them, above the Muskingum river, called the Long Reach, is sixteen
miles and an half long. The Ohio, about 100 miles above, or northerly of the
Rapids, (formerly called the Falls) is in many places 700 yards wide; and as it
approaches them, the high grounds on its borders gradually diminish, and the
country becomes more level. Some of the banks, or heights of this river, are at
times overflowed by great freshes; yet there is scarce a place between
Fort-Pitt and the Rapids, (a distance of 705 computed miles) where a good road
may not be made; and horses employed in drawing up large barges (as is done on
the margin of the river Thames in England, and the Seine in France) against a
stream remarkably gentle, except in high freshes. The heights of the banks of
the Ohio admit them every where to be settled, as they are not liable to
crumble away.

"To these remarks it may be proper to add the following observations of the
ingenious Mr. Lewis Evans. He says, that 'the Ohio river, as the winter snows
are thawed by the warmth or rains in the spring, rises in vast floods, in some
places exceeding twenty feet in height, but scarce any where overflowing its
high and upright banks. These floods,' Mr. Evans adds, 'continue of some height
for at least a month or two, according to the late or early breaking up of the
winter. Vessels from 100 to 200 tons burden, by taking the advantage of these
floods, may go from Pittsburgh to the sea with safety, as then the falls,
rifts, and shoals, are covered to an equality with the rest of the rivers;' --
and though the distance is upwards of 2000 miles from Fort-Pitt to the sea, yet
as there are no obstructions to prevent vessels from proceeding both day and
night, I am persuaded that this extraordinary inland voyage may be performed,
during the season of the floods, by rowing, in sixteen or seventeen days.

"The navigation of the Ohio in a dry season, is rather troublesome from
Fort-Pitt to the Mingo town (about 75 miles) but from thence to the Mississippi
there is always a sufficient depth of water for barges, carrying from 100 to
200 tons burden, built in the manner as those are which are used on the river
Thames, between London and Oxford; -- to wit, from 100 to 120 feet in the keel,
sixteen to eighteen feet in breadth, and four feet in depth, and when loaded,
drawing about three feet water.

"The Rapids, in a dry season, are difficult to descend with loaded boats or
barges.

[But instead of the carrying place now used, it is intended to substitute a
canal on the contrary side of the river.]

"Most of the hills on both sides of the Ohio are filled with excellent coal,
and a coal mine was in the year 1760, opened opposite to Fort-Pitt, on the
river Monongahela, for the use of that garrison. Salt springs, as well as iron
ore, and rich lead mines, are found bordering upon the river Ohio. One of the
latter is opened on a branch of the Scioto river, and there the Indian natives
supply themselves with a considerable part of the lead which they use in their
wars and hunting.

"About 584 miles below Fort-Pitt, and on the eastern side of the Ohio river,
about three miles from it, at the head of a small creek or run, where are
several large and miry salt springs, are found numbers of large bones, teeth,
and tusks, commonly supposed to be those of elephants: -- but the celebrated
Doctor Hunter of London, in his ingenious and curious observations on these
bones, etc. has supposed them to belong to some carnivorous animal, larger than
an ordinary elephant.

"On the north-western side of Ohio, about eleven miles below the
Cherokee-river, on a high bank, are the remains of Fort-Massac, built by the
French, and intended as a check to the southern Indians. It was destroyed by
them in the year 1763. This is a high, healthy, and delightful situation. A
great variety of game, buffaloe, bear, deer, etc. as well as ducks, geese,
swans, turkies, pheasants, patridges, etc. abounds in every part of this
country.

"The Ohio, and the rivers emptying into it, afford green and other turtle, and
fish of various sorts; particularly carp, sturgeon, perch, and cats; the two
latter of an uncommon size, viz. perch from eight to twelve pounds weight, and
cats from fifty to one hundred pounds weight.

"The lands upon the Ohio, and its branches, are differently timbered according
to their quality and situation. The high and dry lands are covered with red,
white and black oak, hickory, walnut, red and white mulberry and ash trees,
grape-vines, etc. the low and meadow lands are filled with sycamore, poplar,
red and white mulberry, cherry, beach, elm, aspen, maple, or sugar trees,
grape-vines, etc. and below, or southwardly of the Rapids, are several large
cedar and cypress swamps, where the cedar and cypress trees grow to a
remarkable size, and where also is a great abundance of canes, such as grow in
South Carolina. The country on both sides of the Ohio, extending
south-easterly, and south-westerly from Fort-Pitt to the Mississippi, and
watered by the Ohio river, and its branches, contains at least a million of
square miles, and it may, with truth, be affirmed, that no part of the globe is
blessed with a more healthful air, or climate; watered with more navigable
rivers and branches communicating with the Atlantic Ocean, by the rivers
Potowmack, James, Rappahannock, Mississippi, and St. Lawrence, or capable of
producing, with less labor and expense, wheat, Indian corn, buck-wheat, rye,
oats, barley, flax, hemp, tobacco, rice, silk, pot-ash, etc. than the country
under consideration. And although there are considerable quantities of high
lands for about 250 miles (on both sides of the river Ohio) southwardly from
Fort-Pitt, yet even the summits of most of the hills are covered with a deep
rich soil, fit for the culture of flax and hemp; and it may also be added, that
no soil can possibly yield larger crops of red and white clover, and other
useful grass, than this does.

"On the north-west and south-east sides of the Ohio, below the great Kanhawa
river, at a little distance from it, are extensive natural meadows, or
savannahs. These meadows are from 20 to 50 miles in circuit. They have many
beautiful groves of trees interspersed, as if by art, in them, and which serve
as a shelter for the innumerable herds of buffaloe, deer, etc. with which they
abound.

"I am obliged to a worthy friend and countryman for the following just and
judicious observations. They were addressed to the Earl of Hillsborough, in the
year 1770, when secretary of state for the North-American department; and were
written by Mr. Samuel Wharton of Philadelphia, who at that time resided in
London, having some business there with Mr. Strahan, Mr. Almon, etc.

"No part of North America," he says, "will require less encouragement for the
production of naval stores, and raw materials for manufactories in Europe, and
for supplying the West India islands with lumber, provisions, etc. than the
country of the Ohio; -- and for the following reasons: --

"First, The lands are excellent, the climate temperate, the native grapes,
silk worms, and mulberry trees, abound every where: hemp, hops, and rye, grow
spontaneously in the valleys and low lands; lead and iron ore are plenty in the
hills; salt springs are innumerable; and no soil is better adapted to the
culture of tobacco, flax, and cotton, than that of the Ohio.

"Second, The country is well watered by several navigable rivers,
communicating with each other; by which, and a short land carriage, the produce
of the lands of the Ohio can, even now (in the year 1772) be sent cheaper to
the seaport town of Alexandria, on the river Potowmack in Virginia (where
General Braddock's transports landed his troops,) than any kind of merchandise
is sent from Northampton to London.

"Third, The river Ohio is, at all seasons of the year, navigable with large
boats, like the west country barges, rowed only by four or five men; and from
the month of February to April large ships may be built on the Ohio, and sent
to sea laden with hemp, iron, flax, silk, tobacco, cotton, pot-ash, etc.

"Fourth, Flour, corn, beef, ship-plank, and other useful articles, can be sent
down the stream of the Ohio to West-Florida, and from thence to the West India
islands, much cheaper, and in better order, than from New York or Philadelphia
to these islands.

"Fifth, Hemp, tobacco, iron, and such bulky articles, may also be sent down
the stream of the Ohio to the sea, and at least 50 per cent. cheaper than these
articles were ever carried by land carriage, of only 60 miles, in Pennsylvania:
where waggonage is cheaper than in any other part of North America.

"Sixth, The expense of transporting European manufactories from the sea to the
Ohio, will not be so much as is now paid, and must ever be paid, to a great
part of the counties of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Maryland. Whenever the
farmers or merchants of Ohio shall properly understand the business of
transportation, they will build schooners, sloops, etc. on the Ohio, suitable
for the West India, or European markets; or, by having black-walnut,
cherry-tree, oak, etc. properly sawed for foreign markets, and formed into
rafts, in the manner that is now done by the settlers near the upper parts of
Delaware river in Pennsylvania, and thereon stow their hemp, iron, tobacco,
etc. and proceed with them to New-Orleans.

"It may not, perhaps, be amiss, to observe, that large quantities of flour are
made in the distant (western) counties of Pennsylvania, and sent by an
expensive land carriage to the city of Philadelphia, and from thence shipped to
South Carolina and to East and West Florida, there being little or no wheat
raised in th^se provinces. The river Ohio seems kindly designed by nature as
the channel through which the two Floridas may be supplied with flour, not only
for their own consumption, but also for the carrying on an extensive commerce
with Jamaica and the Spanish settlements in the Bay of Mexico. Millstones in
abundance are to be obtained in the hills near the Ohio, and the country is
every where well watered with large and constant springs and streams, for grist
and other mills.

"The passage from Philadelphia to Pensacola is seldom made in less than a
month, and sixty shillings sterling per ton freight (consisting of sixteen
barrels) is usually paid for flour, etc. thither. Boats carrying 800 or 1000
barrels of flour, may go in about the same time from the Ohio (even from
Pittsburgh) as from Philadelphia to Pensacola; and for half the above freight
the Ohio merchants would be able to deliver flour, etc. there in much better
order than from Philadelphia, and without incurring the damage and delay of the
sea, and charges of insurance, etc. as from thence to Pensacola.

"This is not mere speculation; for it is a fact, that about the year 1746,
there was a great scarcity of provisions at New-Orleans, and the French
settlements, at the Illinois, small as they then were, sent thither in one
winter, upwards of eight hundred thousand weight of flour."

"I shall now proceed to give a brief account of the several rivers and creeks
which fall into the river Ohio.

"Canawagy, when raised by freshes, is passable with small batteaux, to a
little lake at its head; -- from thence there is a portage of twenty miles to
lake Erie, at the mouth of Jadaghque. The portage is seldom used, because
Canawagy has scarcely any water in it in a dry season.

"Bughaloons is not navigable, but is remarkable for extensive meadows
bordering upon it.

"French Creek affords the nearest passage to lake Erie. It is navigable with
small boats to Le Beuf, by a very crooked channel; the portage thence to
Presquile, from an adjoining peninsula, is 15 miles. This is the usual route
from Quebec to Ohio.

"Licking and Lacomic Creeks do not afford any navigation; but there is plenty
of coals and stones for building in the hills which adjoin them.

"Toby's Creek is deep enough for batteaux for a considerable way up, thence by
a short portage to the west branch of Susquehannah, a good communication is
carried on between Ohio and the eastern parts of Pennsylvania.

"Moghulbughkitum is passable also by flat bottom boats in the same manner as
Toby's Creek is to Susquehannah, and from thence to all the settlements. in
Northumberland county, etc. in Pennsylvania.

"Kishkeminetas is navigable in like manner as the preceding creeks, for
between 40 and 50 miles, and good portages are found between Kishkeminetas,
Juniat^a, and Potowmack rivers. -- Coal and salt are discovered in the
neighborhood of these rivers.

"Monongahela is a large river, and at its junction with the Allegheny river,
stands Fort-Pitt. It is deep, and gentle, and navigable with batteaux and
barges, beyond Red-Stone creek, and still farther with lighter craft. At
sixteen miles from its mouth is Youghiogeny; this river is navigable with
batteaux or barges, to the foot of Laurel-hill.

"Beaver Creek has water sufficient for flat bottom boats. At Kishkuskes,
(about 16 miles up) are two branches of this creek, which spread opposite ways;
one interlocks with French Creek and Cherage, -- the other with Muskingum and
Cayahoga; on this branch, about thirty-five miles above the forks, are many
salt-springs. -- Cayahoga is practicable with canoes about twenty miles farther.

"Muskingum is a fine gentle river, confined by high banks, which prevent its
floods from overflowing the surrounding land. It is 250 yards wide at its
confluence with the Ohio, and navigable, without any obstructions, by large
batteaux or barges, to the Three Legs, and by small ones to a little lake at
its head.

"From thence to Cayahoga (the creek that leads to lake Erie) the Muskingum is
muddy, and not very swift, but no where obstructed with falls or rifts. Here
are fine uplands, extensive meadows, oak and mulberry trees fit for
ship-building, and walnut, chestnut, and poplar trees, suitable for domestic
services. -- Cayahoga furnishes the best portage between Ohio and lake Erie; at
its mouth it is wide and deep enough to receive large sloops from the lake. It
will hereafter be a place of great importance.

"Muskingum, in all its wide-extended branches, is surrounded by most excellent
land, and abounds in springs, and conveniences particularly adapted to
settlements remote from sea navigations; -- such as salt springs, coal, clay,
and free stone. In 1784 a coal mine opposite to Lamenshicola mouth took fire,
and continued burning about twelve months, but great quantities of coal still
remain in it. Near the same place are excellent whetstones, and about eight
miles higher up the river, is plenty of white and blue clay for glass works and
pottery.

"Hockhocking is navigable with large flat bottom boats between seventy and
eighty miles; it has fine meadows with high banks, which seldom overflow, and
rich uplands on its borders. Coal and quarries of freestone are found about 15
miles up this creek.

"Big Kanhawa falls into the Ohio upon its south-eastern side, and is so
considerable a branch of this river, that it may be mistaken for the Ohio
itself by persons ascending it. It is slow for ten miles, to little broken
hills, -- the low land is very rich, and of about the same breadth, (from the
pipe hills to the falls) as upon the Ohio. After going ten miles up Kanhawa,
the land is hilly, and the water a little rapid for 50 or 60 miles further to
the falls, yet batteaux or barges may be easily rowed thither. These falls were
formerly thought impassable; but late discoveries have proved, that a wagon
road may be made through the mountain, which occasions the falls, and that by a
portage of a few miles only, a communication may be had between the waters of
Great Kanhawa and Ohio, and those of James river in Virginia.

"Tottery lies upon the south-eastern side of the Ohio, and is navigable with
batteaux to the Ouasioto mountains. It is a long river, has few branches, and
interlocks with Red Creek, or Clinche's River (a branch of the Cuttawa;) and
has below the mountains, especially for 15 miles from its mouth, very good
land. Here is a perceptible difference of climate between the upper and this
part of Ohio. Here the large reed, or Carolina cane, grows in plenty, even upon
the upland, and the winter is so moderate as not to destroy it. The same
moderation of climate continues down Ohio, especially on the south-east side,
to the rapids, and thence on both sides of that river to the Mississippi.

"Great Salt Lick Creek is remarkable for fine land, plenty of buffaloes, salt
springs, white clay, and limestone. Small boats may go to the crossing of the
war-path without any impediment. The salt springs render the waters unfit for
drinking, but the plenty of fresh springs in their vicinity makes sufficient
amends for this inconvenience.

"Kentucky is larger than the preceding creek* it is surrounded with high clay
banks, fertile lands, and large salt springs. Its navigation is interrupted by
shoals, but passable with small boats to the gap, where the war-path goes
through the Ouasioto mountains.

"Scioto is a large gentle river, bordered with rich flats, or meadows. It
overflows in the spring, and then spreads about half a mile, though when
confined within its banks, it is scarce a furlong wide.

"If it floods early, it seldom retires within its banks in less than a month,
and is not fordable frequently in less than two months.

"The Scioto, besides having a great extent of most excellent land on both
sides of the river, is furnished with salt, on an eastern branch, and red bole
on Necunsia Skeintat. The stream of Scioto is gentle and passable, with large
batteaux or barges, for a considerable way, and with smaller boats near 200
miles, to a portage of only four miles to Sandusky.

"Sandusky is a considerable river abounding in level land; its stream gentle
all the way to the mouth, where it is large enough to receive sloops. The
northern Indians cross Lake Erie here from island to island, land at Sandusky,
and go by a direct path to the Lower Shawanoe town, and thence to the gap of
the Ouasioto mountain, in their way to the Cuttawa country.

"Little Mineami river is too small to navigate with batteaux. It has much fine
land and several salt springs; its high banks and gentle current prevent its
much overflowing the surrounding lands in freshes.

"Great Mineami, Assereniet or Rocky river, has a very stony channel; a swift
stream, but no falls. It has several large branches, passable with boats a
great way; one extending westward toward the Quiaghtena river, another toward
a branch of Mineami river (which runs into Lake Erie,) to which there is a
portage, and a third has a portage to the west branch of Sandusky, besides Mad
Creek, where the French formerly established themselves. Rising ground, here
and there a little stony, begins in the northern part of the peninsula, between
the lakes Erie, Huron, and Michigan, and extends across little Mineami river
below the Forks, and southwardly along the Rocky river, to Ohio.

"Buffaloe river falls into the Ohio on the eastern side of it, at the distance
of 925 computed miles from Fort-Pitt. It is a very considerable branch of the
Ohio; is 200 yards wide, navigable upwards of 150 miles for batteaux or barges,
of 30 feet long, five feet broad, and three feet deep, carrying about seven
tons, and can be navigated much farther with large canoes. The stream is
moderate. The lands on both sides of the river are of a most luxuriant quality,
for the production of hemp, flax, wheat, tobacco, etc. They are covered with a
great variety of lofty and useful timber; as oak, hickory, mulberry, elm, etc.
Several persons who have ascended this river say, that salt springs, coal,
lime, and freestone, etc. are to be found in a variety of places.

"The Wabash is a beautiful river, with high and upright banks, less subject to
overflow than any other river, (the Ohio excepted) in this part of America. It
discharges itself into the Ohio, one thousand and twenty-two miles below
Fort-Pitt, in latitude 37 41. -- At its mouth it is 270 yards wide; is
navigable to Ouiatanon (412 miles) in the spring, summer, and autumn, with
batteaux or barges, drawing about three feet water. From thence, on account of
a rocky bottom, and shoal water, large canoes are chiefly employed, except when
the river is swelled with rains, at which time it may be ascended with boats,
such as I have just described, (197 miles further) to the Miami carrying place,
which is nine miles from the Miami village, and this is situated on a river of
the same name, that runs into the south-south-west part of Lake Erie. -- The
stream of the Wabash is generally gentle to Fort-Ouiatanon, and no where
obstructed with falls, but is by several rapids, both above and below that
fort, some of which are pretty considerable. There is also a part of the river,
for about three miles, and 30 miles from the carrying place, where the channel
is so narrow, that it is necessary to make use of setting poles instead of
oars. The land on this river is remarkably fertile, and several parts of it are
natural meadows, of great extent, covered with fine long grass. The timber is
large and high, and in such variety, that almost all the different kinds
growing upon the Ohio and its branches (but with a greater proportion of black
and white mulberry-trees) may be found here. -- A silver mine has been
discovered about 28 miles above Ouiatanon, (...) northern side of the Wabash,
and probably others may be found hereafter. The Wabash abounds with salt
springs, and any quantity of salt may be made from them, in the manner now done
at the Saline in the Illinois country: -- the hills are replenished with the
best coal, and there is plenty of lime and free stone, blue, yellow and white
clay, for glass works and pottery. Two French settlements are established on
the Wabash, called Post Vincient and Ouiatanon; the first is 150 miles, and the
other 262 miles from its mouth. The former is on the eastern side of the river,
and consists of 60 settlers and their families. They raise Indian corn, wheat,
and tobacco of an extraordinary good quality, superior, it is said, to that
produced in Virginia. They have a fine breed of horses (brought originally by
the Indians from the Spanish settlements on the western side of the river
Mississippi), and large stocks of swine and black cattle. The settlers deal
with the natives for furs and deer skins, to the amount of about 5000l.
annually. Hemp of a good texture grows spontaneously in the low lands of the
Wabash, as do grapes in the greatest abundance, having a black, thin skin, and
of which the inhabitants in the autumn make a sufficient quantity (for their
own consumption) of well-tasted red-wine. Hops, large and good are found in
many places, and the lands are particularly adapted to the culture of rice. All
European fruits; -- apples, peaches, pears, cherries, currants, goosberries,
melons, etc. thrive well, both here and in the country bordering on the river
Ohio.

"Ouiatanon is a small stockaded fort on the western side of the Wabash, in
which about a dozen families reside. The neighboring Indians are the
Kickapoos, Musquitons, Pyankishaws, and a principal part of the Ouiatanons. The
whole of these tribes consist, it is supposed, of about one thousand warriors.
The fertility of soil, and diversity of timber in this country, are the same as
in the vicinity of Post Vincient. The annual amount of skins and furs obtained
at Ouiatanon is aboat 8000l. By the river Wabash, the inhabitants of Detroit
move to the southern parts of Ohio and the Illinois country. Their rout is by
the Miami river to a carrying place, which, as before stated, is nine miles to
the Wabash, when this river is raised with freshes; but at other seasons, the
distance is from 18 to 30 miles, including the portage. The whole of the latter
is through a level country. Carts are usually employed in transporting boats
and merchandise from the Miami to the Wabash river.

"The Shawanoe river empties itself on the eastern side of Ohio, about 95 miles
southwardly of the Wabash river. It is 250 yards wide at its mouth, ha^ been
navigated 180 miles in batteaux of the construction of those mentioned in the
preceding article, and from the depth of water, at that distance from its
mouth, it is presumed, it may be navigated much further. The soil and timber of
the lands upon this river are exactly the same as those upon Buffaloe river.

"The Cherokee river discharges itself into the Ohio on the same side that the
Shawanoe river does, that is, 13 miles below or southerly of it, and 11 miles
above, or northerly of the place where Fort-Massac formerly stood, and 57 miles
from the confluence of the Ohio with the river Mississippi. The Cherokee river
has been navigated 900 miles from its mouth. At the distance of 220 miles from
thence, it widens from 400 yards, (its general width) to between two and three
miles, and continues this breadth for near thirty miles farther. The whole of
this distance is called the Muscle Shoals. Here the channel is obstructed with
a number of islands, formed by trees and drifted wood, brought hither, at
different seasons of the year, in freshes and floods. In passing these islands,
the middle of the widest intermediate water is to be navigated, as there it is
deepest. From the mouth of the Cherokee river to Muscle Shoals the current is
moderate, and both the high and low lands are rich, and abundantly covered with
oaks, walnut, sugar-trees, hickory, etc. About 200 miles above these shoals is,
what is called, the Whirl, or Suck, occasioned, I imagine, by the high
mountain, which there confines the river (supposed to be the Laurel mountain.)
The Whirl, or Suck, continues rapid for about three miles. Its width about
fifty yards. Ascending the Cherokee river, and at about 100 miles from the
Suck, and upon the south-eastern side of that river, is Highwasce river. Vast
tracts of level and rich land border on this river; but at a small distance
from it, the country is much broken, and some parts of it produce only pine
trees. Forty miles higher up the Cherokee river, on the north-western side, is
Clin^he's river. It is 150 yards wide, and about fifty miles up it several
families are settled. From Clinche's to Tenesee river is one hundred miles. It
comes in on the eastern side, and is 250 yards wide. About ten miles up this
river is a Cherokee town, called Chota, and further up this branch are several
other Indian towns, possessed by Indians, called, the Overhill Cherokees. The
navigation of this branch is much interrupted by rocks, as is also the river
called French Broad, which comes into the Cherokee river fifty miles above the
Tenesee, and on the same side. One hundred and fifty miles above French Broad
is Long Island, (three miles in length) and from thence to the source of the
Cherokee river is sixty miles, and the whole distance is so rocky as to be
scarcely navigable with a canoe.

"By the Cherokee river, the emigrants from the frontier counties of Virginia
and North Carolina, pass to the settlements in West-Florida, upon the river
Mississippi. They embark at Long Island.

"I will now proceed to give a description of that part called the Illinois
country, lying between the Mississippi westerly, the Illinois river northerly,
the Wabash easterly, and the Ohio southerly.

"The land at the confluence, or fork of the rivers Mississippi and Ohio, is
above twenty feet higher than the common surface of these rivers; yet so
considerable are the spring floods, that it is generally overflowed for about a
week, as are the lands for several miles back in the country. -- The soil at
the fork is composed of mud, earth, and sand, accumulated from the Ohio and
Mississippi rivers. It is exceedingly fertile, and in its natural state yields
hemp, pea-vines, grass, etc. and a great variety of trees, and in particular
the aspen tree, of an unusual height and thickness.

"For 25 miles up the Mississippi (from the Ohio) the country is rich, level,
and well timbered; and then several gentle rising grounds appear, which
gradually diminish at the distance of between four and five miles eastward from
the river. From thence to the Kaskaskias river is 65 miles. The country is a
mixture of hills and valleys; some of the former are rocky and steep; but they,
as well as the valleys, are shaded with fine oaks, hickory, walnut, ash, and
mulberry trees, etc. Some of the high grounds afford most pleasant situations
for settlements. Their elevated and airy positions, together with the great
luxuriance of the soil, every where yielding plenty of grass, and useful
plants, promise health, and ample returns to industrious settlers.

"Many quarries of lime, freestone, and marble, have been discovered in this
part of the country.

"Several creeks and rivers fall into the Mississippi, in the above distance
(of 65 miles), but no remarkable ones, except the rivers a'Vase and Kaskaskias:
the former is navigable for batteaux about 60, and the latter for about 130
miles. Both these rivers run through a rich country, abounding in extensive,
natural meadows, and numberless herds of buffaloe, deer, etc.

"The high grounds, just mentioned, continue along the eastern side of the
Kaskaskias river, at a small distance from it, for the space of five miles and
a half, to the Kaskaskias village; then they incline more toward that river,
and run nearly parallel with the eastern bank of the Mississippi, at the
distance of about three miles in some parts, and four miles in other parts from
it. These are principally composed of lime and freestone, and from 100 to 130
feet high, divided in several places by deep cavities, through which many small
rivulets pass before they fall into the Mississippi. The sides of these hills,
fronting this river, are in many places perpendicular, and appear like solid
pieces of stone masonry, of various colors, figures, and sizes.

"The low land between the hills and the Mississippi begins on the north side
of the Kaskaskias river, and continues for three miles above the river Misouri,
where a high ridge terminates it, and forms the eastern bank of the
Mississippi. This interval land is level, has few trees, and is of a very rich
soil, yielding shrubs and most fragrant flowers, which, added to the number and
extent of meadows and ponds dispersed through this charming valley, render it
exceedingly beautiful and agreeable.

"In this vale stand the following villages, viz. Kaskaskias, which, as already
mentioned, is five miles and a half up a river of the same name, running
northerly and southerly. This village contains 80 houses, many of them well
built -- several of stone, with gardens and large lots adjoining. It consists
of about 500 white inhabitants, and between four and five hundred negroes. The
former have large stocks of black cattle, swine, etc.

"Three miles northerly of Kaskaskias, is a village of Illinois Indians (of the
Kaskaskias tribe) containing about 210 persons and 60 warriors. They were
formerly brave and warlike, but are degenerated into a drunken and debauched
tribe, and so indolent, as scarcely to procure a sufficiency of skins and furs
to barter for clothing.

"Nine miles further northward than the last mentioned village, is another,
called La Prairie du Rocher, or the Rock Meadows. It consists of one hundred
white inhabitants, and eighty negroes.

"Three miles northerly of this place, on the banks of the Mississippi, stood
Fort-Chartres. It was abandoned in the year 1772, as it was rendered untenable
by the constant washings of the River Mississippi in high floods. -- The
village of Fort-Chartres, a little southward of the fort, contained so few
inhabitants as not to deserve my notice.

"One mile higher up the Mississippi than Fort-Chartres, is a village settled
by 170 warriors of the Piorias and Mitchigamias (two other tribes of the
Illinois Indians). They are as idle and debauched as the tribe of Kaskaskias
which I have just described.

"Four miles higher than the preceding village, is St. Philip's. It was
formerly inhabited by about a dozen families, but at present is possessed only
by two or three. The others have retired to the western side of the Mississippi.

"Forty-five miles further northwards than St. Philip's (and one mile up a
small river on the southern side of it) stands the village of Cahokia. It has
50 houses, many of them well built, and 300 inhabitants, possessing 80 negroes,
and large stocks of black cattle, swine, etc.

"Four miles above Cahokia, on the western or Spanish side of the Mississippi,
stands the village of St. Louis, on a high piece of ground. It is the most
healthy and pleasurable situation of any known in this part of the country.
Here the Spanish commandant and the principal Indian traders reside; who, by
conciliating the affections of the natives, have drawn all the Indian trade of
the Misouri, part of that of the Mississippi (northwards) and of the tribes of
Indians residing near the Ouisconsing and Illinois rivers, to this village. In
St. Louis are 120 houses, mostly built of stone. They are large and commodious.
This village has 800 inhabitants, chiefly French; -- some of them have had a
liberal education, are polite, and hospitable. They have about 150 negroes, and
large stocks of black cattle, etc.

"Twelve miles below, or southerly of Fort-Chartres, on the western bank of the
Mississippi, and nearly opposite to the village of Kaskaskias, is the village
of St. Genevieve, or Missire. It contains upwards of 100 houses, and 460
inhabitants, besides negroes. This and St. Louis are all the villages that are
upon the western or Spanish side of the Mississippi.

"Four miles below St. Genevieve, (on the western bank of the Mississippi,) at
the mouth of a creek, is a hamlet, called the Saline. Here all the salt is made
which is used in the Illinois country, from a salt spring that is at this place.

"In the several villages on the Mississippi, which I have just described,
there were, so long ago as the year 1771, twelve hundred and seventy-three
sencible men.

"The ridge which forms the eastern bank of the Mississippi, above the Misouri
river, continues northerly to the Illinois river, and then directs its course
along the eastern side of that river for about 220 miles, when it declines in
gentle slopes, and ends in extensive rich savannahs. On the top of this ridge,
at the mouth of the Illinois river, is an agreeable and commanding situation
for a fort, and though the ridge is high and steep (about 130 feet high), and
rather difficult to ascend, yet when ascended, it affords a most delightful
prospect. -- The Mississippi is distinctly seen from its summit for more than
twenty miles, as are the beautiful meanderings of the Illinois river for many
leagues; -- next a level, fruitful meadow presents itself, of at least one
hundred miles in circuit on the western side of the Mississippi, watered by
several lakes, and shaded by small groves or copses of trees, scattered in
different parts of it, and then the eye with rapture surveys, as well the high
lands bordering upon the river Misouri, as those at a greater distance up the
Mississippi. In fine, this charming ridge is covered with excellent grass,
large oak, walnut-trees, etc. and at the distance of about nine miles from the
Mississippi, up the Illinois river, are seen many large savannahs, or meadows,
abounding in buffaloe, deer, etc.

"In ascending the Mississippi, Cape au Gres particularly attracted my
attention. It is about eight leagues above the Illinois river, on the eastern
side of the Mississippi, and continues above five leagues on that river. There
is a gradual descent back to delighted meadows, and to beautiful and fertile
uplands, watered by several rivulets, which fall into the Illinois river,
between thirty and forty miles from its entrance into the Mississippi, and into
the latter at Cape au Gres. The distance from the Mississippi to the River
Illinois across the country, is lessened or increased, according to the
windings of the former river; -- the smallest distance is at Cape au Gres, and
there it is between four and five miles. The lands in this intermediate space
between the above two rivers are rich, almost beyond parallel, covered with
large oaks, walnut, etc. and not a stone is to be seen except upon the sides of
the river. It is even acknowledged by the French inhabitants, that if
settlements were only begun at Cape au Gres, those upon the Spanish side of the
Mississippi would be abandoned, as the former would excite a constant
succession of settlers, and intercept all the trade of the upper Mississippi.

"The Illinois river furnishes a communication with Lake Michigan, by the
Chicago river, and by two portages between the latter and the Illinois river;
the longest of which does not exceed four miles.

"The Illinois country is in general of a superior soil to any other part of
North America that I have seen. It produces fine oak, hickory, cedar,
mulberry-trees, etc. some dying roots and medicinal plants; -- hops and
excellent wild grapes, and in the year 1769, one hundred and ten hogsheads of
well-tasted and strong wine were made by the French settlers from these grapes,
-- a large quantity of sugar is also annually made from the juice of the
maple-tree; and as the mulberry-trees are long and numerous, I presume the
making of silk will employ the attention and industry of the settlers, when the
country is more fully inhabited than it is at present, and especially as the
winters are much more moderate, and favorable for the breed of silk worms,
than they are in many of the seacoast provinces. -- Indigo may likewise be
successfully cultivated (but not more than two cuttings in a year); wheat,
peace, and Indian corn thrive well, as does every sort of grain and pulse, that
is produced in any of the old colonies. Great quantities of tobacco are also
yearly raised by the inhabitants of the Illinois, both for their own
consumption, and that of the Indians; but little has hitherto been exported to
Europe. Hemp grows spontaneously, and is of a good texture; its common height
is 10 feet, and its thickness three inches (the latter reckoned within about a
foot of the root), and with little labor any quantity may be cultivated. Flax
seed has hitherto been only raised in small quantities. There has however been
enough produced to show that it may be sown to the greatest advantage. Apples,
pears, peaches, and all other European fruits, succeed admirably. Iron, copper,
and lead mines, as also salt springs, have been discovered in different parts
of this territory. The two latter are worked on the Spanish side of the
Mississippi, with considerable advantage to their owners. There is plenty of
fish in the rivers, particularly cat, carp, and perch, of an uncommon size. --
Savannahs, or natural meadows, are both numerous and extensive; yielding
excellent grass, and feeding great herds of buffaloe, deer, etc. -- Ducks,
teal, geese, swans, cranes, pelicans, turkeys, pheasants, partridges, etc. such
as are seen in the seacoast colonies, are in the greatest variety and
abundance. -- In short, every thing that a reasonable mind can desire is to be
found, or may, with little pains, be produced here.

"Niagara fort is a most important post. It secures a greater ^^mber of
communications through a larger coun^^^ (...) probably any other pass in
interior Ameri^^ (...) stands at the entrance of a strait, by which lake
^ntario is joined to lake Erie, and the latter is connected with the three
great lakes, Huron, Michegan, and Superior. About nine miles above Fort Niagara
the carrying place begins. It is occasioned by the stupendous cataract of that
name. The quantity of water which tumbles over this fall is unparalleled in
America; its height is not less than 137 feet. This fall would interrupt the
communication between the lakes Ontario and Erie, if a road was not made up the
hilly country that borders upon the strait. This road extends to a small post
eighteen miles from Fort Niagara. Here the traveller embarks in a batteau or
canoe, and proceeds eighteen miles to a small fort at Lake Erie. It may be
proper also to add, that at the end of the first two miles, in the
last-mentioned distance of 18 miles, the stream of the river is divided by a
large island, above nine miles in length; and at the upper end of it, about a
mile from Lake Erie, are three or four islands, not far from each other; --
these islands, by interrupting and confining the waters discharged from the
lake, greatly increase the rapidity of the stream; which indeed is so violent,
that the stiffest gale is scarcely sufficient to enable a large vessel to stem
it; but it is successfully resisted in small batteaux or canoes, that are rowed
near the shore.

"Lake Erie is about 225 miles in length, and upon a medium about 40 miles in
breadth. It affords a good navigation for shipping of any burden. The coast,
on both sides of the lake, is generally favorable for the passage of batteaux
and canoes. Its banks in many places have a flat sandy shore, particularly to
the eastward of the peninsula called Long-Point, which extends into the lake,
in a south-eastern direction, for upwards of 18 miles, and is more than five
miles wide in the broadest part; but the isthumus, by which it joins the ca^
(...), is scarcely two hundred yards wide. The (...) ^la is composed of sand,
and is very convenient to haul boats out of the surf upon (as is almost every
other part of the shore) when the lake is too rough for rowing or sailing; yet
there are some places where, in boisterous weather, (on account of their great
perpendicular height,) it would be dangerous to approach, and impossible to
land. Most of these places are marked in my map with the letter X.

"Lake Erie has a great variety of fine fish, such a^ sturgeon, eel, white
fish, trout, perch, etc.

"The country, northward of this lake, is in many parts swelled with moderate
hills, but no high mountains. The climate is temperate, and the air healthful.
The lands are well timbered (but not generally so rich as those upon the
southern side of the lake), and for a considerable distance from it, and for
several miles eastward of Cayahoga river, they appear quite level and extremely
fertile; and except where extensive savannahs, or natural meadows intervene,
are covered with large oaks, walnut, ash, hickory, mulberry, sassafras, etc.
etc. and produce a great variety of shrubs and medicinal roots. -- Here also is
great plenty of buffaloe, deer, turkies, partridges, etc.

"Fort Detroit is of an oblong figure, built with stockades, and advantageously
situated, with one entire side commanding the river, called Detroit. This fort
is near a mile in circumference, and encloses about one hundred houses, built
in a regular manner, with parallel streets, crossing each other at right
angles. Its situation is delightful, and in the center of a pleasant, fruitful
country.

"The strait St. Clair (commonly called the Detroit river) is at its entrance
more than three miles wide, but in ascending it, its width perceptibly
diminishes, so that opposite to the fort (which is 18 miles from Lake Erie) it
does not exceed half a mile in width. From thence to Lake St. Clair it widens
to more than a mile. The channel of the strait is gentle and wide, and deep
enough for shipping of great burden, although it is incommoded by several
islands, one of which is more than seven miles in length. These islands are of
a fertile soil, and from their situation afford a very agreeable appearance.
For eight miles below, and the same distance above Fort Detroit, on both sides
of the river, the country is divided into regular and well-cultivated
plantations, and from the contiguity of the farmers' houses to each other, they
appear as two long extended villages. The inhabitants, who are mostly French,
are about 2000 in number, 500 of whom are as good marksmen, and as ^ell
accustomed to the woods, as the Indian natives themselves. They raise large
stocks of black cattle, and great quantities of corn, which they grind by
wind-mills and manufacture into excellent flour. The chief trade of Detroit
consists in a barter of coarse European goods with the natives for furs, deer
skins, tallow, etc. etc.

"The rout from Lake St. Clair to Lake Huron is up a strait or river, about 400
yards wide. This river derives itself from Lake Huron, and at the distance of
33 miles loses itself in Lake St. Clair. It is in general rapid, but
particularly so near its source: its channel, and also that of Lake St. Clair,
are sufficiently deep for shipping of a very considerable burden. This strait
has several mouths, and the lands lying between them are fine meadows. The
country on both sides of it, for 15 miles, has a very level appearance, but
from thence to Lake Huron it is in many places broken, and covered with white
pines, oaks, maple, birch, and beech."

Thoughts on the Duration of the American Commonwealth.
THERE is a greater probability that the duration of the American commonwealth
will be longer than any empire that has hitherto existed. For it is a truth,
universally admitted, that all the advantages which ever attended any of the
monarchies in the old world, all center in the new, together with many others
which they never enjoy. The four great empires, and the dominions of
Charlemaign and the Turks, all rose by conquests -- none by the arts of peace.
On the contrary, the territory of the United States has been planted and reared
by a union of liberty, good conduct, and all the comforts of domestic virtue.

All the greater monarchies were formed by the conquest of kingdoms, different
in arts, manners, language, temper, or religion, from the conquerors; so that
the union, though in some cases very strong, was never the real and intimate
connection of the same people; and this circumstance principally accelerated
their ruin, and was absolutely the cause of it in some. This will be very
different in the Americans. They will, in their greatest extent and population,
be one and the same people -- the same in language, religion, laws, manners,
tempers and pursuits; for the small variation in some districts, owing to the
settlement of Germans, is an exception so very slight, that in a few ages it
will be unknown.

The Assyrian and Roman empires were of very slow growth, and therefore lasted
the longest; but still their increase was by conquest, and the union of
dissonant parts. The Persian and Macedonian monarchies were soon founded and
presently overturned; the former not lasting so long as the Assyrian, nor a
sixth of the duration of the Roman; and as to the Macedonian, it lasted but six
years. This advant^ge of a slow growth is strong in favor of the Americans;
the wonderful increase of their numbers is the natural effect of plenty of
land, a good climate, and a mild and beneficent government, in which corruption
and tyranny are wholly unknown. Some centuries are already past since their
first settlement, and many more will pass before their power appears in its
full splendor; but the quickness of a growth that is entirely natural will
carry with it no marks of decay, being entirely different from monarchies
founded by force of arms. The Roman empire perished by the hands of northern
barbarians, whom the masters of the world disdained to conquer: it will not be
so with the Americans; they spread gradually over the whole continent, insomuch
that two hundred years hence there probably will be nobody but themselves in
the whole northern continent: from whence therefore should their Goths and
Vandals come? Nor can they ever have any thing to fear from the south; first,
because that country will never be populous, owing to the possession of mines:
secondly, there are several nations and languages planted and remaining in it:
thirdly, the most considerable part of it lies in the torrid zone; a region
that never yet sent forth nations of conquerors.

In extent the habitable parts of North America exceed that of any of the four
empires, and consequently can feed and maintain a people much more numerous
than the Assyrians or the Romans. The situation of the region is so
advantageous that it leaves nothing to be wished for; it can have no neighbors
from whom there is a possibility of attack or molestation; it will possess all
the solid advantages of the Chinese empire, without the fatal neighborhood of
the Tartars.

It will have further the singular felicity of all the advantages of an island,
that is, a freedom from the attacks of others, and too many difficulties, with
too great a distance, to engage in enterprises that heretofore proved the ruin
of other monarchies.

The soil, the climate, production, and face of the continent, are formed by
nature for a great, independent, and permanent government: fill it with people
who will of themselves, of course, possess all sorts of manufactures, and you
will find it yielding every necessary and convenience of life. Such a vast
tract of country, possessing such singular advantages, becoming inhabited by
one people, speaking the same language, professing the same religion, and
having the same manners; attaining a population equal to that of the greatest
empire; sprung from an active and industrious nation, who have transfused into
them their own industry and spirit, and seen them worthy of their original;
inhabiting a soil not dangerously fertile, nor a clime generally conducive to
effeminacy; accustomed to commerce: such a people must found a commonwealth as
indissoluble as humanity will allow. Suffice it for England, that she will have
been the origin of a commonwealth, greater and more durable than any former
monarchy; that her language and her manners will flourish among a people who
will one day become a splendid spectacle in the vast eye of the universe. This
flattering idea of immortality no other nation can hope to attain.

And here let me make an observation that should animate the authors in the
English language with an ardour that cannot be infused into those of any other
nation; it is the pleasing idea of living among so great a people, through
almost a perpetuity of same, and under almost an impossibility of becoming,
like the Greek and Latin tongues, dead; known only by the learned. --
Increasing time will bring increasing readers, until their names become
repeated with pleasure by above an hundred millions of people!

A state of the Commercial Intercourse between the United States of America and
Foreign Nations. Written in the Month of June, 1792. By Thomas Jefferson, Esquire
Secretary of State to the said United States.
The countries with which the United States have had their chief commercial
intercourse, are Spain, Portugal, France, Great Britain, the United
Netherlands, Denmark, and Sweden, and their American possessions; and the
articles of export which constitute the basis of that commerce, with their
re^pective amounts, are -- Bread stuff, that is to say, bread-grains, meals,
and bread, to the annual amount of 7,649,887 Dols. Tobacco 4,349,567 Dols. Rice
1,753,796 Dols. Wood 1,263,534 Dols. Salted fish 941,696 Dols. Pot and pearl
ash 839,093 Dols. Salted meats 599,130 Dols. Indigo 537,379 Dols. Horses and
mules 339,753 Dols. Whale oil 252,591 Dols. Flax seed 236,072 Dols. Tar, pitch,
and turpentine 217,177 Dols. Live provisions 137,743 Dols. Ships Foreign goods
620,274 Dols.


To descend to articles of smaller value than these, would lead into a
minuteness of detail neither necessary nor useful to the present object.

The proportions of our exports, which go to the nations before mentioned, and
to their dominions, respectively, are as follows: To Spain and its dominions
2,005,907 Dols. Portugal and its dominions 1,283,462 Dols. France and its
dominions 4,698,735 Dols. Great Britain and its dominions 9,363,416 Dols. The
U. Netherlands and their dominions 1,963,880 Dols. Denmark and its dominions
224,415 Dols. Sweden and its dominions 47,240 Dols.


Our Imports from the same countries are -- Spain and its dominions 335,110
Dols. Portugal and its dominions 595,763 Dols. France and its dominions
2,068,348 Dols. Great Britain and its dominions 15,285,428 Dols. United
Netherlands and their dominions 1,172,692 Dols. Denmark and its dominions
351,394 Dols. Sweden and its dominions 14,325 Dols.


These imports consist mostly of articles on which industry has been exhausted.

Our navigation, depending on the same commerce, will appear by the following
statement of the tonnage of our own vessels, entering into our ports, from
those several nations and their possessions, in one year, that is to say, from
October, 1789, to September, 1790, inclusive, as follows: Spain 19,695 Tons.
Portugal 23,576 Tons. France 116,410 Tons. Great Britain 43,580 Tons. United
Netherlands 58,858 Tons. Denmark 14,655 Tons. Sweden 750 Tons.


Of our commercial objects, Spain receives favorably our bread stuff, salte^
fish, wood, ships, tar, pitch, and turpentine. On our meals, however, as well
as on those of other foreign countries, when re-exported to their colonies,
they have lately imposed duties of from half a dollar to two dollars the
barrel, the duties being so proportioned to the current price of their own
flour, as that both together are to make the constant sum of nine dollars per
barrel.

They do not discourage our rice, pot and pearl ash, salted provisions, or
whale oil: but these articles being in small demand at their markets, are
carried thither but in a small degree. Their demand for rice, however, is
increasing. Neither tobacco nor indigo are received there. Our commerce is
permitted with their Canary Islands, under the same conditions.

Themselves and their colonies are the actual consumers of what they receive
from us.

Our navigation is free with the kingdom of Spain; foreign goods being received
there in our ships, on the same conditions as if carried in their own, or in
the vessels of the country of which such goods are the manufacture or produce.

Portugal receives favorably our grain and bread, salted fish and other salted
provisions, wood, tar, pitch, and turpentine.

For flax-seed, pot and pearl ash, though not discouraged, there is little
demand.

Our ships pay 20 per cent. on being sold to their subjects, and are then free
bottoms.

Foreign goods, (except those of the East Indies) are received on the same
footing in our vessels as in their own, or any others; that is to say, on
general duties of from twenty to twenty-eight per cent. and consequently our
navigation unobstructed by them. Tobacco, rice, and meals, are prohibited.

Themselves and their colonies consume what they receive from us.

These regulations extend to the Azores, Madeira, and the Cape de Verd Islands,
except that in these meals and rice are received freely.

France receives favorably our bread stuff, rice, wood, pot and pearl ashes.

A duty of five sous the kental, or nearly four and a half cents, is paid on
our tar, pitch, and turpentine. Our whale oil pays six livres the kental, and
are the only foreign whale oils admitted. Our indigo pays five livres on the
kental; their own, two and an half: but a difference of quality, still more
than a difference of duty, prevents its seeking that market.

Salted beef is received freely for re-exportation, but if for home
consumption, it pays five livres the kental. Other salted provisions pay that
duty in all cases, and salted fish is made lately to pay the prohibitory one of
twenty livres in the kental.

Our ships are free to carry thither all foreign goods which may be carried in
their own or any other vessels, except tobaccoes not of our own growth; and
they participate with their's the exclusive carriage of our whale oils and
tobaccoes.

During their former government, our tobacco was under a monopoly, but paid no
duties; and our ships were freely sold in their ports, and converted into
national bottoms. The first National Assembly took from our ships this
privilege: they emancipated tobacco from its monopoly, but subjected it to
duties of eighteen livres fifteen sous the kental, carried in their own
vessels, and twenty-five livres carried in ours, a difference more than equal
to the freight of the article.

They and their colonies consume what they receive from us.

Great Britain receives our pot and pearl ashes free, while those of other
nations pay a duty of two shillings and three pence the kental. There is an
equal distinction in favor of our bar iron, of which article, however, we do
not produce enough for our own use. Woods are free from us, whilst they pay
some small duty from other countries. Our tar and pitch pay 11d. sterling the
barrel; from other alien countries they pay about a penny and a third more.

Our tobacco, for their own consumption, pays 1s. 3d. sterling the pound,
custom and excise, besides heavy expenses of collection. And rice, in the same
case, pays 7s. 4d. sterling the hundred weight; which rendering it too dear as
an article of common food, it is consequently used in very small quantity.

Our salted fish, and other salted provisions, except bacon, are prohibited.
Bacon and whale oil are under prohibitory duties; so are our grains, meals, and
bread, as to internal consumption, unless in times of such scarcity as may
raise the price of wheat to 50s. sterling the quarter, and other grains and
meals in proportion.

Our ships, though purchased and navigated by their own subjects, are not
permitted to be used, even in their trade with us.

While the vessels of other nations are secured by standing laws, which cannot
be altered but by the concurrent will of the three branches of the British
legislature, in carrying thither any produce or manufacture of the country to
which they belong, which may be lawfully carried in any vessels, ours, with the
same prohibition of what is foreign, are further prohibited by a standing law
(12 Car. II.28. 3) from carrying thither all and any of our own domestic
productions and manufactures. A subsequent act, indeed, authorized their
executive to permit the carriage of our own productions in our own bottoms, at
its sole discretion; and the permission has been given from year to year by
proclamation, but subject every moment to be withdrawn on that single will, in
which event our vessels having any thing on board, stand interdicted from the
entry of all British ports. The disadvantage of a tenure which may be so
suddenly discontinued was e^perienced by our merchants on a late occasion, when
an official notification that this law would be strictly enforced, gave them
just apprehensions for the fate of their vessels and cargoes dispatched or
distined to the ports of Great Britain. The minister of that court, indeed,
frankly expressed his personal conviction that the words of the order went
farther than was intended, and so he afterward officially informed us; but the
embarrassments of the moment were real and great, and the possibility of their
renewal lays our commerce to that country under the same species of
discouragement as to other countries where it is regulated by a single
legislator; and the distinction is too remarkable not to be noticed, that our
navigation is excluded from the security of fixed laws, while that security is
given to the navigation of others.

Our vessels pay their ports 1s. 9d. sterling per ton, light and trinity dues,
more than is paid by British ships, except in the port of London, where they
pay the same as British.

The greater part of what they receive from us is re-exported to other
countries, under the useless charges of an intermediate deposit and double
voyage. From tables published in England, and composed, as is said, from the
books of their custom-houses, it appears that of the indigo imported there in
the years 1773 -- 4 -- 5, one third was re-exported; and from a document of
authority, we learn that of the rice and tobacco imported there before the war,
four-fifths were re-exported. We are assured, indeed, that the quantities sent
thither for re-exportation since the war, are considerably diminished, yet less
so than reason and national interest would dictate. The whole of our grain is
re-exported when wheat is below 50s. the quarter, and other grains in
proportion.

The United Netherlands prohibit our pickled beef and pork, meals and bread of
all sorts, and lay a prohibitory duty on spirits distilled from grain.

All other of our productions are received on varied duties, which may be
reckoned on a medium at about three per cent.

They consume but a small proportion of what they receive; the residue is
partly forwarded for consumption in the inland parts of Europe, and partly
re-shipped to other maritime countries. On the latter proportion they intercept
between us and the consumer so much of the value as is absorbed by the charges
attending an intermediate deposit.

Foreign goods, except some East India articles, are received in vessels of any
nation.

Our ships may be sold and naturalized there with exceptions of one or two
privileges, which somewhat lessen their value.

Denmark lays considerable duties on our tobacco and rice carried in their own
vessels, and half as much more if carried in ours; but the exact amount of
these duties is not perfectly known here. They lay such as amount to
prohibitions on our indigo and corn.

Sweden receives favorably our grains and meals, salted provisions, indigo,
and whale oil.

They subject our rice to duties of sixteen mills the pound weight carried in
their own vessels, and of forty per cent. additional on that, or 22,4^0 mills,
carried in ours or any others. Being thus rendered too dear as an article of
common food, little of it is consumed with them. They consume more of our
tobaccoes, which they take circuitously through Great Britain, levying heavy
duties on them also; their duties of entry, town duties, and excise, being 4
dols. 34 cents. the hundred weight, if carried in their own vessels, and of 40
per cent. on that additional, if carried in our own or any other vessels.

They prohibit altogether our bread, fish, pot and pearl ashes, flax-seed, tar,
pitch and turpentine, wood (except oak timber and masts), and all foreign
manufactures.

Under so many restrictions and prohibitions, our navigation with them is
reduced almost to nothing.

With our neighbors, an order of things much harder presents itself.

Spain and Portugal refuse to those parts of America which they govern, all
direct intercourse with any people but themselves. The commodities in mutual
demand between them and their neighbors must be carried to be exchanged in
some port of the dominant country, and the transportation between that and the
subject state must be in a domestic bottom.

France, by a standing law, permits her West India possessions to receive
directly our vegetables, live provisions, horses, wood, tar, pitch and
turpentine, rice and maize, and prohibits our other bread stuff; but a
suspension of this prohibition having been left to the colonial legislatures in
times of scarcity, it was formerly suspended occasionally, but latterly without
interruption.

Our fresh and salted provisions (except pork) are received in their islands
under a duty of three colonial livres the kental, and our vessels are as free
as their own to carry our commodities thither, and to bring away rum and
molasses.

Great Britain admits in her islands our vegetables, live provisions, horses,
wood, tar, pitch and turpentine, rice and bread stuff, by a proclamation of her
executive, limited always to the term of a year. She prohibits our salted
provisions: she does not permit our vessels to carry thither our own produce.
Her vessels alone may take it from us, and bring in exchange, rum, molasses,
sugar, coffee* cocoa nuts, ginger, and pimento. There are, indeed, some
freedoms in the island of Dominica, but under such circumstances as to be
little used by us. In the British continental colonies, and in Newfoundland,
all our productions are prohibited, and our vessels forbidden to enter their
ports; their governors however, in times of distress, have power to permit a
temporary importation of certain articles in their own bottoms, but not in ours.

Our citizens cannot reside as merchants or factors within any of the British
plantations, this being expressly prohibited by the same statute of 12 Car. II.
C. 18. commonly called the Navigation Act.

In the Danish American possessions, a duty of five per cent. is levied on our
corn, corn-meal, rice, tobacco, wood, salted fish, indigo, horses, mules, and
live stock; and of ten per cent. on our flour, salted pork and beef, tar,
pitch, and turpentine.

In the American islands of the United Netherlands and Sweden, our vessels and
produce are received, subject to duties, not so heavy as to have been
complained of; but they are heavier in the Dutch possessions on the continent.

To sum up these restrictions, so far as they are important:

1st. In Europe --
Our bread stuff is at most times under prohibitory duties in England, and
considerably dutied on exportation from Spain to her colonies.

Our toba^coes are heavily dutied in England, Sweden, an^ France, and
prohibited in Spain and Portugal.

Our rice is heavily dutied in England and Sweden, and prohibited in Portugal.

Our fish and salted provisions are prohibited in England, and under
prohibitory duties in France.

Our whale-oils are prohibited in England and Portugal.

And our vessel^ are denied naturalization in England, and of late in Fr^nce.

2d. In the West Indies.
All intercourse is prohibited with the possessions of Spain and Portugal.

Our salted provisions and fish are prohibited by England.

Our salted pork, and bread stuff (except maize,) are received under temporary
laws only, in the dominions of France, and our salted fish pays there a weighty
duty.

3d. In the Article of Navigation.
Our own carriage of our own tobacco is heavily dutied in Sweden, and lately in
France.

We can carry no article, not of our own production, to the British ports in
Europe.

Nor even our own produce to her American possessions.

Such being the restrictions on the commerce and navigation of the United
States, the question is, in what way they may best be removed, modified, or
counteracted?

As to the commerce, two methods occur. 1. By friendly arrangements with the
several nations with whom these restrictions exist: or, 2d. By the separate act
of our own legislatures for countervailing their effects.

There can be no doubt, but that of these two, friendly arrangement is the most
eligible. Instead of embarrassing commerce under piles of regulating laws,
duties, and prohibitions, could it be relieved from all its shackles in all
parts of the world -- could every country be employed in producing that which
nature has best fitted it to produce, and each be free to exchange with others
mutual surplusses for mutual wants, the greatest mass possible would then be
produced of those things which contribute to human life and human happiness*
the numbers of mankind would be increased, and their condition bettered.

Would even a single nation begin with the United States this system of free
commerce, it would be advisable to begin it with that nation; since it is by
one only that it can be extended to all. Where the circumstances of either
party render it expedient to levy a revenue, by way of impost, on commerce, its
freedom might be modified, in that particular, by mutual and equivalent
measures, preserving it entire in all others.

Some nations, not yet ripe for free commerce, in all its extent, might still
be willing to mollify its restrictions and regulations for us in proportion to
the advantages which an intercourse with us might offer. Particularly they may
concur with us in reciprocating the duties to be levied on each side, or in
compensating any excess of duty, by equivalent advantages of another nature.
Our commerce is certainly of a character to entitle it to favor in most
countries. The commodities we offer are either necessaries of life, or
materials for manufacture, or convenient subjects of revenue; and we take in
exchange, either manufactures, when they have received the last finish of art
and industry, or m^re luxuries. Such customers may reasonably expect welcome,
and friendly treatment at every market; customers too, whose demands,
increasing with their wealth and population, must very shortly give full
employment to the whole industry of any nation whatever, in any line of supply
they may get into the habit of calling for from it.

But should any nation, contrary to our wishes, suppose it may better find its
advantages by continuing its system of prohibitions, duties, and regulations,
it behooves us to protect our citizens, their commerce, and navigation, by
counter-prohibitions, duties, and regulations also. Free commerce and
navigation are not to be given in exchange for restrictions and vexations; nor
are they likely to produce a relaxation of them.

Our navigation involves still higher considerations. As a branch of industry,
it is valuable; but as a resource, essential.

Its value, as a branch of industry, is enhanced by the dependence of so many
other branches on it. In times of general peace it multiplies competitors for
employment in transportation, and so keeps that at its proper level; and in
times of war, that is to say, when those nations who may be our principal
carriers, shall be at war with each other, if we have not within ourselves the
means of transportation, our produce must be exported in belligerent vessels at
the increased expense of warfreight and insurance, and the articles which will
not bear that, must perish on our hands.

But it is a resource for defense that our navigation will admit neither
neglect nor forbearance. The position and circumstances of the United States
leave them nothing to fear on their land-board, and nothing to desire beyond
their present rights. But on their sea-board, they are open to injury, and they
have there, too, a commerce which must be protected. This can only be done by
possessing a respectable body of citizen-seamen, and of artists and
establishments in readiness for ship-building.

Were the ocean, which is the common property of all, open to the industry of
all, so that every person and vessel should be free to take employment wherever
it could be found, the United States would certainly not set the example of
appropriating to themselves, exclusively, any portion of the common stock of
occupation. They would rely on the enterprise and activity of their citizens
for a due participation of the benefits of the seafaring business, and for
keeping the marine class of citizens equal to their object. But if particular
nations grasp at undue shares* and more especially if they seize on the means
of the United States to convert them into aliment for their own strength* and
wit^draw them entirely from the support of those to whom they belong, defensive
and protecting measures become necessary on the part of the nation whose marine
resources are thus invaded, or it will be disarmed of its defense; its
productions will lie at the mercy of the nation which has possessed itself
exclusively of the means of carrying them, and its politics may be influenced
by those who command its commerce. The carriage of our own commodities, if once
established in another channel, cannot be resumed in the moment we may desire.
If we lose the seamen and artists whom it now occupies, we lose the present
means of marine defense, and time will be requisite to raise up others, when
disgrace or losses shall bring home to our feelings the error of having
abandoned them. The materials for maintaining our due share of navigation are
ours in abundance; and as to the mode of using them, we have only to adopt the
principles of those who thus put us on the defensive, or others equivalent and
better fitted to our circumstances.

The following principles being founded in reciprocity, appear perfectly just,
and to offer no cause of complaint to any nation.

1st. Where a nation imposes high duties on our productions, or prohibits them
altogether, it may be proper for us to do the same by theirs, first burthening
or excluding those productions which they bring here in competition with our
own of the same kind; selecting next such manufactures as we take from them in
greatest quantity, and which at the same time we could the soonest furnish to
ourselves, or obtain from other countries; imposing on them duties lighter at
first, but heavier and heavier afterward, as other channels of supply open.
Such duties having the effect of indirect encouragement to domestic
manufactures of the same kind, may induce the manufacturer to come himself into
those states; where cheaper subsistence, equal laws, and a ve^^ of his wares,
free of duty, may insure him the highest profits from his skill and industry.
And here it would be in the power of the state governments to cooperate
essentially, by opening the resources of encouragement which are under their
control, extending them liberally to artists in those particular branches of
manufacture, for which their soil, climate, population, and other circumstances
have matured them, and fostering the precious efforts and progress of household
manufacture, by some patronage suited to the nature of its objects, guided by
the local informations they possess, and guarded against abuse by their
presence and attentions. The oppressions on our agriculture in foreign ports
would thus be made the occasion of relieving it from a dependence on the
councils and conduct of others, and of promoting arts, manufactures, and
population, at home.

2d. Where a nation refuses permission to our merchants and factors to reside
within certain parts of their dominions, we may, if it should be thought
expedient, refuse residence to theirs in any and every part of ours, or modify
their transactions.

3. Where a nation refuses to receive in our vessels any productions but our
own, we may refuse to receive, in theirs, any but their own productions. The
first and second clauses of the bill reported by the committee are well formed
to effect this object.

4th. Where a nation refuses to consider any vessel as ours which has not been
built within our territories, we should refuse to consider as theirs any vessel
not built within their territories.

5th. Where a nation refuses to our vessels the carriage even of our own
productions to certain countries under their domination, we might refuse to
theirs, of every description, the carriage of the same productions to the same
countries. But as justice and good neighborhood would dictate, that those who
have no part in imposing the restriction on us, should not be the victims of
measures adopted to defeat its effect, it may be proper to confine the
restriction of vessels owned or navigated by any subjects of the same dominant
power, other than the inhabitants of the country to which the said productions
are to be carried. -- And to prevent all inconvenience to the said inhabitants,
and to our own, by too sudden a check on the means of transportation, we may
continue to admit the vessels marked for future exclusion, on an advanced
tonnage, and for such length of time only, as may be supposed necessary to
provide against that inconvenience.

The establishment of some of these principles by Great Britain alone has
already lost us, in our commerce with that country and its possessions, between
eight and nine hundred vessels of near 40,000 tons burden, according to
statements from official materials, in which they have confidence. This
involves a proportional loss of seamen, shipwrights, and ship-building, and is
too serious a loss to admit forbearance of some effectual remedy.

It is true we must expect some inconvenience in practice, from the
establishment of discriminating duties. But in this, as in so many other cases,
we are left to choose between two evils. These inconveniences are nothing when
weighed against the loss of wealth and loss of force, which will follow our
perseverance in the plan of indiscrimination. -- When once it shall be
perceived that we are either in the system or the habit of giving equal
advantages to those who extinguish our commerce and navigation, by duties and
prohibitions, as to those who treat both with liberality and justice,
liberality and justice will be converted by all into duties and prohibitions.
It is not to the moderation and justice of others we are to trust for fair and
equal access to market with our productions, or for our due share in the
transportation of them; but to our means of independence, and the firm will to
use them. Nor do the inconveniences of discrimination merit consideration. Not
one of the nations before mentioned, perhaps not a commercial nation on earth,
is without them. In our case one distinction alone will suffice, that is to
say, between nations who favor our productions and navigation, and those who
do not favor them. One set of moderate duties, say the present duties, for the
first, and a fixed advance on these as to some articles, and prohibitions as to
others, for the last.

Still it must be repeated, that friendly arrangements are preferable with all
who will come into them; and that we should carry into such arrangements all
the liberality and spirit of accommodation, which the nature of the case will
admit.

France has, of her own accord, proposed negociations for improving, by a new
treaty, on fair and equal principles, the commercial relations of the two
countries. But her internal disturbances have hitherto prevented the
prosecution of them to effect, though we have had repeated assurances of a
continuance of the disposition.

Proposals of friendly arrangement have been made on our part by the present
government to that of Great Britain, as the message states; but, being already
on as good a footing in law, and a better in fact, than the most favored
nation, they have not as yet discovered any disposition to have it meddled with.

We have no reason to conclude that friendly arrangements would be declined by
the other nations with whom we have such commercial intercourse as may render
them important. In the mean while, it would rest with the wisdom of Congress to
determine whether, as to those, nations, they will not surcease exparte
regulations, on the reasonable presumption that they will concur in doing
whatever justice and moderation dictate should be done.

THOMAS JEFFERSON.
P. S. Since writing the above, some alterations of the condition of our
commerce with some sovereign nations have taken place. France has proposed to
enter into a new treaty of commerce with us, on liberal principles; and has, in
the mean time, relaxed some of the restraints mentioned in the Report. Spain
has, by an ordinance of June last, established New Orleans, Pensacola, and St.
Augustine, into free ports, for the vessels of friendly nations having treaties
of commerce with her, provided they touch for a permit at Corcubion in
Gallicia, or at Alicant; and our rice is by the same ordinance excluded from
that country.



The following are some of the principal Articles of Exportation from the
United States of America during the Year ending in September, 1792.
Three millions one hundred and forty thousand two hundred and fifty-five
bushels of grain (principally wheat).

One million four hundred and sixty-nine thousand seven hundred and
twenty-three barrels of flour, meal, biscuit, and rice (reducing casks of
various sizes to the proportion of flour barrels).

Sixty million six hundred and forty-six thousand eight hundred and sixty-one
feet of boards, plank, and scantling (inch board measure).

Thirty-one million seven hundred and sixty thousand seven hundred and two
slaves and hoops.

Seventy-one million six hundred and ninety-three thousand eight hundred and
sixty-tree shingles.

Nineteen thousand three hundred and ninety-one and a half tons of timber.

Eighteen thousand three hundred and seventy-four pieces of timber.

One thousand and eighty cedar and oak ship knees.

One hundred and ninety-one frames of houses.

Seventy-three thousand three hundred and eighteen oars, rafters for oars, and
handspikes.

Forty-eight thousand eight hundred and sixty shook or knock down casks.

One hundred and forty-six thousand nine hundred and nine barrels of tar,
pitch, turpentine and rosin.

Nine hundred and forty-eight thousand one hundred and fifteen gallons of
spirits, distilled in the United States.

One hundred and sixteen thousand eight hundred and three barrels of beef,
pork, bacon, mutton, oysters, etc. (reducing casks of various sizes to the
proportion of beef and pork barrels.)

Two hundred and thirty-one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six barrels of
dried and pickled fish.

Seven thousand eight hundred and twenty-three tons twelve (...) and 4lb. of
pot ashes and pearl ashes.

One hundred and twelve thousand four hundred and twenty-eight hogsheads of
tobacco.

Fifty-two thousand three hundred and eighty-one hogsheads of flax-seed.

Forty-four thousand seven hundred and fifty-two horses, ^orned cattle, mules,
and sheep.

The preceding extract from the copy of an authentic (...) return of all the
exports from the United States of America, within the year, ending in September
^ast, conveys an idea of the wealth, importance, and progressive prosperity of
that country, far surpassing what has been heretofore entertained on the
subject.

P. S. From the 1st of January, 1793, to the 1st of January, 1794, there were
exported from the port of Philadelphia, 4^2*^75 barrels of flour.



Of the Civil List, and Revenue of the United States.
Abstract of an Estimate of the Expenditures of the civil list of the United
States, for the year 1793, reported by A. Hamilton* Secretary of the Treasury
to the House of Representatives.

Pres^dent's Salary 25,000 Dollars. Vice President's ditto 5,000 Dollars. Chief
Justice 4,000 Dollars. Five Associate Justices 17,500 Dollars. All the district
Judges 21,700 Dollars. Congress 143,591 Dollars. Treasury Department 55,050
Dollars. Department of State 6,300 Dollars. Department of War 11,250 Dollars.
Commissioners of old accounts 13,300 Dollars. Loan Offices 13,250 Dollars.
Western Territory 11,000 Dollars. Amount of Pensions 5,267 Dollars.
Contingencies 20,264 Dollars. Total 352,466 Dollars. or In British Money L.
79,304 17 osterl.
The Revenues.
The American revenue, for 1793, is stated to be 4,400,000 dollars, exclusive
of what may arise from the sale of lands in the Western Territory; there is
likewise upwards of the value of 5,000,000 dollars in bullion, lying in the
Bank of the United States.

Estimate of Expense for the Year 1794.
Dols. Cents. The whole Civil List for 1794, is 397,201 6 -- Extraordinaries
for Public Works, Benevolences, etc. 147,693 43 -- Estimate of the War Expenses
for 1794 1,457,936 1 Total 2,002,830 50

The Dollar is 4s. 6d. sterling, and the Cent is the hundredth part of a Dollar.

The celebrated Mr. Thomas Pain, in his letter to Mr. Secretary Dundas,
published in London in the month of June, 179^, and who on this subject,
(without offending any party) may be entitled to credit, gives a statement of
the expenses of the American government in the following words:

The expenses of all the several departments of the General Representative
Government of the United States of America, extending over a space of country
nearly ten times larger than England, is two hundred and ninety-four thousand
five hundred and fifty-eight dollars, which at 4s. 6d. per dollar, is 66,275l.
11s. sterling, and is thus apportioned:

Expenses of the Executive Department.
L. s. The Office of the Presidency, at which the President receives nothing
for himself 5,625 0 Vice President 1,125 0 Chief Justice 900 0 Five associate
Justices 3,937 10 Nineteen Judges of Districts and Attorney General 6,873 15

Legislative Department.
Members of Congress at six dollars (1l. 7s.) per day, their Secretaries,
Clerks, Chaplains, Messengers, Door-keepers, etc. 25,515 0

Treasury Department.
Secretary, Assistant, Comptroller, Auditor, Treasurer, Register, and
Loan-Office-Keeper, in each state, together with all necessary Clerks,
Office-Keepers, etc. 12,825 0

Department of State, including Foreign Affairs.
Secretary, Clerks, etc. etc. 1,406 5

Department of W^r.
Secretary, Clerks, Paymasters, Commissioner, etc. 1,462 10

Commissioners for settling Old Accounts.
The whole Board, Clerks, etc. 2,598 15

Incidental and Contingent Expenses.
For Fire Wood, Stationary, Printing, etc. 4,^06 16 Total 66,275 11

FINIS.

