SELECT SERMONS, BY HUGH BLAIR, D. D. F. R. S. Ed. ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE
HIGH CHURCH, AND PROFESSOR OF RHETORIC AND BELLES LETTRES, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
EDINBURGH.

THE EIGHTH AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL. M,DCC,XCV

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. On the Causes of Men's being weary of Life. JOB X. 1. My soul is
weary of my life. Page. 1 SERMON II. On Charity as the End of the Commandment.
1 TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the and of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart,
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Page. 12 SERMON III. On our
Live^ being in the Hand of God. Preached at the beginning of a New Year. PSALM.
xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand. -- Page. 23 SERMON IV. On the Mixture of
Bad Men with the Good in human Society. Matthew xiii. 30. Let both grow
together until the harvest -- Page. 35 SERMON V. On the Relief which the Gospel
affords to the Distressed. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. MATTHEW xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Page. 47 SERMON VI. On Luxury and
Licentiousness. ISAIAH v. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and the pipe
and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither
consider the operation of his hands. Page. 60 SERMON VII. On the Presence of
God in a Future State. PSALM xvii. 11 Thou will show me the path of life; in
thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore Page. 71 SERMON VIII. On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of others.
JOHN xxi. 21.22. Peter seeing him ^^^h to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man
do? Jesus says to him, If I will that he t^rry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me. Page. 82 SERMON IX. On our present Ignorance of the Ways
of God. JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou k^^west
not n^w; but thou shall know hereafter. Page. 93 SERMON X. On the Slavery of
Vice. 2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage. Page. 105 SERMON XI. On the Importance of Public Worship.
PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. Page. 117 SERMON XII. On the Fashion of the World
passing away. 1 CORINTHIANS. vii. 31. -- The fashion of this world posseth away.
Page. 131 SERMON XIII. On Tranquillity of Mind. PSALM xv. 5. -- He that does
these things shall never be moved. Page. 142 SERMON XIV. On the Misfortunes of
Men being chargeable on themselves. PROVERBS xix. 5. The foolishness of man
perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord. Page. 153 SERMON
XV. On Integrity as the Guide of Life. PROVE. xi. 3. The integrity of the
upright shall guide them. -- Page. 164 SERMON XVI. On Submission to the Divine
Will. JOB ii. 10. -- Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? Page. 176 SERMON XVII. On Friendship. PROVE. xxvii. 10. Thine own
friend and thy father's friend forsake not. Page. 188 SERMON XVIII. On the
Conduct to be held with regard to Future Events. PROVE. xxvii. 1. Boast not
thyself of tomorrow; for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Page.
199 SERMOM XIX. On following the Multitude to do Evil. EXODUS xxii. 2. Thou
shall not follow a Multitude to do evil. -- Page. 210 SERMON XX. On the Wisdom
of God. 1 TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen Page. 222
SERMON I. ON THE CAUSES OF MEN'S BEING WEARY OF LIFE.
JOB X. 1. My soul is weary of my life. --


JOB, in the first part of his days, was the greatest of all the men of the
East. His possessions were large, his family was numerous and flourishing; his
own character was fair and blameless. Yet this man it pleased God to visit with
extraordinary reverses of fortune. He was robbed of his whole substance. His
sons and his daughters all peri^hed; and he himself, fallen from his high
estate, ^hildless and reduced to poverty, was smitten with ^ore disease. His
friends came about him, seemingly with the purpose of administering comfort.
But from a harsh and ill-founded construction of the intention of Providence in
his disasters, they only added to his sorrows by unjust upbraiding. Hence those
many pathetic lamentations with which this book abounds, poured forth in the
most beautiful and touching strain of Oriental poetry. In one of those hours of
lamentation, the sentiment in the text was uttered; My soul is weary of my
life; a sentiment, which surely, if any situation can justify it, was allowable
in the case of Job.

In situations very different from that of Job, under calamities far less
severe, it is not uncommon to find such a sentiment working in the heart, and
sometimes breaking forth from the lips of men. Many, very many there are, who
on one occasion or other, have experienced this weariness of life, and been
tempted to wish that it would come to a close. Let us now examine in what
circumstances this feeling may be deemed excusable; in what it is to be held
sinful; and under what restrictions we may, on any occasion, be permitted to
say, My soul is weary of my life.

I shall consider the words of the text in three lights; as expressing, First,
The sentiment of a discontented man; Secondly, The sentiment of an afflicted
man; Thirdly, The sentiment of a devout man.

I. Let us consider the text as expressing the sentiment of a discontented man;
with whom it is the effusion of spleen, vexation, and dissatisfaction with
life, arising from causes neither laudable nor justifiable. There are chiefly
three classes of men who are liable to this disease of the mind^ the idle; the
luxurious; the criminal.

First, This weariness of life is often found among the idle; persons commonly
in easy circumstances of fortune, who are not engaged in any of the laborious
occupations of the world, and who are, at the same time, without energy of mind
to call them forth into any other line of active exertion. In this languid, or
rather torpid state, they have so many vacant hours, and are so much at a loss
how to fill up their time, that their spirits utterly sink; they become
burdensome to themselves, and to every one around them; and drag with pain the
load of existence. What a convincing proof is hereby afforded, that man was
designed by his Creator to be an active being, whose happiness is to be found
not merely in rest, but in occupation and pursuit? The idle are doomed to
suffer the natural punishment of their inactivity and folly; and for their
complaints of the tiresomeness of life there is no remedy but to awake from the
dream of sloth, and to fill up with proper employment the miserable vacancies
of their days. Let them study to become useful to the world, and they shall
soon become less burdensome to themselves. They shall begin to enjoy existence;
they shall reap the rewards which Providence has annexed to virtuous activity;
and have no more cause to say My soul is weary of my life.

Next, The luxurious and the dissipated form another class of men, among whom
such complaints are still more frequent. With them they are not the fruit of
idleness. These are men who have been busied enough; they have run the whole
race of pleasure; but they have run it with such inconsiderate speed, that it
terminates in weariness and vexation of spirit. By the perpetual course of
dissipation in which they are engaged; by the excesses which they indulge; by
the riotous revel, and the midnight or rather morning hours to which they
prolong their sectivity; they have debilitated their bodies, and worn out their
spirits. Satiated with the repetition of their accustomed pleasures, and yet
unable to find any new ones in their place; wandering round and round their
former haunts of joy, and ever returning disappointed; weary of themselves, and
of all things about them, their spirits are oppressed with a deadly gloom, and
the complaint bursts forth of odious life and a miserable world. Never are
these complaints more irequent than at the close of rounds of amusement, and
after a long repetition of festal pleasures; when the spirits which had been
forced up, as by some intoxicating drug, to an unnatural height, subside into
profound dejection. What increases the evil is, that it is not among the infirm
and the aged, but among the young, the gay, and the prosperous, who ought to be
reputed the happiest men, that this distaste of life most frequently prevails.

When persons of this description, in their peevish and splenetic hours,
exclaim, My soul is weary of my life, let them know, let them be assured, that
this is no other than the judgment of God overtaking them for their vices and
follies. Their complaints of misery are entitled to no compassion; nay, they
are sinful, because they arise from a sinful cause; from a mind broken and
debased by luxury and corruption. They are the authors of their own misery, by
having thrown away on the follies of the world those powers which God had
bestowed on them for nobler ends. -- Let them return to the duties of men and
Christians. Let them retreat from frivolity, and abstain from excess. Let them
study temperance, moderation, and self-command. By entering on a virtuous and
manly course of action, and applying to the honorable discharge of the
sunctions of their station, they will acquire different views. They will obtain
more real enjoyment of life, and become more willing to prolong it. -- But,
after the warnings which God has given them of their misbehaviour by the inward
misery they suffer, if they still continue to run the same intemperate round,
and to drain pleasure to the last dregs, it shall come to pass, that they who
now contemn life, and are impatient of its continuance, shall be the persons
most eager to prolong it. When they behold it in reality drawing toward a
close, and are obliged to look forward to what is to come after it, they shall
be rendered awfully sensible of its value. They will then grasp eagerly at the
flying hours; anxious to stop them if they could, and to employ every moment
that remains in repairing their past errors, and in making their peace, if
possible, with God and heaven. According as they have sown, they now reap. They
are reduced to eat the fruit of their own ways, and to be filled with their own
devices.

There remains still a third class of those who from discontent are become
weary of life; such as have embittered it to themselves by the consciousness of
criminal deeds. They have been, perhaps, unnatural to their parents, or
treacherous to their friends; they have violated their fidelity; have ensnared
and ruined the innocent; or have occasioned the death of others. There is no
wonder that such persons should lose their relish for life. To whatever arts
they may have recourse for procuring a deceitful peace, conscience will at
times exert its native power, and shake over them its terrific, scourge. The
internal misery they endure has sometimes arisen to such a height, as has made
them terminate, with their own hands, an existence which they felt to be
insupportable. -- To the complaints of such persons no remedy can be furnished,
except what arises from the bitterness of sincere and deep repentance. We can
do no more than exhort them to atone as much as is in their power for the evils
they have committed; and to fly to the divine mercy through Jesus Christ for
pardon and forgiveness. Let us now,

II. Turn to persons of another description, and consider the sentiment in the
text as extorted by situations of d^^^ss. These are so variously multiplied in
the world, and often so oppressive and heavy, that assuredly it is not uncommon
to hear the afflicted complain that they are weary of life. Their complaints,
if not always allowable, yet certainly are more excusable than those which flow
from the sources of dissatisfaction already mentioned. They are sufferers, not
so much through their own misconduct, as through the appointment of Providence;
and therefore to persons in this situation it may seem more needful to offer
consolation, than to give admonition. However, as the evils which produce this
impatience of life are of different sorts, a distinction must be made as to the
situations which can most excuse it.

Sometimes, the exclamation in the text may be occasioned by deep overwhelming
grief. When they whom we had most affectionately loved, and in whom we had
placed the felicity of our days, are taken away, our connection with life
appears to be dissolved. Why should we survive those to whom our souls were
tied? Would to God we had died before them? Now when they are gone all pleasure
and hope is gone as to us. To us the sun no longer shines with his usual
brightness. No longer cheerfulness invests the face of nature. On every object
a sad gloom appears to rest; and every employment of life is become an
oppressive burden. With the feelings of those who are thus distressed we
naturally sympathise. They are frequently the feelings of the most virtuous and
amiable minds: And yet such persons must be told, that grief may be endulged so
far as to become immoderate and improper. There are bounds which are prescribed
to it both by reason and by religion. A Christian ought not to mourn like those
who have no hope. While he feels his sorrows as a man, he should also study to
bear them like a man, with fortitude; and not abandon himself to feeble and
fruitless melancholy. Let him have recourse to a strenuous discharge of the
duties of his station, and consider it as incumbent on him to make the best
improvement that he can of those comforts which Providence has still left in
his possession.

Again; it sometimes happens that, apart from grief, great reverses of worldly
fortune give rise to the lamentation in the text. This was the case with Job
himself. A sudden fall from opulence into indigence and want; some undeserved
disgrace incurred, or some unexpected cloud thrown over former reputation and
fame; the unkindness and desertion of friends, or the insolent triumph of
enemies, are apt to overwhelm the minds of men with gloom, and to reduce them
to be weary of life. To persons under such calamities, sympathy is due. That
sympathy, however, will be proportioned to the degree in which we consider them
as free from blame in the misfortunes which they suffer. As far as, through
their own misconduct and vice, they have been the authors to themselves of
those misfortunes, we withdraw our pity. The burden which they have brought on
themselves we leave them to bear as they can; and with little concern we hear
them exclaim that their souls are weary of life. -- Not only so, but even in
cases where calamities have fallen on the innocent, to the pity which we feel
for them will be joined a secret contempt, if we perceive that together with
their prosperity, their courage and fortitude have also forsaken them. To
abandon themselves to dejection carries no mark of a great or a worthy mind.
Instead of declaring that his soul is weary of his life, it becomes a brave and
a good man, in the evil day, with firmness to maintain his post; to bear up
against the storm; to have recourse to those advantages which in the worst of
times, are always left to integrity and virtue; and never to give up the hope
that better days may yet arise.

It is good for persons in such situations to remark that, though Job was for a
long while severely tried by a variety of distresses, yet his condition was not
left finally unhappy. On the contrary, the goodness of that God whom he had
served returned at last, to shine upon him with greater brightness than ever.
His riches were restored to him twofold. The losses in his family were repaired
by a new offspring. His name became again renowned in the East; and the latter
end of Job, we are told, was more blessed than the beginning.

But still, it may be asked, will not the continuance of long and severe
disease justify the exclamation in the text, My soul is weary of my life! To
persons who are forsaken by all the blessings of health, and who have no
prospect left, but that of lingering under sickness or pain, Job's complaint
may assuredly be forgiven more than to any others. Though it might be suggested
to them, that even in old age and sickness, except in very extreme cases, some
resources are always left, of which they may avail themselves for relief; yet
it must be admitted, that lawfully they may wish their sufferings to be brought
to an end. Still however they must remember, that resignation to the pleasure
of heaven continues to be their duty to the last. As long as any part remains
to be acted, as long as their continuance in the world can serve any valuable
purpose; it is more honorable to bear the load with magnanimity, than to give
way to a querulous and dejected spirit. It remains,

III. To address myself to another order of men, among whom, though more rarely
than among those whom I have described, the sentiment of the text is to be
found. They are persons who have no particular complaint to make of the
injustice of the world, or the afflictions of their state. But they are tired
of the vanity of the world, of its insipid enjoyments, and its perpetually
revolving circle of tifles and follies. They feel themselves made for something
greater and nobler. They are disgusted and hurt with the scenes of wickedness
that are often passing before their eyes. Their hearts are warmed with the
thoughts of a purer and more perfect existence designed for man; and in the
moments of aspiration after it, the exclamation breaks forth, My soul is weary
of my life. -- O that I had wings like a dove! for then I would fly away and be
at rest. Lo then I would wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. I would
hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest. For I have seen violence and
strife in the city. Wickedness is in the midst thereof; deceit and guile depart
not from her streets. Psalm lv. 6, 11.
-- In this view the sentiment in the text may sometimes be that of a devout
man. But such persons I must admonish, that their devotion, how sincere
however, is not altogether of a rational and chastened kind. It was from this
temper that, in former ages of the church, the numerous race sprung of
anchorets, hermits, and all the various orders who voluntarily abandoned the
the world, to people the lonely deserts and the monastic retreat. The ordinary
course of things seemed below them as candidates for heaven. The concerns of
the world appeared unworthy of their attention, and dangerous to their virtue.
Breathing after a higher estate, they imagined that they could not abstract
themselves too much from every earthly amusement, as long as they were forced
to remain in this place of exile.

Let us beware of all such imaginary refinements as produce a total disrelish
of our present condition. They are, for the most part, grafted either on
disappointed pursuits, or on a melancholy and splenetic cast of mind. They are
far from contributing to happiness, and are inconsistent with all the active
virtues of man. This life deserves not indeed to be put in competition with
that blessed immortality to which God has raised our hopes. But such as it is,
it is the gift of God. It is the sphere in which his wisdom has placed us, and
appointed us to act our parts. As long as it lasts, we must neither slight the
duties which it requires, nor undervalue the innocent enjoyments which it
offers. It belongs to a man to live among men as his brethren; which he who
declares himself weary of life is not qualified to do with propriety.

Thus I have placed before you, in various views, the sentiment in the text;
and have shown in what circumstances, and from what causes, that disrelish of
life arises which is often found among mankind. On a review of the whole, we
cannot but acknowledge, that it is oftener to be ascribed to our own vices and
follies, than to any other cause. Among the multitudes in the world, to whom at
this day, life is burdensome, the far greater number is of those who have
rendered it so to themselves. Their idleness, their luxury and pleasures, their
criminal deeds, their immoderate passions, their timidity and baseness of mind
have dejected them in such a degree, as to make them weary of their existence.
Preyed upon by discontent of their own creating, they complain of life when
they ought to reprehend themselves.

Various afflictions there doubtless are in the world; many persons with whom
we have cause to sympathise, and whom we might reasonably forgive for wishing
death to close their sorrows. But of the evils which embitter life, it must be
admitted, that the greater part is such as we have brought on ourselves; or at
least such as, if we were not wanting to ourselves, might be tolerably
supported. When we compute the numbers of those who are disposed to say, My
soul is weary of my life, some there are to whom this sentiment is excusable;
but many more among whom it is in no way justifiable. I admit that, among the
worthiest and the best, there may be dark moments in which some feeling of this
nature may be apt to intrude upon their minds. But with them they are only
moments of occasional and passing gloom. They soon recall the vigor of their
minds; and return with satisfaction to the discharge of the duties, and to a
participation of the enjoyments of life.

One great cause of men's becoming weary of life is grounded on the mistaken
views of it which they have formed, and false hopes which they have entertained
from it. They have expected a scene of enjoyment; and when they meet with
disappointments and distresses, they complain of life, as if it had cheated and
betrayed them. God ordained no such possession for man on earth as continued
pleasure. For the wisest purposes he desgined our state to be chequered with
pleasure and pain. As such let us receive it, and make the best of what is
doomed to be our lot. Let us remain persuaded, that simple and moderate
pleasures are always the best; that virtue and a good conscience are the sures
foundations of enjoyment; that he who serves his God and his Savior with the
purest intentions, and governs his passions with the greatest care, is likely
to lead the happiest life. Following these principles, we shall meet with fewer
occasions of being weary of life; we shall always find some satisfactions mixed
with its crosses; and shall be enabled to wait with a humble and contented mind
till the Almighty, in his appointed time, finish our state of trial, and remove
us to a more blessed abode.

SERMON II. ON CHARITY AS THE END OF THE COMMANDMENT.
1 TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart,
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.


IT appears from this chapter, that one design of the Apostle, in writing to
Timothy, was to guard him against certain corrupters of Christian doctrine, who
had already arisen in the church. To their false representations of religion he
opposes that general view of it which is given in the text. Such summaries of
religion frequently occur in the sacred writings; and are extremely useful. By
the comprehensive energy with which they express the great lines of our duty,
they both imprint them on our memory, and bring them home to our conscience
with force. In the progress of this discourse, I hope to make it appear, that
the words of the text afford a most enlarged and instructive view of religion
in all its chief parts.

The Apostle pronounces charity to be the end or scope of the commandment, that
is, of the law of God. At the same time, in order to prevent mistakes on this
most important subject, he subjoins to charity certain adjuncts, as necessary
to qualify it, and to render the Christian character complete. These are the
pure heart, the good conscience, and faith unfeigned. In treating of these, I
shall show the nature of their connection with charity, and the importance of
their being always united with it.

The end of the commandment is charity. Charity is the same with benevolence or
love; and is the term uniformly employed, in the New Testament, to denote all
the good affections which we ought to bear toward one another. It consists not
in speculative ideas of general benevolence floating in the head, and leaving
the heart, as speculations too often do, untouched and cold. Neither is it
confined to that indolent good nature, which makes us rest satisfied with being
free from inveterate malice, or ill will to our fellow creatures, without
prompting us to be of service to any. True charity is an active principle. It
is not properly a single virtue; but a disposition residing in the heart, as a
fountain whence all the virtues of benignity, candor, forbearance, generosity,
compassion, and liberality, flow, as so many native streams. From general
good will to all, it extends its influence particularly to those with whom we
stand in nearest connection, and who are directly within the sphere of our good
offices. From the country or community to which we belong, it descends to the
smaller associations of neighborhood, relations, and friends; and spreads
itself over the whole circle of social and domestic life. I mean not that it
imports a promiscuous undistinguishing affection, which gives every man an
equal title to our love. Charity, if we should endeavor to carry it so far,
would be rendered an impracticable virtue, and would resolve itself into mere
words, without affecting the heart. True charity attempts not to shut our eyes
to the distinction between good and bad men; nor to warm our hearts equally to
those who befriend and those who injure us. It reserves our esteem for good
men, and our complacency for our friends. Toward our enemies it inspires
forgiveness and humanity. It breathes universal candor, and liberality of
sentiment. It forms gentleness of temper, and dictates affability of manners.
It prompts corresponding sympathies with them who rejoice and them who weep. It
teaches us to slight and despise no man. Charity is the comforter of the
afflicted, the protector of the oppressed, the reconciler of differences, the
intercessor for offenders. It is faithfulness in the friend, public spirit in
the magistrate, equity and patience in the judge, moderation in the sovereign,
and loyalty in the subject. In parents it is care and attention; in children it
is reverence and submission. In a word, it is the soul of social life, it is
the sun that enlivens and cheers the abodes of men. It is like the dew of
Hermon, says the Psalmist, and the dew that descends on the mountains of Zion
where the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. Psalm cxxxiii. 3.


Such charity, says the text, is the end of the commandment. This assertion of
the Apostle is undoubtedly consonant to all that reason can suggest on the
subject of religion. For, on considering the nature of the Supreme Being,
reason gives us much ground to believe, that the chief design of all the
commandments which he has given to men, is to promote their happiness.
Independent and self-sufficient, that Supreme Being has nothing to exact from
us for his own interest o^ felicity. By our ^ervices he cannot be bene^^ed, nor
by our offenses injured. When he created the world, it was benevolence that
moved him to co^ser ^^^^^ence. When he made himself known to his creatures,
benevolence in like manner moved him to give them laws for their conduct.
Benevolence is the spring of legislation in the Deity, as much as it was the
^^tive of creation. He ^ssued his commands on ^^^th on purpose that by
obedience to them, his creatures might be rendered happy among themselves in
this life, and be prepared for greater happiness in another. Charity,
especially when joined with purity, good conscience, and faith, is obviously
the great instrument for this purpose; and therefore must needs possess the
chief and primary place in the laws of God.

Accordingly, throughout the New Testament, it is uniform^y presented to us to
the same light in which it is placed by the text. This is known to all who have
any acquaintance with the sacred books. Charity is termed the fulfilling of the
law, and the bond of perfectness. It was assumed by our blessed Lord as the
characteristical distinction of his disciples; and in that magni^icent eulogium
which the Apostle Paul pronounces upon it, in the thirteenth chapter of the
first epi^tle to the Corinthians, it is ^^pressly preferred by him to faith and
hope. This de^^rves to be seriously considered by those who are apt to
undervalue charity, as an appendage of what they ^^ntemptuously call Morality;
while they confine tr^e religion to some favorite ^^^^ts and observances of
t^eir own, which they considered as comprehending the sum of what is acceptable
to God. Such persons show themselves profoundly ignorant of the nature of
religion, and may too often be suspected of being strangers to its influence.
For, as the apostle John reasons, He that loves not his brother, whom he has
seen, how can he love that God whom he has not seen? 1 John iv 20.


At the same time, while I ascribe to charity that high place in the system of
religion, which justly belongs to it, I am not to be understood as confi^ing
all religion to this disposition alone. With much wisdom and propriety, the
text has annexed to it certain adjuncts, without which neither the character
of a good man can be completed, nor charity itself exercised to advantage. To
the consideration of these I now proceed; and I enter the more readily on this
branch of the subject, as there is ground to believe, that many pretend to
possess charity, without properly understanding its nature and efficacy. There
has been always an unhappy tendency among men to run to extremes, on one side
or other, in matters of religion, as one set of men, who employ all their zeal
on right belief, are prone to undervalue good practice; so another set who wish
to be esteemed, rational christians, are inclined to rest the whole of their
duty on charitable deeds, while they overlook certain dispositions and habits
which ought always to accompany them. It is therefore of importance, that the
mistakes of both these classes of men should be rectified, in order that
religion may be held forth to the world in its complete form, and in its full
and undiminished luster.

The first qualification of charity pointed out in the text is purity; charity
out of a pure heart. Purity includes the virtues which belong to the
individual, considered in himself, and with respect to the government of his
desires and pleasures. It has its seat in the heart; but extends its influence
over so much of the outward conduct, as to form a great and material part of
the character. They are only the pure in heart, we are told by our Savior, who
can see God. Matthew. v. 8
It is also true, that they are only the pure in heart who can properly
discharge their duties toward mankind. Inordinate love of pleasure,
intemperance, sensuality, and a course of irregular life, are inconsistent, not
only with the general character of a good man, but also with the peculiar
exercises of charity and benevolence. For nothing is more certain, than that
habits of licentious indulgence contribute to stiffle all the good affections;
to harden the heart; to nourish that selfish attachment to our own vicious
pleasures which renders us insensible to the circumstances and wants of others.
A profligate man is seldom found to be a good husband, a good father, or a
beneficent neighbor. How many young persons have at first set out in the world
with excellent dispositions of heart; generous, charitable, and humane; kind to
their friends, and amiable among all with whom they had intercourse? and yet
how often have we seen all those fair appearances unhappily blasted in the
progress of life, merely through the influence of loose and currupting
pleasures; and those very persons who promised once to be blessings to the
world, sunk down, in the end, to be the burden and nuisance of society? The
profusion of expense which their pleasures occasion, accounts in a great
measure for the fatal reverse that takes place in their character. It not only
drains the sources whence the streams of beneficence should flow, but often
obliges them to ^^^me oppressive and cruel to those whom it was their duty to
have patronised and supported.

Purity of heart and conduct must therefore be held fundamental to charity and
love, as well as to general piety and virtue. The licentious I know are ready
to imagine, that their occasional deeds of bounty and liberality will atone for
many of their private disorders. But, besides that such plans of compeniation
for vices, by some supposed virtues, are always fallacious, the licentious may
be assured, that it is an appearance only of charity, not the reality of it, to
which they can lay claim. For that great virtue consists not in occasional
actions of humanity, in fits of kindness or compassion, to which bad men may be
prompted by natural instinct; but in the steady and regular exercise of those
good affections, and the discharge of those important duties toward others,
for which the licentious are in a great measure disqualified. Their criminal
propensities direct their inclinations to very different objects and pursuits;
and often determine them to sacrifice the just rights of others, sometimes to
sacrifice the peace and the reputation of the innocent, to the gratification of
their passions. Such is the pernicious influence which the love of pleasure has
on the good qualities of its devoted votaries. The impure heart is like the
stagnant and putrefying lake, which sends forth its poisonous exhalations to
corrupt and wither every plant that grows on its banks.

The second qualification annexed to Charity, in the text, is, that it be of a
good conscience By this I understand the Apostle to mean, that charity be in
full consistency with justice and integrity; that the conscience of the man who
purposes to perform actions of benevolence, be free from the reproach of having
neglected the primary duties of equity. For, undoubtedly, justice is a virtue
primary to charity; that is, it must go before it in all its exertions, One
must first do justly before he can pretend that he loves mercy. -- Religion, my
friends, in order to render it useful to mankind, must be brought down by its
^eachers from the sublimity of speculation to the functions and occupations of
ordinary life. It is my duty to admonish you, that you must, in the first
place, be fair in all your dealings with others; you must discharge the debts
you owe; you must pay the wages due to your servants and dependents; you must
provide for your own family, and be just to the claims of relations; then, and
then only, you can, from a good conscience, as the text enjoins, perform acts
of generosity and mercy.

This leads to a reflection which here deserves our attention; that, in order
to fulfill that charity which is the end of the commandment, economy, and good
order in private life, ought to be carefully studied by all Christians. This is
more closely connected with a good conscience, than many seem inclined to
admit. Economy, when prudently and temperately conducted, is the safeguard of
many virtues; and is in a particular manner favorable to the exertions of
benevolence. He who by inconsiderate conduct is injuring his circumstances,
will probably in time lose the inclination, and certainly is depriving himself
o^ the means, of being serviceable to his brethren. Some important exertions,
indeed, there are of charity, which have no connection with giving or
bestowing. Candor, forgiveness, gentleness, and sympathy, are due to our
brethren at all times, and in every situation of our own fortune. The poor have
opportunities for displaying these virtues, as well as the rich. They who have
nothing to give can often afford relief to others, by imparting what they feel.
But, as far as beneficence is included in charity, we ought always to remember,
that justice must, in the first place, inviolably be held sacred.

The wisdom of scripture remarkably appears, in the connection pointed out by
the text between charity and good conscience or integrity; a connection which I
apprehend is often not attended to so much as it deserves. Among the frugal and
industrious, great regard is commonly paid to justice. They will not defraud.
They will not take any unlawful advantage in their dealings: And satisfied with
this degree of good conscience, they are strangers to that charity, which is
the end of the commandment. They are hard and unfeeling. They are rigid and
severe in their demands. They know nothing of humanity, forgiveness, or
compassion. -- Among another class of men, who have been more liberally
educated, and who are generally of a higher rank in life, justice is apt to be
considered as a virtue less noble than charity; and which may, on some
occasions be dispensed with. They are humane perhaps, and tender in their
feelings. They are easy to their dependents. They can be liberal, even to
profusion. While, at the same time, they are accumulating debts, which they
know themselves unable to discharge. Their affairs are allowed to run into
confusion. Economy and good order are neglected. The innocent, in great
numbers, suffer materially through their mismanagement: And all the while they
assume to themselves the praise of being generous and good-hearted men. This
surely is not that charity which the Gospel enjoins; and which, in its very
essence, involves good conscience and integrity. He who pretends to do good to
his brethren, without first doing them justice, cannot be accounted their real
friend. True charity is not a meteor, which, occasionally glares; but a
luminary, which, in its orderly and regular course, dispenses a benignant
influence.

The third and last adjunct connected in the text with charity is, that it be
of faith unfeigned Faith in the scripture sense of it, includes the whole of
religious principles respecting God, and respecting Christ. Good principles,
without good practice, I confess, are nothing; they are of no avail in the
sight of God, nor in the estimation of wise men, But practice not founded on
principle is likely to be always unstable and wavering; and, therefore, the
faith of religious principles enters, for a very considerable share, into the
proper discharge of the duties of charity.

It will be admitted that, without faith, our duties toward God cannot be
properely performed. You may be assured that your duties toward men will
always greatly suffer from the want of it. Faith, when pure and genuine,
supplies to every part of virtue and in particular to the virtue of charity,
many motives and assistances, of which the unbeliever is destitute. He who acts
from faith acts upon the high principle of regard to the God who has made him,
and to the Savior who redeems him; which will often stimulate him to his duty
when other principles of benevolence become faint and languid, or are crossed
by opposite interests. When he considers himself as pursuing the approbation of
that divine Being, from whom love descends, a sacred enthusiasm both prompts,
and consecrates, his charitable dispositions. Regardless of men, or of human
recompense, he is carried along by a higher impulse. He acts with the spirit of
a follower of the Son of God, who not only has enjoined love, but has enforced
it by the example of laying down his life for mankind. Whatever he does in
behalf of his fellow creatures, he considers himself as doing, in some degree,
to that divine Person, who has said, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Matthew xxv. 40.
Hence charity is with him not only a moral virtue, but a Christian grace. It
acquires additional dignity and energy from being connected with the heavenly
state and the heavenly inhabitants He mingles with beings of a higher order,
while he is discharging his duty to his fellow creatures on earth; and by
joining faith and piety to good works he completes the character of a Christian.

Thus I have endeavored to explain the full sense of that comprehensive view
of religion which is given in the text. I have shown in what respects charity
joined with the pure heart, the good conscience, and faith unfeigned forms the
end of the commandment. Let us ever keep in view those essential parts of a
virtuous character, and preserve them in their proper union. Thus shall our
religion rise into a regular and well-proportioned edifice, where each part
gives firmness and support to another. If any one of those material parts be
wanting in the structure; if, our system of charity, either purity, or justice,
or faith, be left, there will be cracks and slaws in the building which prepare
its ruin.

This is indeed one of the greatest and most frequent errors of men, in their
moral conduct. They take hold of virtue by pieces and corners only. Few are so
depraved as to be without all sense of duty, and all regard to it. To some
moral qualities, which appear to them amiable or estimable, almost all men lay
claim; and on these they rest their worth, in their own estimation. But these
scattered pieces of virtue, not uniting into one whole, nor forming a
consistent character, have no powerful influence on their general habits of
life. From various unguarded quarters they lie open to temptation. Their lives
are full of contradiction, an^ perpetually fluctuate between good and evil.
Virtue can neither rise to its native dignity nor attain its proper rewards,
until all its chief parts be joined together in our character, and exert an
equal authority in regulating our conduct.

SERMON III. ON OUR LIVES BEING IN THE HAND OF GOD.
Preached at the beginning of a New Year January 6th 1793

PSALM xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand. --


THE sun that rolls over our heads, the food that we receive, the rest that we
enjoy, daily admonish us of a superior power, on whom the inhabitants of the
earth depend for light, life, and subsistence. But as long as all things
proceed in their ordinary course; when day returns after day with perfect
similarity; when our life seems stationary, and nothing occurs to warn us of
any approaching change, the religious sentiments of dependence are apt to be
forgotten. The great revolutions of time, when they come round in their stated
order, have a tendency to force some impressions of piety even on the most
unthinking minds. They both mark our existence on earth to be advancing toward
its close, and exhibit our condition as continually changing; while each
returning year brings along with it new events and at the same time carries us
forwards to the conclusion of all. We cannot, on such occasions avoid
perceiving that there is a Supreme Being who holds in his hands the line of our
existence, and measures out to each of us our allotted portion of that line.
Beyond a certain limit, we know that it cannot be extended; and long before it
reach that limit it may be cut asunder by an invisible hand, which is stretched
forth over all the inhabitants of the world. Then naturally arises the
ejaculation of the text, My times. O God, are in thy hand. My fate depends on
thee. The duration of my life, and all the events which in future days are to
fill it, are entirely at thy disposal. -- Let us now, when we have just seen
one year close, and another begin, mediate seriously on this sentiment. Let us
consider what is implied in our times being in the hand of God; and to what
improvement this meditation leads.

The text evidently implies, first, that our times are not in our own hands;
that, as our continuance in life depends not on ourselves, so the events which
are to happen, while life remains, are unknown to us, and not under our own
direction. Of this we may behold many a proof, when we look back on the
transactions of the year which is just finished. Recollection will readily
present to us a busy period, filled up with a mixture of business and
amusement, of anxteties and cares, of joys and sorrows. We have talked, perhaps
and acted much. We have formed many a plan; in public or in private life, we
have been engaged in a variety of pursuits. Let me now ask, how small a
proportion of all that has happened could have been foreseen, or foretold by
us? How many things have occured, of which we had no expectation; some,
perhaps, that have succeeded beyond our hopes; many, also, that have befallen
us contrary to our wish? How often were each of us admonished that there are
secret wheels, which, unseen by us, bring about the revolutions of human
affairs; and that, while man was devising his way, Providence was directing the
event?

That scene is now closed. The tale of that year has been told. We look forward
to the year which is beginning; and what do we behold there? -- All, my
brethren is a blank to our view: A dark unknown presents itself. We are
entering on an untried, undiscovered country, where, as each succeeding month
comes forward, new scenes may open; new objects may engage our attention;
changes at home or abroad, in public or private affairs, may alter the whole
state of our fortune. New connections may be at hand to be formed, or old ones
just about to be dissolved; perhaps, we may have little more to do with this
world, or with any of its connections; we may be standing on the verge of time
and life, and on the point of passing into a new region of existence. In short
the prospect before us is full of awful uncertainty. Life and death, prosperity
and adversity, health and sickness, joy and trouble, lie in one
undistinguishable mass, where our eye can descry nothing through the obscurity
that wraps them up.

While it is thus certain that our times are not at our own disposal, we are
taught, by the text, that they are in the hand of God. This may be considered
in two views. Our times are in the hand of God, as a supreme Disposer of
events. They are in the hand of God as a Guardian and a Father.

Our times, I say are in the hands of God as a supreme irresistible Ruler. All
that is to happen to us in this and the succeeding years of our life, -- if any
succeeding years we shall be allowed to see, -- has been foreknown and arranged
by God. The first view, under which human affairs present themselves to us, is
that of confused and irregular succession. The events of the world seem thrown
together by chance, like the billows of the sea, tumbling and tossing over each
other, without rule or order. All that is apparent to us is the fluctuation of
human caprice, and the operation of human passions. We see the strife of
ambition, and the efforts of stratagem, laboring to accomplish their several
purposes among the societies of men. But it is no more than the surface, the
outside of things, that we behold. Higher counsels, than it is in our power to
trace, are concerned in the transactions of the world. If we believe in God at
all, as the Governor of the universe, we must believe that, without his
providence, nothing happens on earth. He overrules, at his pleasure, the
passions of men. He bends all their designs into subserviency to his decree. He
makes the wrath of man to praise him and restrains, in what measure he thinks
the remainder of wrath. Psalm lxxvi. 10.
He brings forth in their course all the generations of men. When the time is
come for their entering into light, they appear on the stage; and when the time
fixed for their dismission arrives, he changes their countenance, and sends
them away. The time of our appearing is now come, after our ancestors had left
their place, and gone down to the dust. We are at present permitted to act our
part freely, and without constraint. No violence is done to our inclination or
choice. But assuredly their is not a day of our life nor an event in that day,
but was foreseen by God. That succession of occurrences, which to us is full of
obscurity and darkness, is all light and order in his view. He sees from the
beginning to the end, and brings forward every thing that happens, in its due
time and place.

Our times are altogether in his hand. Let us take notice, that they are not in
the hands either of our enemies, or of our friends. It is not in the power of
man to shorten or to prolong our life, more or less than God has decreed.
Enemies may employ craft or violence in their attacks; friends may employ skill
and vigilance for the preservation of our health and safety; but both the one
and the other can have effect only as far as God permits. They work in
subserviency to his purpose. By him they are held in invisible bonds. To the
exertions of all human agents he says, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further.

We are to observe next, that our times are in the hand of God, not only as an
almighty Disposer, but as a merciful Guardian and Father. We are by no means to
imagine, that from race to race, and from year to year, God sports with the
lives of succeeding generations of men, or, in the mere wantonness of arbitrary
power, brings them forth, and sends them away. No; if we have any confidence in
what either the light of nature suggests to all men, or what the revelation of
the gospel has confirmed to Christians, we have full ground to believe, that
the administration of human affairs is conducted with infinite wisdom and
goodness. The counsels of the Almighty are indeed too deep for our limited
understandings to trace. His path may often, as to as, be in the sea, and his
footsteps in the mighty waters; while, nevertheless, all his paths are mercy
and truth. He who, from the benignity of his nature, erected this world for the
abode of men; He who furnished it so richly for our accommodation, and stored
it with so much beauty for our entertainment; He who since first we entered
into life, has followed us with such a variety of mercies, surely can have no
pleasure in our disappointment and distress. He knows our frame; he remembers
we are dust; and looks to frail man, we are assured, with such pity as a father
bears to his children. Psalm ciii. 13, 14.
To him we may safely commit ourselves, and all our concerns; as to one who is
best qualified, both to direct the incidents proper to happen to us in this
world, and to judge of the time when it is fit for us to be removed from it.

Even that ignorance of our future destiny in life, of which we sometimes
complain, is a single proof of his goodness. He hides from us the view of
futurity, because the view would be dangerous and overpowering. It would either
dispirit us with visions of terror, or intoxicate us by the disclosure of
success. The veil which covers from our sight the events of this and of
succeeding years, is a veil woven by the hand of mercy. Our times are in his
hand; and we have reason to be glad that in his hand they are kept, shut out
from our view. Submit to his pleasure as an almighty Ruler we must, because we
cannot resist him. Equal reason there is for trusting in him as a Guardian,
under whose disposal we are sat.

Such is the import of the text, that our times are in the hand of God. Our
times are unknown to us, and not under our own direction. They are in the hands
of God as a Governor and Ruler; in the hands of God as a Guardian and Father.
These separate views of the text require, on our part, separate improvements.

Seeing our times are not in our own hand, seeing futurity is unknown to us,
let us, first, check the vain curiosity of penetrating into what is to come.
Conjecture about futurity we often must; but upon all conjectures of what this
year is to produce, let us lay a proper restraint. Let us wait till God shall
bring forward events in their proper course, without wishing to discover what
he has concealed; lest, if the discovery were granted, we should see many
things, which we would wish not to have seen.

The most common propensity of mankind is to store futurity with whatever is
agreeable to them; especially in those periods of life when imagination is
lively, and hope is ardent. Looking forward to the year now beginning, they are
ready to promise themselves much from the foundations of prosperity which they
have laid; from the friendships and connections which they have secured; from
the plans of conduct which they have formed. Alas! how deceitful do all these
dreams of happiness often prove! While many are saying in secret to their
hearts, Tomorrow shall be as this day and more abundantly, we are obliged in
return to say to them, Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou know not
what a day may bring forth. I do not mean, that in the unknown prospect which
lies before us, we should forebode to ourselves nothing but misfortunes. -- May
it be the pleasure of Heaven that this year run on in a placid and tranquil
tenor to us all! -- But this I say, that in such foresight of futurity as we
are allowed to take, we may reckon upon it as certain, that this year shall
prove to us, as many past have proved, a chequered scene of some comforts and
some troubles. In what proportion one or other of these shall prevail in it;
whether, when it ends, it shall leave with us the memory of joys or of sorrows,
is to be determined by him in whose hands our times are. Our wisdom is, to be
prepared for whatever the year is to bring; prepared to receive comforts with
thankfulness, troubles with fortitude; and to improve both for the great
purposes of virtue and eternal life.

Another important instruction which naturally arises from our times not being
in our own hands is, that we ought no longer to trifle with what it is not in
our power to prolong; but that we should make haste to live as wise men; nor
delaying till tomorrow what may be done to day; doing now with all our might
whatever our hand finds to do; before that night comes wherein no man can
work.

Admists the uncertainty of the events which are before us, there is one thing
we have too much reason to believe namely, that of us who are now assembled in
this congregation, and who have seen the year begin, there are some who shall
not survive to see it close. Whether it shall be you, or you, or I, who shall
be gathered to our fathers before the revolving year has finished its round,
God alone knows. Our times are in his ^and? But to our place, it is more than
probable that some of us shall have gone. Could we foretell the month, or the
day, on which our change was to happen, how diligent would we be in setting our
house in order, and preparing ourselves to appear before our Maker? Surely,
that ought to be prepared for with most care, concerning which we are ignorant
how soon it is to take place. Let us therefore walk circumspectly, and redeem
the time. Let us dismiss those trivial and supersluous cares which burden or
corrupt our life, in order to attend to what is of highest importance to us as
men and Christians. The beginning of each year should carry to us all a solemn
admonition of our folly, in neglecting to improve suitably the years that are
past. It should call up misspent time into our view; and be like the hand coming
forth upon the wall, in the days of Belshazzar, and writing in legibl^^
characters over against us, O man! thy days are numbered; thou art weighed in
the balance, and found wanting; take care lest thy kingdom be on the point of
departing from thee.

When we consider, in the next place, that our times as I before illustrated,
are in the hand of God as a sovereign Disposer, it is an obvious inference from
this truth, that we should prepare ourselves to submit patiently to his
pleasure both as to the events which are to fill up our days, and as to the
time of our continuing in this world. To contend with him we know to be
fruitless. The word that is gone ont of his moath must stand. In the path which
he has marked out for us, whether it be short or long, rugged or smooth, we
must walk. Is it not then the dictate of wisdom, that we should previously
reconcile ourselves to this soverign ordination, and bring our minds to
harmonize with what is appointed to be our destiny? Let us fortify this temper,
by recalling that reflection of the wise man; Who knows what is good for man
in this life; all the days of his vain life which he spends as a shadow?
Eccles. v 12.


To enjoy long life, and see many days, is the universal with; and, as the wish
is proinpted by nature it cannot be in itself unlawful. At the same time,
several circumstances concur to temper the eagerness of this wish; and to show
us that it should always be formed under due submission to the wiser judgment
of Heaven. Who among us can tell, whether, in wishing for the continuance of
many years on earth, we may not be only wishing for a prolongation of distress
and misery? -- You might live, my friends, till you had undergone lingering
rounds of severe pain, from which death would have proved a seasonable
deliverance. You might live till your breasts were pierced with many a wound
from public calamities or private sorrows. You might live till you beheld the
death of all whom you had loved; till you survived all those who love you; till
you were left as desolate strangers on earth, in the midst of a new race, who
neither knew you, nor cared for you, but who wished you off the stage. -- Of a
nature so ambiguous are all the prospects which life sets before us, that in
every wish we form, relating to them, much reason we have to be satisfied that
our times are in the hands of God, rather than our own.

This consideration is greatly strengthened when, in the last place, we think
of God acting, not as a Sovereign only, but as a Guardian, in the disposal of
our times. This is our great consolation in looking forward to futurity. To God
as a wise Ruler, calm submission is due; but it is more than submission that
belongs to him as a merciful Father; it is the spirit of cordial and
affectionate consent to his will. Unknown to us as the times to come are, it
should be sufficient to our full repose that they are known to God. The day and
the hour which are fixed in his counsels for our dismission from life, we ought
to be persuaded are fixed for the best; and that any longer we should not wish
to remain.

When we see that last hour drawing nigh, though our spirits may be composed on
our own account, yet, on account of our friends and families, no little anxiety
and sorrow may be sometimes apt to take possession of the mind. Long we have
enjoyed the comfort of their society, and been accustomed to consider them as
parts of ourselves. To be parted from them forever is, at any rate, a bitter
thought; but to the bitterness of this, is over and above added the
apprehension of their suffering much by our death. We leave many a relation,
perhaps may leave young children, and a helpless family, behind us, to be
exposed to various dangers, and thrown forth on an unfriendly world. Such
virtuous anxieties often oppress the tender and feeling heart at the closing
periods of life. -- My brethren, look up to that God, in whose hands the times
of your fathers were; in whose hand the times of your posterity shall be.
Recollect, for your comfort, the experience of ages. When were the righteous
utterity forsaken by God in times past? Why should they be forsaken by him in
times to come; Well did he govern the world before you had a being in it: Well
shall he continue to govern it after you are no more. No cause have you,
therefore, to oppress your minds with the load of unknown futurity. Commit your
cares to a Father in heaven. Surrender your friends, and your family, to that
God, who has said, The children of his servants shall continue, and their seed
shall be established before him. Psalm cii. 28.
-- Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let thy
widows trust in me. Jeremiah xlix. 11.


I have thus shown what the import is, and what the improvement should be, of
the doctrine of the text, that our times are in the hand of God. It asserts a
fact, the the truth of which can be called in question by none; a fact which,
whether persons have any sentiments of religion or not, is calculated to make a
serious impression on every mind; especially at seasons when the revolution of
years gives us warning that our duration on earth is measured, and advances
toward its period. To persons who are religiously disposed, who study to
improve life to its proper purposes, to do their duty toward God and man, and
through the merits of their Redeemer to obtain grace and favor from Heaven,
the doctrine of the text is still more important. Among them it tends to awaken
impressions which are not only serious, but, as I have shown, salutary and
comforting to the heart. -- Thankful that our times are in the hand of a
Sovereign, who is both wise and gracious, let us prepare ourselves to meet the
approaching events of life with becoming resignation, and at the same time with
manly constancy and firm trust in God. As long as it shall please him to
continue our abode in the world, let us remain faithful to our duty; and when
it shall please him to give the command for, our removal hence, let us utter
only this voice: In thy hand O my God, my times are. Thou art calling me away.
Here I am, ready to obey thy call, and at thy signal to go forth. I thank thee
that I have been admitted to partake so long of the comforts of life, and to be
a spectator of the wisdom and goodness displayed in thy works. I thank thee
that thou have borne so long with my infirmities and provocations; have allowed
me to look up to thy promises in the gospel, and to hear the words of eternal
life uttered by my great Redeemer. With gratitude faith, and hope I commit my
soul to thee. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. -- Such are the sentiments with which every pious and
good man should conclude his life. Such indeed are the sentiments which he
ought to carry through every part of life. With these may we begin, and with
these conclude, every succeeding year which God shall think fit to add to our
earthly existence!

SERMON IV. ON THE MIXTURE OF BAD MEN WITH THE GOOD IN HUMAN SOCIETY.
MATTHEW. xiii. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest. --


THE parable, of which these words are a part, contains a prophetical
description of the state of the church. Our Lord predicts that the societies of
Christians were to be infected with persons of loose principles and bad
disposition, whom he likens to tares springing up among wheat. He intimates
that there should arise some whose officious zeal would prompt the desire of
exterminating immediately all such evil men; but that this were contrary to the
designs of providence, and to the spirit of Christianity; that a complete
separation was indeed to be made at last between the good and the bad; but that
this separation was to be delayed till the end of the world, when, in the style
of the parable, the tares should be entirely gathered out from among the wheat.
Let both grow together until the harvest.

When we look around us, nothing is more conspicuous in the state of the world,
than that broad mixture of the religious and the impious, the virtuous and the
wicked, which we find taking place in every society. Strong objections seem
hence to arise against either the wisdom or goodness of divine Providence;
especially when we behold bad men not only tolerated in the world, but
occasionally exalted in their circumstances, to the depression of the just.
Why, it will be said, if a Supreme Being exist, and if his justice rule the
universe, does he allow such infamous persons as the records of history often
present, to have a place, and even to make a figure in his world? Why sleeps
the thunder idle in his hand, when it could so easily blast them? What shall we
think of one who, having the power of exterminating them always at his command,
permits them to proceed without disturbance; nay, sometimes appears to look on
them with complacency? -- It becomes highly worthy of our attention to consider
what answer can be made to these objections; to inquire whether any reasons can
be given that serve to justify this dispensation of Providence, in allowing a
mixture of bad men to continue on the face of the earth until the end of time.
This inquiry shall make the subject of the present discourse, together with
such reflections as naturally arise from surveying the state of human affairs.

But, before entering directly on such inquiry, it may be proper to take
notice, that, in our estimation of who are the good, who are the bad, we are
often in hazard of committing mistakes. The real characters of men are known
only to God. They frequently depend on the secret and unseen parts of life. As
in judging of themselves men are always partial, so in judging of others they
often err, through the imperfect information which they have gathered, or the
rash prejudices which they have formed. They are too apt to limit the character
of virtue to those who agree wi^h them in sentiment and belief; and exaggerate
the failings of those against whom they have conceived dislike, into great and
unpardonable crimes. Were it left to the indiscreet zeal of some to extirpate
from the earth all those whom they consider as bad men, there is ground to
apprehend that, instead of tares the wheat would often be rooted out. -- At the
same time, we readily admit the fact, as too manifest to be denied, that a
multitude of gross and notorious sinners are now mixed with the followers of
God and virtue. Let us proceed then to consider how far this is consistent with
the justice and wisdom of the Governor of the world.

It is a principle in which all serious and reflecting persons have agreed, and
which by many arguments is confirmed, that our present state on earth is
designed to be a state of discipline and improvement, in order to fit human
nature for a higher and better state which it is to attain hereafter. Now, this
principle being once admitted, we say, that the mixture of virtue and vice
which here prevails, is calculated to answer this purpose better than a more
unmixed and perfect state of society would have done.

For, in the first place, the crimes of the wicked give occasion to the
exercise of many excellent dispositions of heart among the righteous. They
bring forth all the suffering virtues, which otherwise would have had no field;
and by the exercise of which the human character is tried, and acquires some of
its chief honors. Were there no bad men in the world to vex and distress the
good, the good might appear in the light of harmless innocence; but could have
no opportunity of displaying fidelity, magnanimity, patience, and fortitude.
One half of virtue, and not the least important half, would be lost to the
world. In our present imperfect state, any virtue which is never exercised is
in hazard of becoming extinct in the human breast. If goodness constantly
proceeded in a smooth and flowery path; if, meeting with no adversary to oppose
it, it were surrounded on every hand with acclamation and praise, is there no
ground to dread that it might be corrupted by vanity, or might sink into
indolence? This dangerous calm must therefore be interrupted. The waters must
be troubled, lest they should stagnate and putrify. When you behold wicked men
multiplying in number, and increasing in power, imagine not that Providence
particularly favors them. No; they are suffered for a time to prosper, that
they may fulfill the high designs of heaven. They are employed as instruments in
the hand of God for the improvement of his servants. They are the rods with
which he chastens the virtuous, in order to rouse them from a dangerous
slumber; to form them for the day of adversity, and to teach them how to suffer
honorably.

In the next place, the mixture of the bad among the good serves not only to
give exercise to the passive graces, but also to improve the active powers and
virtues of man. It inures the righteous to vigilance and exertion. It obliges
them to stand forth, and act their part with firmness and constancy in evil
times. It gives occasion for their virtues to shine with conspicuous luster;
and makes them appear as the lights of the world amidst surrounding darkness.
Were it not for the dangers that arise from abounding iniquity, there would be
no opportunity for courage to act, for wisdom to admonish, for caution to
watch, nor for faith to exert itself in overcoming the world. It is that
mixture of disposition which now takes place, that renders the theater on which
we act so busy and stirring, and so much fitted for giving employment to every
part of man's intelligent and moral nature. It affords a complete field for the
genuine display of characters; and gives every man the opportunity to come
forth and show what he is. Were the terror of human conduct altogether regular
and uniform, interrupted by no follies and vices, no cross dispositions and
irregular passions, many of our active powers would find no exercise. Perhaps
even our life would languish, and become too still and insipid. Man is not yet
ripe for a paradise of innocence, and for the enjoyment of a perfect and
faultless society. As in the natural world, he is not made for perpetual spring
and cloudless skies, but by the wintry storm must be calied to exert his
abilities for procuring shelter and defense; so in the moral world,
intermixture of bad men renders many an exertion necessary, which in a perfect
state of the world would find no place, but which in the present state of trial
is proper and useful. -- The existence of vice in the world assuredly testifies
our present corruption; and according to the degree of its prevalence, is
always, more or less, the source of misery. It is a standing proof of the fall
and degeneracy of man. But as long as that fallen state continues, the wisdom
of Providence eminently appears in making the errors and frailties of the
wicked subservient to the improvement of the just. Tares are for that reason
suffered at present to grow up among the wheat.

These observations on the wisdom of Providence in this dispensation will be
farther illustrated, by considering the useful instructions which we receive,
or which at least every wise man may receive, from the follies and vices of
those among whom we are obliged to live.

First, They furnish instruction concerning the snares and dangers against
which we ought to be most on our guard. They put it thereby in our power to
profit by the errors and misconduct of others. By observing from what small
beginnings the greatest crimes have arisen; observing how bad company has
seduced this man from his original principles and habits; how a careless
indulgence of pleasure has blinded and intoxicated that man; how the neglect of
divine institutions has, in another, gradually paved the way for open
profligacy; much salutary instruction is conveyed to the virtuous. Tracing the
dangerous and slippery paths by which so many have been insensibly ^etrayed
into ruin, their views of human nature are enlarged; the sense of their own
imbecility is strongly impressed upon them; accompanied with the conviction of
the necessity of a constant dependence on the grace and assistance of heaven.
All the crimes which they behold disturbing society around them, serve as
signals hung out to them, beacons planted in their view, to prevent their
making shipwreck among those rocks on which others have split. It has been
justly said, that not only from the advices of his friends, but from the
reproaches of his enemies, a wise man may draw instruction. In the same manner,
it is not only by the examples of good men, but likewise by those of the
wicked, that an attentive mind may be confirmed in virtue.

Next. These examples of bad men, while they admonish the virtuous of the
dangers against which they are to guard, are farther profitable by the views
which they exhibit of the evil and the deformity of sin. Its odious nature
never appears in so strong a light as when displayed in the crimes of the
wicked. It is true that, when vice is carried to a certain degree, and
disguised by plausible colors, it may pass unreproved, and even for a while
seem popular in the world. But it is no less true that, when it becomes open
and flagrant, and is deprived of the shadow of virtue, it never fails to in our
general reproach, and to become the object either of contempt or of hatred. How
often, for instance, have the abilities, which once drew esteem and admiration,
sunk, in a short time, into the most humiliating degradation merely through the
ascendant which corrupted inclinations and low habits had acquired over their
possessor? How often have the rising honors of the young been blasted, by
their forsaking the path of honor on which they had once entered, for the
blind and crooked tracts of depravity and folly? Such spectacles of the infamy
of vice, such memerials of the disgrace attending it, are permitted by
Providence for general instruction and are assuredly edifying to the world. It
was necessary, for moral improvement, that the beauty and excellence of virtue,
and the deformity of vice, should be strongly impressed on every intelligent
mind. This could never be done with so great advantage as by the striking
contrasts of both which are produced by the living examples of evil men
intermixed with the good. It is in this mirror that we clearly contemplate how
much the righteous is more excellent than his neighbor.

The same purpose of important instruction is farther promoted by the instances
of misery which the state of wicked men on earth affords. I admit that the
worldly success, which sometimes attends them, may blind and seduce the unwary;
but a little more reffection enables men to distinguish between apparent
success and real happiness. The condition of worthless men, whatever splendour
riches may throw around them, is easily discerned to be a restless and
miserable one; and the misery which they suffer, to be derived from their
vices. In that great corrupted crowd which surrounds us, what incestant bustle
and ^^ir, what agitation and tumults take place? What env^ and jealousy of one
another? How much hitterness (...) ^^^^tment do we behold among them; mutually
deceiving and deceived; supplanting and supplanted; ever pursuing, but never
satisfied? These are not matters of rare observation, or which require nice
scrutiny to discover them. We need only open our eyes to behold the wicked
tormented by their passions, and far removed from that sanctuary of calmness
and tranquillity which is the abode of real happiness. Nay, when we appeal to
bad men themselves, after they have run the whole round of vicious pleasures,
we will often find them obliged to confess, that the wretched result of their
pursuits has been vanity and vexation of spirit; and that the happiest days
they have enjoyed were in the times of innocence; before criminal desires and
guilty passions had taken possession of their breasts. Such practical
demonstrations as these of the infelicity of sin are yielded by the examples of
evil doers whom we see around us. By attending to their situation, the misery,
as well as infamy of guilt is realised, and rendered sensible to our
apprehension.

Thus, upon a fair inquiry, you behold how the ways of God may, in this
remarkable case, be justified to man. You behold what important ends are
advanced, by permitting the tares at present to grow together with the wheat.
The intermixture of evil men in human society serves to exercise the suffering
graces and virtues of the good; by the diversity of characters among those with
whom they have intercourse, it serves to bring forth and improve their active
powers and virtues, and to enlarge the circle of useful occupations; it ferves
to instruct them in the temptations against which they are to guard, to reveal
to them all the deformity of vice, and to make its miseries pass conspicuously
before their eyes. When we con^^der them as actors on the theater of the world,
they are thereby improved in the part they have to perform. When we consider
them as spectators of what is passing on that theater, their minds are thereby
instructed; their views rectified and enlarged by the objects that are set
before them.

From these important truths, several reflections no less important arise.

We are naturally taught, in the first place, never to be hasty in finding
fault with any of the arrangements of Providence. The present permission of
moral evil on the earth seemed, on the first view, to furnish a strong
objection against either the wisdom or the goodness of the Author of nature.
After beholding the useful purposes which are answered by that permission, how
cautious should we be in advancing any of our rash speculations against his
government and conduct! To our confined and humble station it belongs not to
censure, but to submit, trust, and adore; satisfied that the farther we
enquire, the rectitude of his ways will appear the more; thankful for the
discoveries of them which have been imparted to us; and persuaded that, where
our discoveries fail, it is not because there is no more wisdom or goodness to
be seen, but because our present condition allows us not to see more.

In the second place, let us be taught with what eye we are to look upon those
bad men whom we find around us in the world. Not surely with an eye of envy.
Whatever prosperity they may seem to enjoy, they are still no more than tares,
the weeds of the field; contemptible in the sight of God; tolerated by his
providence for a while on account of the righteous, to whose improvement they
are rendered subservient. The parable informs us that, in the end, they are to
be gathered and burnt. In this life only they have their good things. But their
prosperity is transitory. They are brought into ^^solation in a moment, and
utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, O God, when
thou awakest, thou sh^lt despise their image Psalm Ixxiii. 19.2^.
. -- When we consider their unhappy state, it becomes us to behold them with
the eye of pity. Let us remember that, in the midst of their errors, they are
by nature still our brethren. Let us not behave to them in the spirit of
bitterness. Insult not their follies. Pride not yourselves on superior virtue.
Remember that, as bad men are mixed with the good, so, in the best men, vices
are at present mixed with virtues. Your own character, good as you may esteem
it, is not free from every evil taint; and in the characters of those whom you
reprobate as vicious, there are always some good qualities mixed with the bad
ones. Study, as far as you can, to reclaim and amend them; and if, in any
degree, you have been profited by their failings, endeavor, in return, to
profit them, by good counsel and advice, by advice, not administered with
officious zeal, or self-conceited superiority, but with the tenderness of
compassion and real friendship.

In the third place, in whatever proportion the admixture of vice may seem to
take place in the world, let us never despair of the prevalence of virtue on
the whole. Let us not exaggerate, beyond measure, the quantity of vice that is
found in the mixture. It is proper to observe, that in the parable now before
us, after the owner of the field had sown his good seed, no reason is given us
to think, that the good seed was entirely chocked up by tares. On the contrary,
we are told that the blade sprung up, and brought forth fruit; and, though the
tares also arose, yet, in the end there was a harvest, when the wheat was
reaped and gathered into the barn. In the most corrupted times, God never
leaves himself without many witnesses on earth. He is always at entive to the
cause of goodness; and frequently supports and advances, it by means which we
are una^^^ to trace. He nourishes much piety and virtue in hearts that are
unknown to us; and beholds repentance ready to spring up among many whom we
consider a reprobates. -- I know that it has always been comm^^ for persons to
represent the age in which they live as the worst that ever appeared; and
religion and virtue as just on the point of vanishing from among m^n. This is
the language sometimes of the serious; ^^ten of the hypocritical, or of the
narrow-minded. But true religion gives no sanction to such severe censures, or
such gloomy views. Though the tares must be at all times springing up, there is
no reason for believing that they shall ever overspread the whole field. The
nature of the weeds that spring up may vary, according to the nature of the
soil. Different modes of iniquity may distinguish different ages of the world;
while the sum of corruption is nearly the same. Let not our judgments of men,
and of the times in which we live, be hasty and presumptuous. Let us trust in
the grace of God; and hope the best of mankind.

In the fourth and last place, let us keep our eyes ever fixed on that
important period, which is alluded to in the text, as the conclusion of all.
Let both grow together until the harvest. The great spiritual year is to be
closed by a harvest, when the householder is to gather the wheat into his barn;
when, at the end of the world, the final distinction of men and characters is
to take place. The confused mixture of good and evil, which now prevails, is
only a temporary dispensation of Providence, accommodated to man's fallen and
imperfect state. Let it not tempt us for a moment to distrust the reality of
the divine government; or to entertain the remotest suspicion that moral good
and evil are to be on the same terms forever. The frailties of our nature
fitted us for no more at present than the enjoyment of a very mixed and
imperfect society. But when our nature, pu^ified and refined, shall become ripe
for higher advancement, then shall the spirits of the just, disengaged from any
polluted mixture, undisturbed by sin or by sinners, be united in one divine
assembly, and rejoice forever in the presence of him who made them. Looking
forward to this glorious issue with steadfast faith, let no cross appearances
every discomfit our hopes, or lead us to suspect that we have been serving God
in vain. If we continue faithful to the death, we may rest ass^red, that in due
time we shall receive the crown of life.

SERMON V. ON THE RELIEF WHICH THE GOSPEL AFFORDS TO THE DISTRESSED.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW. xi. 28. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.


THE life of man ^n earth is doomed to be clouded with various evils.
Throughout all ranks, t^^^ afflicted form a considerable proportion of the
human race; and even they who have a title to be called prosperous, are always,
in some periods of their life, obliged to drink from the cup of bitterness. The
Christian religion is particularly entitled to our regard, by accommodating
itself with great tenderness to this distressed condition of mankind. It is not
to be considered as merely an au^^oritative system of precepts. Important
precepts it indeed delivers for the wise and proper regulation of life. But the
same voice which enj^^^s our duty, utters the words of consolation. The ^^spel
deserves to be held a dispensation of relief to m^nkind under both the temporal
and spiritual distresses of their state.

This amiable and compassionate spirit of our ^eligion conspicously appears in
the character of its great Author. It shone in all his actions while he lived
on earth. It breathed (...) all his discourses; and, in the words of the text,
is expressed with much energy. In the preceding verse, he had given a h^gh
account of his own person and dignity. All things are delivered unto me of my
Father; and no man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. But least
any of his hearers should be discouraged by this mysterious representation of
his greatness, he instantly tempers it with the most gracious benignity;
declaring, in the text, the merciful intention of his mission to the world,
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

The first thing which claims our attention in these words is, what we are to
understand by coming unto Christ. This is a phrase which has often given
occasion to controversey. By theological writers it has been involved in much
needless mystery, while the meaning in itself is plain and easy. The very
metaphor that is here used serves to explain it. In the ancient world,
disciples flocked round their different teachers, and attended them wherever
they went; in order both to testify their attachment, and to imbibe more fully
the doctrine of their masters. Coming unto Christ, therefore, is the same with
resorting to him as our declared Master? acknowledging ourselves his disciples,
believers in his doctrine, and followers of his precepts. As Christ is made
known to us under the character both of a Teacher and a Savior, our coming to
him imports not only submission to his instructions, but confidence (...) his
power to save. It imports that, forsaking the corruptions of sin and the world,
we follow that course of virtue and obedience which he points out to us;
relying on his mediation for pardon of our offenses, and acceptance w^^h
heaven. This is what is implied in the scripture term Faith; which includes
both the assent of the understanding to the truth of the Christian religion,
and the concurrence of the will in receiving it.

What next occurs in the text to attract our notice is the description of those
to whom the invitation is addressed. All those who labor and are heavy laden,
that is, who, in one way or other, feel themselves grieved and dutressed, are
here invited to come to Christ. -- Now, from two sources chiefly our distresses
arise; from moral, or from natural causes.

First, They may arise from inward moral causes; from certain feelings and
reflections of the mind, which occasion uneasiness and pain. A course of sin
and vice always proves ruinous and destructive in the issue. But its tendency
to ruin is often not perceived, while that tendency is advancing. For as sin is
the reign of passion and pleasure, it forms men to a thoughtless inconsiderate
state. C^^cumstances, however, may occur, and frequent^^^, in the course of
life, do occur, which disclose to (...) vicious man the ruin which he is
bringing on himself, as an offender against the God who made him. When some
occasional confinement to solitude, o^^^ some turn of adverse fortune, directs
his attention immediately upon his own character; or when, drawing toward the
close of life, his passions subside, his pleasures withdraw, and a future state
comes forward to his view; in such situations it often happens, that the past
follies and crimes of such a man appear to him in a light most odious and
shocking; and not odious only, but terrifying to his heart. He considers that
he is undoubtedly placed under the government of a just God, who did not send
him into this world for naught; that he has neglected the part assigned to him;
has contemned the laws of heaven; has degraded his own nature; and instead of
being useful, having been hurtful and pernicious to those among whom he lived,
is about to leave a detestable memory behind him. -- What account shall he give
of himself to his Maker; Self condemned, polluted by so many crimes, how can he
expect to find mercy in his sight; Hence, an overwhelmed and dejected mind;
hence, dismal forebodings of punishment; hence, that wounded spirit, which,
when it is deeply pierced, becomes the forest of all human evils, and has
sometimes rendered existence a burden which could not be endured.

Such distresses as these, arising from moral internal causes, may be made
light of by the giddy and the vain; and represented as confined to a few
persons only of distempered imagination. But to those whose professions give
them occasion to see men under various circumstances of affliction, they are
known to be far from being unfrequent in the world; and on many more occasions
than is commonly imagined, to throw over the human mind the blackest gloom of
which it is susceptible. Religious feelings, be assured, have a deep root in
the nature of man. They form a part of the human constitution. They are
interwoven with many of those fears and hopes which actuates us in the changing
situations of fortune. During the gay and active periods of life, they may be
smothered; but with most men, they are smothered rather than totally
obliterated: And if any crisis of our condition shall awaken, and bring them
forth, in their full force upon a conscious guilty heart, woe to the man, who,
in some disconsolate season, is doomed to suffer their extreme vengeance!

But, while under such distresses of the mind not a few may be said to labor
and to be heavy laden, greater still is the multitude of those who, from
natural external causes, from the calamities and evils of life, undergo much
suffering and misery. The life of man is not indeed wholly composed of misery.
It admits of many, pleasing scenes. On the whole, there is reason to believe
that it affords more joy than grief. At the same time, the unfortunate, as I
before observed, form always a numerous class of mankind; and it may be said
with truth, that sore travel is ordained for the sons of men. Though the burden
is not equally laid on all; some there always are, on whom it falls with
oppressive weight. -- Unexpected disappointments have crushed their hopes, and
blasted the plans which they had formed for comfort in the world. The world
had, perhaps, smiled upon them once, only to give them a feeling of its
miseries at the last. Struggling with poverty, unable to support their families
whom they see languishing around them, they, at the same time, are obliged by
their situation in so ciety to conceal their necessities; and under the forced
appe^^ance of cheerfulness, to hide from the world a broken heart. They are
st^^, perhaps, by the unkindness of friends; cast off by those in whom they had
trusted; or torn by untimely death from real friends, in connection with whom
they might have flourished and been happy; at the same time borne down, it may
be, with the infirmities of a sickly body, and left to drag a painful life
without assistance o^ relief. -- How many sad scenes of this nature, on which
it were painful to insist, does the world afford?

When we turn to those who are accounted prosperous men, we shall always find
many sorrows mingled with their pleasures; many hours of care and vexation,
wherein they acknowledge themselves classed with those who labor and are heavy
laden. In entering into some gay festive assembly, we behold affected
cheerfulness displayed on every contenance; and might fancy that we had arrived
at the temple of unmixed pleasure and gladness of heart. Yet, even there, could
we look into the bosoms of these apparently happy persons, how often would we
find them inwardly preyed upon by some tormenting suspicions some anxious
fears, some secret griefs which either they dare not disclose to the world, or
from which, if disclosed, they can look for no relief? -- In short, amidst that
great company of pilgrims, who are journeying through life, many there are
whose journey lies through a valley of tears; and many to whom that valley is
only cheered by transient glimpses of joy.

To these classes of mankind is addressed the invitation of the text. To them,
it is in a particular manner addressed; overlooking the giddy and dissipated
multitude. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden. Not as if our
Savior were always ready to accept that sort of piety which is merely the
consequence of distress; or made all those welcome, who are driven by nothing
but fear or danger to have recourse to him. His words are to be understood as
intimating, that the heart which is humbled and softened by affliction, is the
object of his compassionate regard; that he will not reject us merely because
we have been cast off by the world; but that, if with proper dispositions and
sentiments we apply to him in the evil day, we shall be sure of meeting with a
gracious reception. It now remains to show, what that reception is which we may
look for; what that rest is which Christ has promised to confer on those who
come to him; whether their distresses arise from moral or natural causes. Come
unto me, and I will give you rest.

1. Christ affords rest to the disturbed mind that labors under apprehensions
and fears of guilt. Let those who suffer distress of this nature come to
Christ, that is, with contrition and repentance, have recourse to him as their
Savior, and they shall regain quietness and peace. Foolish and guilty they
have been; and justly lie under dread of punishment; but the penitent sorrow
which they now feel, implies their disposition to be changed. It implies, as
far as it is genuine, that, sensible of their folly, they now desire to become
good and wise; and are determined for the future to hold a virtuous course,
could they only hope to obtain pardon for the past. In this situation of mind,
let them not be cast down and despair. Christ has brought with him from heaven
the olive branch. He carries in his hand the signal of forgiveness. The
declaration which he publishes is, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return to the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Isaiah lv. 7.
Insufficient though our own repentance be, to procure pardon from heaven, we
are informed, that an all-sufficient atonement has been made by Christ. Neither
the number nor the atrocity of offenses excludes, from forgiveness, the
penitent who returns to his duty. To all who come under this description, the
offer of mercy extends, without exception. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Romans viii. 32.


This discovery of divine government, afforded by the Gospel, is perfectly
calculated to scatter the gloom which had over^ast the desponding heart. The
atmosphere clears up on every side; and is illuminated by cheering rays of
celestial mercy. Not only is hope given to the penitent, but it is rendered
sinful not to indulge that hope. We are not only allowed and encouraged, but we
are commanded to trust in the divine clemency. We are commanded to believe that
none who come unto Christ ^e will in any wise cost out. John vi 37.
As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked urn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your
evi^^^^ays; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel xxxiii. 11.
-- Such is the relief which the religion of Christ brings to them who labor
and are heavy laden under the impressions of guilt and divine displeasure; a
relief which nothing can render ineffectual to the heart, except the most
gloomy superstition, founced on gross misconceptions of the nature and
attributes of God. Let us now.

II. Consider what rest the religion of Christ gives to them whose distress
arises not from inward and moral, but from natural and external causes; from
adverse fortune, or any of those numerous calamities to which we are at present
exposed To such persons, it may seem more difficult to promise any effectual
relief. In the former case, the distress lay entirely in the mind. As soon as
its views are rectified, and its apprehensions quieted, the evil is removed,
and the cure effected. Here, the distress arises from without; and the religion
of Christ affects not the course of external events. But though it removes not
all the evils of life, though it promises no continuance of undisturbed
prosperity, (which indeed it were not sulutary for man always to enjoy) yet, if
it mitigates the evils which necessarily belong to our state, and supports us
under them, it may justly be said to give rest to them who labor and are heavy
laden. When much that is material and important is effected, we have no cause
to complain, though all that we desire be not accomplished. -- In this part of
the discourse, I am to be considered as addressing myself not merely to such as
are at present suffering any severe ca^amity. I now speak to many, who, in the
m^^st of health and affluence, enjoy the various comforts of life. But I must
desire such persons to look forward to what may one day be their state. Let
them reflect how important it is to prepare themselves for the future unknown
vicissitudes of the world. For, if a man live many years, and rejoice in them
all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. Eccles.
xi. 8.
-- Now, either in the prospect of future distress, or under present suffering.
I say, that the religion of Christ gives rest to the heart, by the forti^^de
which it inspires, and by the consolations which it affords.

First, It inspires fortitude. It discovers a supreme administration, so
friendly to the interests of goodness, as never to allow the followers of
Christ to dread, that, in any situation of fortune, they shall be neglected by
Heaven. From the abstract consideration of the divine perfections, men had
always some ground to believe, that the general order of the universe was
consulted by its great Ruler. But how far the interest of individuals might be
obliged to yield, or, in many cases might be sacrificed, to this general order,
they were left altogether in the dark. Here the gospel of Christ comes to our
aid, by the explicit assurance which it gives, that, in the great system of
Providence, the welfare of every single good man is particularly included. All
things, we are expressly told, are made to work together, not merely for the
order and perfection of the whole, but also for good to them who love God. Rom
viii 28
The life of every person, who comes under this description, forms a system
complete within itself; where every event that happens to him possesses its
destined place, and forms a link in that great chain of causes, which was
appointed, from the beginning of things, for carrying on his improvement and
felicity. Such an arrangement of the affairs of the world, may appear
astonishing to our narrow capacities; yet surely implies no effort beyond the
reach of infinite power, joined with infinite wisdom and goodness.

Hence arises a degree of fortitude and constancy to good men, which can upon
no other grounds be attained. Faith, in these principles of the gospel, erects
for them a fortiess, impregnable to the assaults of the world, into which they
can at all times retreat. Sitting under the shelter of divine protection, they
calmly hear the storm, when it blows with its utmost violence around them. The
floods have lifted up their voice; they have lifted up all their waves But the
Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters; yea, than the mighty
waves of the sea. Psalm xciii. 34.
Of the man who possesses such principles, it is justly said, His heart is
established; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. Psalm cxii. 7, 8.
Tranquillity, order, and magnanimity, dwell with him; while all is confusion
and trepidation among those, who have nothing to look to but the apparent
disorders of the world.

The doctrine of Christ not only arms us, in this manner, with fortitude
against the approach of evil; but, supposing evils to fall upon us with their
heaviest pressure, it lightens the load by many consolations to which others
are strangers. While bad men trace, in the calamities with which they are
visited, the hand of an offended sovereign, Christians are taught to view them
as the well-intended chastisements of a merciful Father. They hear amidst them,
that still voice which a good conscience brings to their ear: Fear not, for I
am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God. Isaiah xli. 10.
They apply to themselves the comfortable promises with which the gospel
abounds. They discover in these the happy issue decreed to their troubles; and
wait with patience till Providence shall have accomplished its great and good
designs. In the mean time, devotion opens to them its blessed and holy time,
devotion opens to them its blessed and holy sanctuary: That sanctuary in which
the wounded heart is healed, and the weary mind is at rest; where the cares of
the world are forgotten, where its tumults are hushed, and its miseries
disappear; where greater objects open to our view than what the world presents;
where a more serene sky shines, and a sweeter and calmer light beams on the
afflicted heart. In those moments of devotion, a pious man, pouring out his
wants and sorrows to an almighty Supporter, feels that he is not left solitary
and forsaken in a vale of woe. God is with him; Christ and the Holy Ghost are
with him; and, though he should be bereaved of every earthly friend, he can
look up in heaven to a Friend who will never die.

To these present consolations, the religion of Christ adds the joyful prospect
of that future state, where eternal rest remains for the people of God. This
life they are taught to consider as only the house of their pilgrimage; the
temporary mansion of painful though necessary discipline. But let them endure
for a little and the pilgrimage shall end, the discipline shall be finished;
and all the virtuous be assembled in those blissful regions which are prepared
for their reward. Such a prospect cheers the darkest hours of life; and affords
a remedy to every trouble. The sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed. Romans viii. 18.
They appear in this comparative view, as no more than a distressing dream of
the night, from which one awakes into health, and light, and joy. -- Peculiar
is this high consolation to the religion of Christ. It is what all nations had
eagerly wished for; what all philosophy had anxiously sought to discover; but
what no research, no philosophy were able to ascertain to mankind, till Christ
brought the assurance of life and immortality from heaven; and conferred on his
disciples this noble and inestimable gift.

Thus, on the whole, the Christain doctrine is found to be the great Medicine
of life. It is the balm of human sorrows and cares. In our present state, where
so many are suffering actual distress, of one kind or other, and where all have
reason to dread the approach of distress, it is religion only that can
alleviate the burdens of life, and smooth our passage through this evil world.
-- Let this view of religion persuade us to improve the sacred ordinance of our
Lord's supper for coming unto Christ, in the way before explained: that is,
joining ourselves to him as his disciples; his disciples, not in words and
professions only, but in heart, and in truth; taking upon us his yoke, as is
added in the words immediately following the text; and learning of him who is
meek and lowly in heart. Let those who labor under the sense of remembered
follies and crimes, come unto Christ with penitent dispositions, and they shall
obtain pardon. Let those who labor under the suffering of present, or the
apprehension of future sorrows, come unto Christ, and they shall receive
consolation. All who are in any sense heavy laden, coming unto him, shall find
rest to their souls.

Before concluding this discourse, there is another set of men, not yet
mentioned, to whom I must also address the exhortation in the text; those I
mean, who laboring under none of the distressful burdens of life are surfeited
of its pleasures; who labor under the burden only of languid ease, and the
load of insipid prosperity. You drag, my friends, but a misearble existence.
Oppressed by no sorrow, you feel vacuity and dissatisfaction within; you are
often weary of life; and in your solitary hours, are disposed to confess that
all you have experienced is vanity. Wherefore should you any longer spend your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not? Come to the waters which are now offered to you, and drink. Hear, and your
souls shall live. Retreat from the corrupting vanities of the world, to Christ,
to religion, and to virtue. New sources of enjoyment shall then be opened to
you. A world yet untried shall display itself to your view. You shall be formed
to a relish for the quiet and innocent pleasures of piety and devotion; of
friendship, and good affections; of useful knowledge, and virtuous activity; of
calm society, and seasonable retirement; pleasures of which at present you have
no conception; but which, upon trial. you shall find superior to the trifling,
or turbulent amusements, in which you have hitherto passed your days. -- The
true satisfaction of the human mind is only to be found in religion and
goodness; in a purified heart, and a virtuous life. All other plans of
happiness are fallacious, and pregnant with disappointment. It is only by
acquainting ourselves with God that we can find peace: And those who are weary
and heavy laden now, shall be weary and heavy laden to the end, unless they
come to him who only can give them rest.

SERMON VI. ON LUXURY AND LICENTIOUSNESS.
ISAIAH V. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and wine are in their
feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands.


IT appears from many passages in the writings of this prophet, that in his
days great corruption of manners had begun to take place among the people of
Israel. Originally a sober and a religious nation, accustomed to a simple and
pastoral life, after they had enlarged their territories by conquest, and
acquired wealth by commerce, they gradually contracted habits of luxury; and
luxury soon introduced its usual train of attending evils. In the history of
all nations, the same circulation of manners has been found; and the age in
which we live resembles, in this respect, the ages which have gone before it.
Forms of iniquity may vary; but the corrupt propensities of men remain at all
times much the same; and revolutions from primitive simplicity to the
refinements of criminal luxury have been often exhibited on the stage of the
world. The reproof directed in the text to the Jews of that ancient age, will
be found equally applicable to the manners of many, in modern times. In
discoursing from it, I shall first consider the character of those who are
described in the text, and show the guilt that is involved in it. I shall next
consider the duties which persons of that character are supposed to have
neglected; to regard the work of the Lord, and to consider the operation of his
hands.

I. When we take into view the character pointed at in the text, it is evident
that what the prophet means to reprove is, the spirit of inconsiderate
dissipation of intemperate indulgence, and irreligious luxury. It is not the
feast and the wine, the harp and the viol, which he means to condemn. Music and
wine are, in themselves, things of innocent nature: Nay, when temperately
enjoyed, they may be employed for useful purposes; for affording relaxation
from the oppressive cares of life, and for promoting friendly intercourse among
men. The opulent are not prohibited from enjoying the good things of this
world, which Providence has bestowed upon them. Religion neither abolishes the
distinction of ranks, (as the vain philosophy of some would teach us to do,)
nor interferes with a modest and decent indulgence of pleasure. -- It is the
criminal abuse of pleasure which is here censured; that thoughtless and
intemperate enjoyment of it which wholly absorbs the time and attention of men;
which obliterates every serious thought of the proper business of life; and
effaces the sense of religion and of God.

It may be proper to remark, that it is not open and direct impiety, which is
laid to the charge of the persons here characterised. It is not said, that in
their feasts they scoffed at religion, or blasphemed the name of God. To this
summit of wickedness these persons had not yet arrived; perhaps, the age in
which they lived gave not its countenance to this wantonness of impiety. It is
merely a negative crime of which they are accused; that they regarded not the
work of the Lord, neither considered the operation of his hands. But this
absence of all religious impressions is here pointed out, as sufficient to
stigmatize their characters with guilt. As soon as the sense of a Supreme Being
is lost, the great check is taken off, which keeps under restraint the passions
of men. Mean desires, and low pleasures, take place of the greater and nobler
sentiments which reason and religion inspire. Amidst the tumult of the wine and
the feast, all proper views of human life are forgotten. The duties which, as
men, they have to perform, the part they have to act in the world, and the
distresses to which they are exposing themselves, are banished from their
thoughts. Tomorrow shall be as this day, and more abundantly, is the only
voice Inflamed by society, and circulated from one loose companion to another,
the spirit of riot grows and swells, till it end in brutal excess.

Were such disorders rare and occasional merely, they might perhaps be
forgotten and forgiven. But, nourished by repetition and habit, they grow up
among too many, to become the business and occupation of life. By these
unfortunate votaries of pleasure, they are accounted essential to happiness,
life appears to stagnate without them. Having no resource within themselves,
their spirits sink, and their very being seems annihilated, till the return of
their favorite pleasures awaken within them some transient sparkles of joy. --
Idleness, ease, and prosperity, have too natural a tendency to generate the
follies and vices now described. Because they have no changes, said the
Psalmist, therefore they fear not God. Psalm lv. 19.
They are the dark and solitary hours of life, which recall men to recollection
and wisdom. They show to the unthinking what this world really is, and what may
be expected from it. But the day that is always bright and unclouded, is not
made for men. It flatters them with the dangerous illusion, that it is in their
power to render life one scene of pleasure; and that they have no other
business on earth but to spread the feast, and call the harp and the viol to
sound. But the examples are so frequent, of the dangers and the crimes which
arise from an intemperate abure of pleasure, that on this part of the subject
it seems needless to insist any longer. I proceed, therefore.

II. To consider the duties which men are accused of having neglected; and
which, it is here supposed, if duly attended to, would have acted as the
correctives of dissolute and irreligious luxury; those are, to regard the work
of the Lord, and to consider the operation of his hands. -- By recommending
such duties. I do not mean to represent it as requisite that the feast should
be turned into an act of worship? that the countenances of men should be always
grave; or that, in the hours of amusement and of social festivity, no subject
may employ their thoughts and their discourse, except God and a future state.
All extremes in religion are dangerous; and, by carrying austerity too far, we
are in hazard of only promoting hypocrisy. But though some, in the last age,
might be prone to this extreme; yet, at the present day, there is not much
occasion for warning men against it. -- What I now insist upon is, that all our
pleasures ought to be tempered with a serious sense of God; that scenes of
gaiety and enjoyment should never make us forget that we are subjects of his
government, and have a part allotted us to act in his world; that on no
occasion they should be prolonged so much, repeated so often, or suffered to
transport us so far, as to lead us to break any of the divine laws, or to act
inconsistently with the character of men and Christians. A prevailing sense of
God on the mind is to be ever hold the surest guard of innocence and virtue,
amidst the allurements of pleasure. It is the salutary mixture which must be
infussed into the cup of joy, in order to render it safe and innoxious.

This sense of God should lead us, in the language of the prophet, to regard
the work of the Lord, and to consider the operation of his hands; which
expressions may be understood as requiring us to have God upon our thoughts
under two views: to regard his work, as the Author of nature; and to consider
the operation of his hands, as the Governor of the world. Let us attend more
particularly to each of these views of the Supreme Being.

In the first place, we are to view God as the Author of nature, or to regard
the work of the Lord. With his works we are in every place surrounded. We can
cast our eyes no where, without discerning the hand of Him who formed them, if
the grossness of our minds will only allow us to behold Him. Let giddy and
thoughtless men turn aside a little from the haunts of riot. Let them stand
still, and contemplate the wondrous works of God; and make trial of the effect
which such contemplation would produce. -- It were good for them that, even
independently of the Author, they were more acquainted with his works; good for
them, that from the societies of loose and dissolute men, they would retreat to
the scenes of nature; would oftener dwell among them, and enjoy their beauties.
This would form them to the relish of uncorrupted, innocent pleasures; and make
them feel the va^ue of calm enjoyments, as superior to the noise and turbulence
of licen^ious gaiety. From the harmony of nature, and of nature's works, they
would learn to hear sweeter sounds than what arises from the viol, the tabret,
and the pipe.

But to higher and more serious thoughts these works of nature give occasion,
when considered in conjunction with the Creator who made them. -- Let me call
on you, my friends, to catch some interval of reflection, some serious moment,
for looking with thoughtful eye on the world around you. Lift your view to that
immense arch of heaven which encompasses you above. Behold the sun in all his
splendour rolling over your head by day; and the moon, by night, in mild and
serene majesty, surrounded with that host of stars which present to your
imagination an innumerable multitude of worlds. Listen to the awful voice of
thunder. Listen to the roar of the tempest and the ocean. Survey the wonders
that fill the earth which you inhabit. Contemplate a steady and powerful Hand,
bringing round spring and summer, autumn and winter, in regular course;
decorating this earth with innumerable beauties, diversifying it with
innumerable inhabitants; pouring forth comforts on all that live; and, at the
same time, overawing the nations with the violence of the elements, when it
pleases the Creator to let them forth. -- After you have viewed yourselves as
surrounded with such a scene of wonders; after you have beheld on every hand,
such an astonishing display of majesty united with wisdom and goodness; are you
not seized with solemn and serious awe? Is there not something which whispers
you within, that to this great Creator reverence and homage are due by all the
rational beings whom he has made? Admitted to be spectators of his works,
placed in the midst of so many great and interesting objects, can you believe
that you were brought hither for no purpose, but to immerse yourselves in gross
and brutal, or, at best, in tristing pleasures; lost to all sense of the
wonders you behold; lost to all reverence of that God who gave you being, and
who has crected this amazing fabric of nature, on which you look only with
stupid and unmeaning eyes? -- No: Let the scenes which you behold prompt
correspondent feelings. Let them awaken you from the degrading intoxication of
licentiousness, into nobler emotions. Every object which you view in nature,
whether great or small, serves to instruct you. The star and the insect, the
fiery meteor and the flower of spring, the verdant field and the lofty
mountain, all exhibit a supreme Power, before which you ought to tremble and
adore; all preach the doctrine, all inspire the spirit, of dovotion, and
reverence. Regarding, then, the work of the Lord, let rising emotions of awe
and gratitude call forth from your fouls such sentiments as these: -- Lord,
wherever I am and whatever I enjoy, may I never forget thee, as the Author of
nature! May I never forget that I am thy creature and thy subject! In this
magnificent temple of the universe, where thou have placed me, may I ever be
thy faithful worshipper; and may the reverence and the fear of God be the first
sentiments of my heart! -- It is to such consideration of God I would now recall
your thoughts, from the wine and the feast, as proper to check the spirit of
levity and folly; and to inspire manly and becoming sentiments, in the place of
criminal dissipation. But,

In the second place, there is a consideration of a nature still more serious,
to be employed for the same purpose; the consideration of God as not only the
Author of nature, but the Governor of his creatures. While we regard the work
of the Lord, we are also to consider the never ceasing operation of his hands.
We are to look up to an awful and irresistible Providence, stretching its arm
over our heads; directing the fate of men, and dispensing at its pleasure
happiness or misery. In the giddy moments of jollity, the wanton and
thoughtless are apt to say: Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. Nothing
is better for man, than to rejoice as much as he can all the days of his vain
life; and to keep himself undisturbed by superstitious terrors. He who sits
in the heavens bestows no minute attention on the sons of earth. He permits all
things to come alike to all; one event to happen to the righteous and to the
wicked. -- Be assured, my brethren, it is not so. You greatly deceive
yourselves, by imagining that your Creator and Governor is indifferent to the
part you are now acting; or that the distribution of good and evil, which now
takes place, has no relation to your moral conduct. In some instances, that
relation may not be apparent, because the moral government of God is not
complete in this world. But a multitude of proofs show government to be already
begun; and point out to you the train in which you may expect it to proceed.

In the history of all ages and nations, you cannot but have observed a
thousand instances, in which the operation of the divine hand has been
displayed; overtaking evil doers sooner or later with punishment, and bringing
on their own heads the ruin they had devised for others. You are not to imagine
that this displeasure of Providence is exerted only against the ambitious, the
treacherous, and the cruel, who are the authors of extensive misery to the
world. Under this idea, perhaps, you may be desirous to shelter yourselves,
that your excesses are of a harmless kind; that you seek nothing more than the
enjoyment of your own pleasures; that your feast and your wine interfere not
with the order of the world; and that therefore you have done nothing which
should awaken the sleeping thunder, and bring it dow from heaven on your heads.
Though not stained with the blackest color of guilt, your conduct may
nevertheless be highly offensive to the Ruler of the world. His government is
not of that indolent inattentive kind, which allows impunity to every lesser
criminal. He beholds with displeasure the behavior of those who degrade their
nature by vicious disorders; and contaminate, by their example, every society
with which they are connected. His measures are taken, that in one way or
other, they shall suffer.

Look around the circle of your acquaintance, and observe, whether they are not
the sober, the industrious, and the virtuous, who visibly prosper in the world,
and rise into reputation and influence; observe whether the licentious and
intemperate are not constantly humbled and checked by some dark reverse either
in their health or their fortune; whether the irreligious and profligate are
ever suffered to escape long, without being marked with infamy, and becoming
objects of contempt. -- I ask, to what cause this is to be ascribed, but to
that operation of the hand of God, which I am now calling you to consider? Does
it not obviously carry the marks of a plan, a system of things, contrived and
foreordained by Providence, for rewarding virtue, and punishing vice in every
form of its disorders? -- The Governor of the world need not for this purpose
step from his throne, or put forth his hand from the clouds, With admirable
wisdom he has so ordered the train of human affairs, that, in their natural
course, men's own wickedness shall reprove them, and their back slidings
correct them; that they shall be made to eat the fruit of their doings, and to
fall into the pit which themselves had dug.

These things have been always so apparent to observation, that though a man
may have been seduced into irregular and evil courses during his life, yet, at
the close of it, it seldom happens but he discerns their pernicious nature, and
condemns himself for them. Never, perhaps, was there a father, who after he had
spent his days in idleness, dissipation, and luxury, did not. when dying,
admonish the children whom he loved, to hold a more honorable course, to
follow the paths of virtue, to fear God, and to fulfill properly the duties of
their station. -- To yourselves, indeed, I can confidently appeal, whether what
I am now saying, be not confirmed by your own testimony. After you have been
guilty of some criminal acts, in the course of those riotous pleasures which
you indulge, have you not at certain times, felt the stings of remorse? Were
you not obliged to confess to yourselves that a sad prospect of misery was
opening before you, if such excesses were to continue? Did you not hear an
inward voice upbraiding you for having sunk and degraded your character so far
below that of many of your equals around you? -- My friends, what was this but
the voice of God, speaking, as the Governor of his creatures, within your heart;
testifying loudly that your course of life was displeasing to him; and warning
you of punishments that were to follow? If his displeasure against you is
already begun to be testified, can you tell where it is to stop, or how long it
may continue to pursue you throughout future stages of your existence? Who
knows the power of his wrath? -- To this awful, this warring voice, will you
not be persuaded reverently to listen! Impressed by the dread authority which
it carries, shall you not fall down on your knees before your Maker, imploring
his mercy to pardon your past offenses, and his grace to rectify your future
way?

Such ought to be the effects of the consideration of God as the Governor of
the world. It leads to thoughts of a very serious nature. When we regard the
work of the Lord, and contemplate him as the Author of the universe, such
contemplation prompts devotion. But when we consider the operation of his hands
in providence, and contemplate him as the Governor of mankind, such
contemplation prompts humiliation before him for offenses committed. The former
addresses itself to the ingenuous sentiments that are left in the heart; and
awakens a sense of our unworthiness, in neglecting the Author of nature, amidst
our riotous pleasures. The latter addresses itself to our regard for safety and
happiness; and awakens fear and dread, from conciousness of the guilt we have
contracted. Hence springs up in every thoughtful mind an anxious concern to
avert the displeasure, and regain the favor of that Supreme Being to whom we
are all subject. This, among unenlightened nations, gave rise to sacrifices,
expiations, and all the rites of humble, though superstitious worship. Among
nations who have been instructed in true religion, sentiments of the same
nature pave the way for prayer, repentance, faith, and all those duties, by
means of which we may hope, through a divine Mediator and intercessor, to be
reconciled to heaven. Natural and revealed religion here appear in concord. We
behold the original dictates of the human heart laying a foundation for the
glad reception of the comfortable tidings of the gospel.

I have thus endeavored to show in what manner, by regarding the work of the
Lord, and considering the operation of his hands, we may prevent the dangers
arising from a thoughtless indulgence of pleasure; we may be furnished with an
antidote to the poison which is too often mixed in that intoxicating cup. --
Human life is full of troubles. We are all tempted to alleviate them as much as
we can, by freely enjoying the pleasurable moments which Providence thinks fit
to allow us. Enjoy them we may: But, if we would enjoy them safely, and enjoy
them long, let us temper them with the fear of God. As soon as this is
forgotten and obliterated, the sound of the harp and the viol is changed into
the signal of death. The serpent comes forth from the roses where it had lain
in ambush, and gives the fatal sting. Pleasure in moderation is the cordial, in
excess it is the bane, of life.

SERMON VII. ON THE PRESENCE OF GOD IN A FUTURE STATE.
PSALM XVI. II. Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence is fullness
of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.


THE apostle Peter, in a discourse which he held to the Jews, applies this
passage, in a mystical and prophetical sense, to the Messiah. Acts ii. 25, 28.
But, in its literal and primitive meaning, it expresses the exalted hopes by
which the Psalmist David supported himself amidst the changes and revolutions,
of which his life was full. By these hopes, when flying before Saul, when
driven from his throne, and persecuted by an unnatural son, he was enabled to
preserve his virtue, and to maintain unshaken trust in God. -- In that early
age of the world, those explicit discoveries of a state of immortality, which
we enjoy, had not yet been given to mankind. But though the Sun of
righteousness was not arisen, the dawn had appeared of that glorious day which
he was to introduce. Even in those ancient times, holy men, as the apostle
writes to the Hebrews, saw the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them
and embraced them; and confessing that they were strangers and pilgrims on
earth, declared that they saught after a better country, that is an heavenly.
Heb. xi 13, 16.
Indeed in every age, God permitted such hopes to afford support and
consolation to those who served him. The full effect of them we behold in those
triumphant expressions of the text, which are to be the subject of this
discourse. They lead us to consider; first, The hope of the Psalmist in his
present state; Thou will show me the path of life. And, secondly, the
termination of his hope in that future state, where in the presence of God is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

I. Thou will show me the path of life. This plainly imports that there are
different paths or courses of conduct, which may be pursued by men in this
world; a path which leads to life or happiness, and a path which issues in
death or destruction. These opposite lines of conduct are determined by the
choice which men make of virtue or of vice; and hence men are divided into two
great classes, according as their inclinations lead them to good or to evil.
The path of life is often a rough and difficult path, followed only by a few.
The opposite one is the broad way, in which the multitude walk; seemingly
smooth, and strewed with flowers; but leading in the end to death and misery.
The path of life conducts us up a steep ascent. The palace of virtue has, in
all ages, been represented as placed on the summit of a hill; in the ascent of
which labor is requisite, and difficulties are to be surmounted; and where a
conductor is needed, to direct our way, and to aid our steps.

Now, the hope which good men entertain is, that this path of life shall be
shown them by God; that, when their intentions are upright, God will both
instruct them concerning the road which leads to true happiness, and will
assist them to pursue it successfully. Among nations where any suitable ideas
of God or of virtue began to be formed, hopes of this nature also began to be
entertained. It was consonant to the nature of man, to think that the Supreme
Being was favorable to virtue. Accordingly, in the writings of some of the
ancient philosophers, we find various obscure traces of this belief, that there
was a benign heavenly spirit, who illuminated the minds of the virtuous, and
assisted their endeavors to obtain wisdom and happiness. They even asserted,
that no man became great or good without some inspiration of heaven.

But what they indistinctly conceived, and could not with confidence rely upon,
the doctrine of Christianity has clearly explained and fully confirmed;
expressly and frequently teaching that, not only by the external discoveries of
revelation, but by the inward operations of his Spirit, he shows to the humble
and virtuous the path of life. While, by his word, he instructs them in their
duty, by the influence of his grace he assists them in the performance of it.
In all revelation there is certainly no doctrine more comfortable than this. It
is to good men a noble and pleasing thought, that they are pursuing a path
which God has discovered and pointed out to them. For they know that every
path, in which he is their conduct^r, must be honorable, must be safe, must
bring them in the end to felicity. They follow that shepherd of Israel, who
always leads his flock into ^reen pastures, and makes them lie down beside the
still waters. At the same time, they know that, if there be truth in religion
at all, on this principle they may securely rest, that the Divine Being will
never desert those who are endeavoring to follow out, as they can, the path
which he has shown them. He beholds them here in a state of great imbecility;
s^rn unded with much darkness; exposed to numberless dangers, from the
temptations that assault them without, and the seduction of misguided and
disorderly passions within. In this situation, can they ever suspect that the
Father of mercies will leave his servants, alone and unbefriended, to struggle
up the hill of virtue, without stretching forth a compassionate arm to aid
their frailty, and to guide them through the bewild^ring paths of life? Where
were then the God of love? Where those infinite compassions of his nature, in
which all his worshippers have been encouraged to trust? -- No: He will send
forth his light and ^is truth to bring them to his holy hill, For the righteous
Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance beholds the upright. With him
there is no ob^ique purpose, to turn him aside from favoring the cause of
goodness. No undertaking to which he has given his countenance shall prove
abortive. No promise that he has made shall be allowed to fail. Whom he loves,
he loves to the end. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his covenant. The meek will he guide in judgment, and them wind
teach his way. His grace shall be sufficient for them, and his strength be made
perfect in their weakness. (...) from strength to strength; every one of them
appears before God in Zion. Psalm xxv. 14, 9. 2 Cor. xii. 9. Psalm lxxxiv. 7.
-- Such are the hopes with which good men in a present life set forth on a
course of piety and virtue. Thou will show me the path of life. Let us now
proceed.

II. To consider the termination of these hopes in a future state. In thy
presence is fullness of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
All happiness assuredly dwells with God The fountain of life is justly said to
be with him. That supreme and independent Being must necessarily possess within
himself every principle of beati^^de; and no cause from without can possibly
affect his untroubled felicity. Among created dependent beings, happiness flows
in scattered and fe^ble streams; streams that are often tinged with the
blackness of misery. But from before the throne of God issues the river of
life, full, unmixed, and pure; and the pleasures which now in scanty portions
we are permitted to tuste, are all derived from that source. Whatever gladdens
the hearts of men or angels, with any real and satisfactory joy. come from
heaven It is a portion of the pure influence flowing from the glory of the
A^mighty; a ray iss^ung from the brightness of the everlasting life. It is
manifest, therefore, that every approach to God must be an approach to
felicity. The enjoyment of his immediate presence must be the consummation of
felicity; and it is to this presence that the Psalmist here expresses his hope
that the path of life was to conduct him.

The whole of what is implied in arriving at the presence of the Divinity, we
cannot expect to comprehend. Such expressions as these of scripture, beholding
the face of God; being made glad with the right of his countenance, and
satisfied with his likeness; seeing light in his light; seeing no longer darkly
as through a glass, but face to face; seeing him as he is; are expressions
altogether mysterious, conveying sublime though obscure ideas of the most perfect
happiness and highest exaltation of human nature. This we know, that the
absence of God, the distance at which we are now placed from any communication
with our Creator, is one great source of our infelicity. Faith exerts its
endeavors, but often ineffectually, to raise our souls to him. He is a God
that hides himself. His ways seem intricate and perplexed. We frequently
cannot reconcile them to the conceptions which we had formed of his nature; and
with many a suspicion and doubt they perplex the inquiring mind. His works we
survey with astonishment. We wonder and adore. But while we clearly trace the
footsteps of their great Author, his presence we can never discern. We go
forward, but he is not there; and bachward, but we cannot perceive him: on the
left hand, where he works, but we cannot behold him: he hides himself on the
right hand, that we cannot see him. Job xxiii. 8, 9.
Hence amidst the various sorrows and discouragements of the present state,
that exclamation of Job's is often drawn forth from the pious heart, O that I
knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his seat! Job xxiii. 3.


Surrounded by such distressing obscurity, no hope more transporting can be
open to a good man, than that a period is to come, when he shall be allowed to
draw nearer to the Author of his existence, and to enjoy the sense of his
presence. In order to convey some faint idea of that future bliss, by such an
image as we can now employ, let the image be taken from the most glorious
representative of the Supreme Being, with which we are acquainted in this
world, the Sun in the heavens. As that resplendent luminary cheers and revives
the universe, when after the darkness of a tempestuous night, it comes forth in
the morning with its brightest luster, and inspires every heart with gladness;
as ascending gradually through the heavens, it converts that whole vast extent
over which its beams are diffused, into a region of light; and thus changes
entirely the state of objects, by arraying all nature in beauty, and
transforming it into the image of its own brightness: -- Some such change as
this, though in a degree infinitely superior, we may conceive the revelation of
the Divine Presence to produce upon the human soul. I will behold thy face in
righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness. -- But
without endeavoring farther to unsold mysteries which we cannot explore* there
are two sublime and expressive views of the Divine Essence given us in
scripture, on which it may be edifying that our thoughts should rest for a
little, in order to aid our conceptions of the blessedness of good men
hereafter, in the presence of God. It is said, God is light. 1 John i. 5.
God is love 1 John iv. 8.
Let us consider what fullness of joy must arise from such manifestations of the
Divine Essence to the blessed.

God is light. The revelation of his presence, infers of course, a complete
diffusion of light and knowledge among all who partake of that presence. This
unquestionably forms a primary ingredient of happiness. Ignorance. or the want
of light, is the source of all our present misconduct, and all our misfortunes.
The heart of man is dark; and in the darkness of his heart is the seat of his
corruption. He is unable to discern what is truly good. Perpetually employed in
search of happiness, he is perpetually misled by false appearances of it. The
errors of his understanding impose upon his passions; and, in consequence of
the wrong direction which his passions take, he is betrayed into a thousand
disorders. Hence sensuality, covetousness and all the violent contests with
others about trifles, which occasion so much misery, and so many crimes in the
world. He feeds of ashes: a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he
cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand Isaiah
xliv. 20.
? -- Once open to him the perfect sources of knowledge and truth; suppose him
placed in the presence of that God who is Light; suppose him illuminated by
light derived immediately from the Supreme Being; presently all his former
errors would fly away, as mists are dispelled by the rising sun. His whole
nature would be changed and reformed. The prejudices which obscured his
understanding would be removed. The seductions of his passions would disappear.
Rectitude and virtue, having nothing now to obstruct their entrance, would take
entire possession of his heart. Angels are happier than men, because they enjoy
more enlarged knowledge and views; because they labor under none of our
unhappy deceptions; but see the truth as it is in itself; see it, as it is in
God. Sharing the same light which illuminates them, good men in a future state
will share in their felicity.

Moreover, the light that stows from the presence of Him who is the original
source of light, not only banishes miseries which were the effects of former
darkness, but also confers the most exquisite enjoyment. The knowledge afforded
us at present serves to supply our most pressing wants; but it does no more. It
is always imperfect and unsatisfactory; nay, much painful anxiety it often
leaves Narrow is the sphere within which the mind can see at all; and even
there it can see only darkly as through a glass. But when it shall be enlarged
beyond this dusky territo^y, let loose from this earthly prison, and in God's
light permitted to see light, the most magnificent and glorious spectacles must
open to the view of the purified spirit. What must it be to behold the whole
stupendous scene of nature unveiled, and its hidden mysteries disclosed! To
trace the wise and just government of the Almighty, through all those
intricacies which had so long perplexed us! To behold his hand conducting ten
thousand worlds, which are now unknown to us; and throughout all the regions of
boundless space, to view wisdom and goodness perpetually acting, and
diversifying its operations in forms of endless variety! Well may such
discoveries inspire that song of the blessed, which the apostle John heard as
the voice of of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying.
Al^elujah! For the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Great and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints! Rev.
xix. 6. xv 3.
As God is Light, so also it is said in scripture,

God is Love. His presence must of course diffuse love, among all who are
permitted to dwell in it. He that loves not, knows not God. He that dwells
in love, dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John. iv. 8 16.
Were man a single solitary being, the full enjoyment of light might suffice
for his happiness; as the perfection of knowledge would rectify and impove to
the highest all his faculties. But, both here and hereafter, he is connected
with other beings. Heaven implies a society; and the felicity of that society
is constituted by the perfection of love and goodness, flowing from the
presence of the God of love.

Hence follows the entire purification of human nature from all those
malevolent passions, which have so long rendered our abode on earth the abode
of misery. We greatly deceive ourselves, when we charge our chief distresses
merely to the account of our external condition in the world. From the
disadvantages attending it, I admit, that we may often have been exposed to
suffer. We may have met with disappointments in our pursuits. By the arrows of
misfortune we may have been wounded. Under infirmities of body we may have
languished. But on this we may depend, that the worst evils of our present
condition arise from the want of goodness and love; from the disorders of
selfish passions: from the irritation which these occasion when working within
ourselves, and the distresses which they produce when braking out upon us from
others; in a word, from that corrupted state of temper, and that reciprocation
of jealousies, suspicions, and injuries, which is ever taking place among the
societies of men. Could you banish distrust, craft, and uncharitableness, from
the earth, and form all mankind into an assembly of the just and the
benevolent; could you inspire every heart with kind affections, and render
every one friendly and generous to his neighbor; you would banish at once the
most afflictive tribe of human evils. Seldom would the voice of complaint be
heard. All nature would assume a different aspect. Cheerfulness would be seen
on every countenance. Paradise would return. The wilderness would smile: the
desa^t rejoice and blossom as the rose. -- Now such are the effects which the
presence of the God of love must produce on the inhabitants above. Beholding
his glory, they are changed into the same image. In that temple of eternal
love, which his presence has hallowed and consecrated, no sound but the voice
of harmony is ever heard; no appearances ever present themselves but those of
peace and joy.

Thus, considering God under these two illustrious characters which are given
of him in scripture, as, light and as love, it follows that in his presence
there must be fullness of joy. But I am far from saying that ^^e few imperfect
hints I have now given, exhaust, or even approach to, the sum of those
pleasures for evermore which are at God's right hand. Ten thousand pleasures
are there, which now we have neither faculties to comprehend, nor powers to
enjoy. Behind that mysterious cloud, which covers the habitation of eternity,
the view of mortals connot penetrate. Content with our humble and distant
situation, we must as yet remain. Faith can only look to those glories from
afar. In patient silence, It must wait, turst, and adore.

Supposing the ideas which I have set before you in this discourse, to be no
more than they speculations of a contemplative mind, such as were wont of old
to be indulged by the philosophers of the Platonic school, still they would
deserve attention, on account of their tendency to purify and elevate the mind.
But when they are considered in counection with a revelation, which, upon
grounds the most unquestionable, we believe to be divine, they are entitled to
command, not attention only, but reverence and faith. -- They present to us
such high expectations are are sufficient to determine every reasonable man to
the choice of virtue to support him under all its present discouragements, and
to comfort him in the hour of death. Justly may they excite in our hearts that
ardent aspiration of the Psalmist, My soul thirsts for God for the living
God; O when shall I come and appear before him -- But, with this wish in our
hearts, never I beseech you, let us forget what was set forth in the first part
of this discourse; that, in order to arrive at the presence of God, the path of
life must previously be shown to us by him, and that in this path we must
persevere to the end. These two things cannot be disjoined, a virtuous life and
a happy eternity. Who shall ascend unto the hill of the Lord? and who shall
stand in his holy place? He any who has clean hands and a pure heart. Between
a corrupted heart and the God of light and love, there never can be any
connection. But of this we may rest assured, that the path of piety and virtue,
pursued with a firm and constant spirit, will, in the end, through the merits
of our blessed Redeemer, bring us to that presence, where is fullness of joy,
and where are pleasures for evermore.

SERMON VIII. ON CURIOSITY CONCERNING THE AFFAIRS OF OTHERS.
JOHN XXI. 21, 22. Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this
man do? Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? Follow thou me.


THESE words occurred in a conference which our Lord held with Simon Peter,
after his resurrection from the dead. Conscious of the disgrace which he had
incurred by his late denial of his Master, Peter must at this time have
appeared before him with shame. Our Lord, after a tacit rebuke, implied in the
question which the repeatedly puts to him, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
restores him, with great benignity, to his office as an apostle, by giving the
commandment to feed his sheep; and intimates also that it should be his lot to
suffer death in the cause of his master. The apostle John, distinguished here
by the denomination of the disciple whom Jesus loved, being present at this
conversation, Peter, who was always eager and forward, looking to John, puts
this question to our Savior, Lord, and what shall this man do? What shall be
his employment? what his rank and station in thy kingdom? what his future fate
in life? -- By what principle Peter was moved to put this unseasonable and
improper question to his Master; whether it arose from mere curiosity, of from
some emotion of rivalship and jealousy, does not appear; but it is plain that
our Lord was dissatisfied with the inquiry which he made; and presently he
checks Peter's curiosity, by a severe reply; What is that to thee? What is it
to thee what this man shall do; what shall be his rank; or what the
circumstances of his life or his death? Attend thou to thine own duty. Mind thy
proper concerns. Fulfill the part which I have allotted to thee. Follow thou me.
-- The instruction which arises from this conversation of our Lord's with
Peter, is, That all prying inquiries into the state, circumstances, or
character of others, are reprehensible and improper; that to every man a
particular charge is assigned by his Lord and Master, the fulfillment of which
ought to be the primary object of his attention, without officiously thrusting
himself into the concerns of others. The illustration of these points shall
make the subject of the present discourse.

That idle curiosity, that inquisitive and meddling spirit, which leads men to
pry into the affairs of their neighbors, is reprehensible on three accounts.
It interrupts the good order, and breaks the peace of society. It brings
forward and nourishes several bad passions. It draws men aside from a proper
attention to the discharge of their own duty.

It interrupts, I say, the order, and breaks the peace of society. In this
world we are linked together by many ties We are bound by duty, and we are
prompted by interest, to give mutal assistance, and to perform friendly offices
to each other. But those friendly offices are performed to most advantage, when
we avoid to interfere unnecessarily in the concerns of our neighbor. Every man
has his own part to act, has his own interest to consult, has affairs of his
own to manage, which his neighbor has no call to scrutinize. Human life then
proceeds in its most natural and orderly train, when every one keeps within the
bounds of his proper province; when, as long at his pursuits are fair and
lawful, he is allowed, without disturbance, to conduct them in his own way.
That ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, 1 Thessalonians vi. 11.
is the apostolical rule, and indeed the great rule, for preservation of
harmony and order. But so it is, that in every age, a set of men have existed,
who, driven by an unhappy activity of spirit, oftener perhaps than by any
settled design of doing ill, or any motives of ambition or interest, love to
intermeddle where they have no concern, to inquire into the private affairs of
others, and from the imperfect information which they collect, to form
conclusions concerning their circumstances and character. These are they who in
scripture, are characterised as tu^tlers, and busy bodies in other men's
matters, and from whom we are called to turn away.

Though persons of this description should be prompted by nothing but vain
curiosity, they are, nevertheless, dangerous troublers of the world. While they
conceive themselves to be inoffensive, they are sowing dissension and feuds.
Crossing the lines in which others move, they create confusion, and awaken
resentment. For every man conceives himself to be injured, when he finds
another intruding in to his affairs, and, without any title, taking upon him to
examine his conduct. Being improperly and unnecessarily disturbed, he claims
the right of disturbing in his turn those who wantonly have troubled him.
Hence, many a friendship has been broken; the peace of many a family has been
overthrown; and much bitter and lasting discord has been propagated through
society.

While this spirit of meddling curiosity injures so considerably the peace and
good order of the world, it also nourishes, among individuals who are addicted
to it, a multitude of bad passions. Its most frequent source is mere idleness,
which, in itself a vice, never fails to engender many vices more. The mind of
man cannot be long without some food to nourish the activity of its thoughts.
The idle, who have no nourishment of this sort within themselves, feed their
thoughts with inquiries into the conduct of their neighbors. The inquisitive
and curious are always talkative. What they learn, or fancy themselves to have
learned, concerning others, they are generally in haste to divulge. A tale
which the malicious have invented, and the credulous have propagated; a rumor
which, arising among the multitude, and transmitted by one to another, has, in
every step of its progress gained fresh additions, becomes in the end the
foundation of confident assertion, and of rash and severe judgment.

It is often by a spirit of jealousy and rivalry, that the researches of such
persons are prompted. They wish to discover something that will bring down
their neighbor's character, circumstances, or reputation, to the level of
their own; or that will flatter them with an opinion of their own superiority.
A secret malignity lies at the bottom of their inquiries. It may be concealed
by an affected show of candor and impartiality. It may even be veiled with the
appearance of friendly concern for the interests of others, and with affected
apologies for their failings. But the hidden rancour is easily discovered. --
While, therefore persons of this description trouble the peace of society, they
at the same time poison their own minds with malignant passions. Their
disposition is entirely the reverse of that amiable spirit of charity, on which
our religion lays so great a stress. Charity covers the multitude of sins;
but this prying and meddling spirit seeks to discover and divulge them. Charity
thinks no evil; but this temper inclines us always to suspect the worst.
Charity rejoiceth not in iniquity: this temper triumphs in the discovery of
errors and failings. Charity like the sun, brightens every object on which it
shines; a censorious disposition casts every character into the darkest shade
it will bear.

It is to be farther observed, that all impertinent curiosity about the affairs
of others tends greatly to obstruct personal reformation; as it draws men's
thoughts aside from what ought to be the chief object of attention, the
improvement of their own heart and life. They who are so officiously occupied
about their neighbors, have little leisure, and less inclination, to observe
their own defects, or to mind their own duty. From their inquisitive
researches, they find, or imagine they find, in the behavior of others, an
apology for their own failings: And the favorite result of their inquiries
generally is, to rest satisfied with themselves. They are at least as good,
they think, as others around them. The condemnation which they pass on the
vices of their neighbors, they interpret to be a sentiment of virtue in
themselves. They become those hypocrites described by our Lord, who see clearly
the more that is in their neighbor's eye, while they disern not the beam that
is in their own.

In opposition to such a character as this, the doctrine plainly inculcated by
the text is, that to every man a particular charge is given by his Lord and
Master, a part is assigned him by Providence to act; that to this he ought to
bend his chief attention; and, instead of scrutinizing the character or state
of others, ought to think of himself, and leave them to stand or fail by their
own master. What shall this man do? said Peter What, replies our Lord, is that
to thee? Follow thou me.

Where persons possess any important station, or distinguished rank, in the
world, the application of this doctrine to them is manifest. It they have any
candor, they cannot refuse to acknowledge that God and the world have a title
to expect from them a diligent attention to their proper part in life; and that
to waste their time in idle inquiries about others, with whom they have nothing
to do, is reprehensible and sinful. But there are multitudes of mankind, to
whom this appears in a very different light. They are humble and private men,
who are willing to conceive themselves as of little importance in the world.
Having no extensive influence, and no call, as they think, to distinguish
themselves by active exertions in any sphere, they imagine that they may
innocently lead an idle life, and indulge their curiosity, by canvassing at
pleasure the character and the behavior of those around them. With persons of
this description every society too much abounds. -- My brethren, no one ought
to consider himself as insignificant in the sight of God. In our several
stations we are all sent forth to be laborers in God's vineyard. Every man has
his work allotted, his talent committed to him; by the due improvement of which
he might, in one way or other, serve God, promote virtue, and be useful in the
world. Occupy till I come, is the charge given to all Christians without
exception. To be entirely unemployed and idle is the prerogative of no one, in
any rank of life.

Even that sex, whose task is not to mingle in the labors of public and active
business, have their own part assigned them to act. In the quiet of domestic
shade, there are a variety of virtues to be exercised, and of important duties
to be discharged. Much depends on them for the maintenance of private economy
and order, for the education of the young, and for the relief and comfort of
those whose functions engaged them in the toils of the world. Even where no
such female duties occur to be performed, the care of preparing for future
usefulness, and of attaining such accomplishments as procure just esteem, is
laudable. In such duties and cares, how far better is time employed, than in
that search into private concerns, that circulation of rumors, those
discussions of the conduct and descants on the character of others, which
engross conversation so much, and which end, for the most part, in severity of
censure!

In whatever condition we are placed, to act always in character should be our
constant rule. He who acts in character is above contempt though his station be
low. He who acts out of character is despicable, though his station be ever so
high. What is that to thee, what this man or that man does? Think of what thou
ought to do thyself; of what is suitable to thy character and place; of what
the world has a title to expect from thee. Every excursion of vain curiosity
about others, is a subtraction from that time and thought which was due to
ourselves and due to God. Having gifts, says the Apostle Paul differing
according to the grace that is given us, whether ministry let us wait on our
ministering; or he that teaches on teaching; or he that exhorts, on
exhortation. He that gives let him do it with simplicity; he that rules with
diligence; he that shows mercy, with cheerfulness. Rom xii. 6.9.


In the great circle of human affairs there is room for every one to be busy
and well employed in his own province, without encroaching upon that of others.
It is the province of superiors, to direct; of inferiors, to obey; of the
learned to be instructive; of the ignorant, to be docile; of the old to be
communicative; of the young to be advisable and diligent. Art thou poor? Show
thyself active and industrious, peaceable and contented. Art thou wealthy? Show
thyself beneficent and charitable, condescending and humane. If thou live
much in the world, it is thy duty to make the light of a good example shine
conspicuously before others. If thou live private and retired, it is thy
business to improve thine own mind, and to add, if thou can do no more, one
faithful subject to the Messiah's kingdom. There is indeed no man so
sequestered from active life, but within his own narrow sphere he may find some
opportunities of doing good; of cultivating friendship, promoting peace, and
discharging many of these lesser offices of humanity and kindness, which are
within the reach of every one, and which we all owe to one onother. In all the
various relations which subsist among us in life, as husband and wife, master
and servants, parents and children, relations and friends, rulers and subjects,
innumerable duties stand ready to be performed; innumerable calls to virtuous
activity present themselves on every hand, sufficient to fill up with advantage
and honor the whole time of man.

There is, in particular, one great and comprehensive object of attention,
which, in the text, is placed in direct opposition to that idle curiosity
reprehended by our Lord; that is, to follow Christ. Follow thou me. What this
man or that man does; how he employs his time; how he succeeds in the world;
are matters concerning which the information we receive can never be of great
importance to us; often, is of no importance at all. But how our Savior
behaved while he was on earth, or how, in our situation, he would have behaved,
are matters of the highest moment to every Christian.

The commandment given in the text to follow him, includes both observance of
his words, and imitation of his example. The words of Christ contain, as we all
know, the standing rule of our life. His example exhibits the great model on
which our conduct ought to be formed and it is to this that the precept here
delivered directly refers. -- Examples have great influence on all. But by all
human examples, we are in danger of being occasionally misled. We are ever
obliged to be on our guard, lest the admiration of what is estimable, betray us
into a resemblance of what is blemished and faulty. For the most perfect human
characters, in the midst of their brightness and beauty, are always marked with
some of those dark spots which stains the nature of man. But our Lord possessed
all the virtues of the greatest and best men, without partaking any of their
defects. In him, all was light without a shade, and beauty without a stain. --
At the same time, his example is attended with this singular advantage, of
being more accommodated than any other to general immitation. It was
distinguished by no unnatural austerities, no affected singularities; but
exhibits the plain and simple tenor of all those virtues for which we have most
frequent occasion in ordinary life. In order to render it of more universal
benefit, our Lord fixed his residence in no particular place; he tied himself
down to no particular calling or way of living; but gives us the opportunity or
viewing his behavior, in that variety of lights which equally and
indifferently rega^ ^ll mankind. His life was divided between the retired and
the active state. Devotion and business equally shared it. In the discharge of
that high office with which he was vested, we behold the perfect model of a
public character; and we behold the most beautiful example of private life,
when we contemplate him among his disciples, as a Father in the midst of his
family. -- By such means he has exhibited before us specimens of every kind of
virtue; and to all ranks and classes of men has afforded a pattern after which
they may copy. Hardly is there any emergency which can occur in life, but from
some incident in our Savior's conduct, from some feature displayed in his
character, we are enabled to say to ourselves, Thus Christ would have spoken,
thus he would have acted, thus he would have suffered, if he had been
circumstance das we are now.

Instead, therefore, of thinking of thy neighbors around thee, and of inquring
how they behave, keep Christ in thine eye, and in thy whole conduct follow him.
Follow him in his steady and conscientious discharge of duty, amidst opposition
from evil men, and a corrupted world. Follow him in his patient submission to
his Father's will, and the calmness of his spirit under all trials. Follow him
in his acts of disinterested benevolence, in his compassion to the unhappy, in
readiness to oblige, to assist, and to releave. Immitate the mildness and
gentleness of his manners. Imitate the affabiiity and condescension which
appeared in his behavior. Imitate the uncorrupted simplicity and purity which
distinguished his whole life.

These are much worthier and nobler objects of your attention, than any of
those tristing varieties which you can explore and discover in the characters
of those among whom you live. By lifting your view to so high a standard, you
will be preserved from descending to those futile and corrupting employments of
thought, which occupy the idle, the vain, and the malignant. It is incredible,
how much time and attention are thrown away by men, in examining the affairs of
others, and discussing their conduct. Were their time and attention thrown away
only, the evil would in some degree, be less. But they are worse than thrown
away; they are not merely fruitless, but productive of much mischief. Such a
habit of thought is connected with a thousand vices. It is the constant source
of rash and severe censure. It arises from envy and jealousy. It foments ill
nature and pride. It propagates misunderstanding and discord. All those evils
would be prevented, if the reproof which our Lord administers in the text came
oftener home, with proper authority, to the reflection of men: What is that to
thee? Each of us have more material and important business of our own to
fulfill. Our task is assigned; our part allotted. Did we suitably examine how
that part was performed, we should be less disposed to busy ourselves about the
concerns of others. We would discover many a disorder to be corrected at home;
many a weed to be pulled out from our own grounds; much remaining to be done,
in order to render ourselves useful in this world, and fit for a world to come.
-- Wherefore, instead of being critics on others, let us employ our criticism
on ourselves. Leaving others to be judged by Him who searches the heart, let
us implore his assistance for enabling us to act well our own part, and to
follow Christ.

SERMON IX. ON OUR PRESENT IGNORANCE OF THE WAYS OF GOD.
JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do, thou know not
now; but thou shall know hereafter.


THESE words of our Lord were occasioned by a circumstance in his behavior
which appeared mysterious to his disciples. When about to celebrate his last
passover, he meant to give them an instructive lesson of condescension and
humility. The mode which he chose for delivering this instruction, was the
emblematical action of washing their feet. When Simon Peter saw his Master
addressing himself to the performance of so menial an office, he exclaims with
the greatest surprise, Lord do thou wash my feet? Our Lord replies, in the
words of the text, What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter. My behavior in this instance, may seem unaccountable to you at
present, but you shall afterward receive a satisfactory explication of the
intent of that symbol which I now employ.

The expressions of a divine person on this occasion, can very naturally and
properly be applied to various instances, where the conduct of Providence, in
the administ^ation of human affairs, remains dark and mysterious to us. What I
do, thou know not now. We must for a while be kept in ignorance of the
designs of heaven. But this ignorance, though necessary at present, is not
always to continue. A time shall come when ^ commentary shall be afforded on
all that is now obscure; when the veil of mystery shall be removed, and full
satisfaction be given to every rational mind. Thou shall know hereafter.. This
is the doctrine which I purpose to Illustrate in the following discourse.

I. Our Savior's words lead us to observe, that many things in the conduct or
Providence are at present m^sterio^s and ^^^ntelligible. The truth of this
obser a (...) will not be called in question. It is indeed very readily
admitted by all; an^ ^ver since the beginning of the world (...) fo^^^la^^on of
many a (...) and of (...) concerning the government of Heaven. (...) affairs
are not (...) to (...) acco^ding to m^re chance, and that Providence inter^^ses
in them to a certain degree, is made evident by various tokens to every candid
mind. (...) p^^ple^^^ and trouble of the though^f^l inqu^^^ arise^ from (...)
that Providenc^ appears not (...) p^^^ue any reg^lar or consistent plan. An
unaccountable mixture of ^ight and darkness presents itself to us, when we
attempt to trace the affairs of the world up to any wise and righteous
administration. We see justice and order begun; but on many occasions they seem
to be deserted. The ray of light which we had traced for a while, suddenly
forsakes us; and, where we had looked for the continuance of order, we meet
with confusion and disappointment. -- For instance; when we examine the
constitution of the human mind, we discern evident marks of its being framed
with a view to favor and reward virtue. Conscience is endowed with signal
authority to check vice. It brings home uneasiness and remorse to the bad; and
it sooths and supports the righteous with self approbation and peace. The
ordinary course of human things is made to co^ncide in some degree with this
constitution of our nature. The worthy and the good are in general, honored
and esteemed. He that walks uprightly, is, for the most part, found to walk
surely. The chief misfortunes that befall us in life can be traced to some vices
or follies which we have committed; and it almost never happens but the sinners
own wickedness is made, sooner or later, to reprove him, and his backslidings
to correct him.

All this carries the impress of a just Providence, of a wise and bene^olent
administration of the universe, We cannot avoid perceiving that the Almighty
has set his throne for judgment. At the same time, when we pursue our
enquiries, the Almighty appears to hold back the face of his throne, and to
spread his cloud upon it. Job. xxvi. 9.
For in looking abroad into the world how many scenes do we behold, which are
far from corresponding with any ideas we could form of the government of
Heaven? Many nations of the earth we see lying in a state of barbarity and
misery; sunk in such gross ignorance as degrades them below the rank of
rational beings; or abandoned to be the prey of cruel oppression and tyranny.
When we look to the state of individuals around us, we hear the lamentations of
the unhappy on every hand. We meet with weeping parents and mourning friends.
We behold the young cut off in the flower of their days, and the aged left
desolate in the midst of sorrows. The useful and virtuous are swept away, and
the worthless left to flourish. The lives of the best men are often filled with
discouragements and disappointed hopes. Merit languishes in neglected solitude;
and vanity and presumption gain the admiration of the world. From the scourge
of calumny, and from the hand of violence the injured look up to God as the
Avenger of their cause; but often they look up in vain. He is a God that hides
himself. He dwells, as to them, in the secret place of darkness; or if he
dwells in light, it is in light to which no man can approach. Resignation may
seal up their lips; but in silence they drop the tear, and mourn while they
adore.

Such, it must not be dissembled, are the difficulties which encounter us when
we attempt to trace the present ways of God. At the same time, upon reflection,
we may be satisfied that causes can be assigned for things appearing in this
unfavourable light; and that there is no reason to be surprised at the divine
conduct being mysterious at present.

The monarchy of the universe is a great and complicated system. It comprehends
numberless generations of men, who are brought forth to act their parts for
purposes unknown to us. It includes two worlds at once; the world that now is,
and which is only a small portion of existence; and a world that is to come,
which endures for eternity. To us, no more than the beginnings of things are
visible. We see only some broken parts of a great whole. We trace but a few
^inks of that chain of being, which, by secret connections, binds together the
present and the future. Such knowledge is afforded us as is sufficient for
supplying the exigencies and wants of our present state; but it does no more.
Peeping abroad from a dark corner of the universe, we attempt in vain to
explore the counsels that govern the world. It is an attempt to sound an
unsathomable deep with a scanty line; and with a feeble wing to ascend above
the stars. In any complicated wor^ even of human art, it is found necessary to
be acquainted with the design of the whole, in order to judge of the fitness of
its parts. In a scheme so complex as the administration of the world, where all
the parts refer to one another, and where what is seen is often subordinate to
what is in^isible, how is it possible but our judgments must be often
erroneous, and our ^^mplain^s ill-founded? If a peasant or a cottager be
incapable of judging of the government of a mighty empire, is it surprising
that we should be at a loss concerning the conduct of the Almighty ^ow^rds his
creatures? What I do thou know not now.

But, on this argument still more can be said for our satisfaction. We are to
observe, that complete information respecting the ways of God, not only was not
to be expected here but, moreover, tha^ it would have been hurtful, if granted
to us in our present state. It would have proved inconsistent with that state;
with the actions which we have to perform in it, and the duties we have to
fulfill. It would indeed have overthrown the whole design of our being placed in
this world. We are placed here under the trial of our virtue. Ignorance of the
ev^^ts that are ordained to besal us, ignorance of the plan^ and the decrees of
heaven, enter necessarily into a state of trial. In order to exercise both our
intellectual and moral powers, and to carry them forward to improvement, we
must be left to find our way in the midst of difficulties and doubts, of
hardships, and sufferings. We must be taught to act our part with constancy,
though the reward of our constancy, be distant. We must learn to bear with
patience whatever our Creator judges proper to lay upon us, though we see not
the reason of the hardships he inflicts. If we were let into the secret of the
whole plan of Providence; if the justice of Heaven were, in every step of its
procedure, made manifest to our view, man would no longer be the creature he
now is, nor would his present state answer any purpose of discipline or trial.

Mystery and darkness, therefore, must of necessity now take place in the
course of things. Our present ^^ate can be no other than a state of twilight or
dawn, where dubious forms shall often present themselves to us, and where we
shall find ourselves in a middle condition between complete light and total
darkness. Had we enjoyed no evidence of a just Judge ruling the earth, and of
his providence, interposing in our affairs, virtue would have been altogether
de^^^^^ of its encouragement and support. Had the evidence, on the other hand,
been so strong as to place the Almighty constantly before our eyes, the
intention of our present existence would have been defeated, and no trial of
virtue have remained. Instead therefore, of complaining of the obscurity which
at present covers the conduct of Providence, we see that, on the whole, we have
reason to submit and adore.

II. The text suggests that, though what God is doing, or what he intends to
do, we know not now, yet there is ground to believe, that at some future period
we shall receive information. What I do thou know not now, but thou shall
now hereafter. The question here arises, what that hereafter is to which were
are to look for the solution of our present doubts?

In the first place hereafter may, on some occasions, refer to the subsequent
course of events in this world. It often happens that the consequences of
things throw light on the designs of God. The history of Providence, in
proportion as it advances, disembroils itself. Though our present condition
forbids extensive and complete information, yet as much is sometimes allowed to
appear as gives us favorable openings into the righteous and benevolent
counsels (...) heaven. -- Thus, in the public affairs of the world, (...) has
been frequently seen, that from the most unpro^^ising causes important and
beneficient effects have in the sequel, arisen. In our own country, at o^^^
period, the violent passions of a prince gave beginning to the Reformation. At
another period, arbitrary attempts against religion and liberty occasioned that
happy Revolution which has formed the era of national prosperity. In m^^y
instances, the wrath of m^n has been made to praise God. Those wars and
commotions that shake the moral world have answered similar purposes with
tempest in the natural world, of purging the air from noxious vapors, and
restoring it to a temperature more found and wholesome. From the midst of
confusion order has been made to spring, and from temporary mischiefs, lasting
advantages to arise. -- In all cases of this nature, with which sacred and
civil history abounds, secret designs of heaven were going on, which were
unfolded in the end. The wheel was always in motion. The hand of the clock was
advancing with unperceived progress, till the moment came of its striking the
appointed hour.

In like manner, with respect to individuals, there is often a hereafter in the
course of their lives, which discloses and justifies the ways of God. Not to
mention the good effects which misfortunes are found to produce on the minds of
men, by checking their vices, and correcting their errors, innumerable
exemplifications can be given, of misfortunes paving their way to future
advancement in the world. We are always querulous and impatient when designs
succeed not according to our wish, Ignorant of what futurity is to bring
forward, occupied with nothing but the present, we exclaim, Where is God? Wh^re
the scepter of righteousness? Has he forgotten to be gracious? or does he
indeed see, and is there knowledge in the Most High? -- God sees not as man
sees: He looks not merely to what you suffer, but to what the effect of
these sufferings is to be. Consider only in how different a light the Patriarch
Joseph would view the events of his life after he had seen in what they had
terminated, from the light in which he saw them, when led away by Ishmaelites
as a slave, or when thrown by Potiphar into the Egyptian prison. We murmur
against Providence, just as the impetuous youth frets against his instructors
and tutors, who are keeping him under a strict, and as he thinks a needless,
discipline. He knows not tha^, by their instruction and discipline, they are
laying the foundation of his future fortunes; of the wealth which he is to
acquire, and of the advancement to which he is to rise in the world. What may
justly be said to him by his tutors and instructors, is equally applicable to
us all under our present state of education; What! do, thou know not now,
but thou shall know hereafter. -- Regarding, then, the unknown issue of all
worldly events in this life, let us never despair; let us never think
dishonorable of the government of God; but have patience till his providence
accomplish its designs in its own way, and at its own time. Although thou
say thou shall not see him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou
in him Job xxxv. 14.
.

In the second place, the expression of hereafter in the text must be
understood to refer, in its full extent, not to future events in this life, but
to a subsequent state of being. For this life is no more than the beginning of
the mighty and extensive plans of Providence. The seeds are only now sown, of
what is to ripen and come forth, at the harvest of the world; when the
revolution of the great moral year shall be finished, and the government of God
shall obtain its full completion. It is the chief scope of religion to direct
our view to this period; and it has often taught us that the knowledge of the
ways of God, then enjoyed by the blessed, shall constitute a chief article of
their felicity. Now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face. Now
we know in part; but then we shall know even as we are known. When that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. In God's
light we shall see light 1 Cor. xiii. 10 12. Psalm xxxvi. 9.
. The reasons that required obscurity to remain for a while on the ways of God
no longer subsist. The education of good men is completed; and the intention of
those steps of education, which once they could not comprehend, now becomes
apparent -- Why this man was prematurely carried away from the world in the
beginning of a promising course; why that deserving family were left
overwhelmed with grief and despair, by the loss of one who was their sole
benefactor and support; why friendships cemented by tender ties were suddenly
torn asunder by death: These are inquiries to which we can now make no reply;
and which throw a dark gloom over the conduct of the Almighty. But the spirits
of the just above, who are admitted to a larger view of the ways of God, see
the reasons of such counsels. They see that one man was seasonably taken away
from dangers and evils to come, which, unknown to him, were hovering over his
head. They see that Providence was in secret preparing unexpected blessings for
the family who appeared to be left disconsolate and hopeless. They see that it
was time for friendships to be dissolved, when their longer continuance would
to some of the parties have proved a snare. Where we behold nothing but the rod
of power stretched forth, they discern an interposition of the hand of mercy.

Let us wait till this promised hereafter arrive, and we shall in like manner
be satisfied concerning the events that now disturb and perplex us. We shall
then know why so much darkness and misery have been so long permitted to remain
on the earth, and so much oppression and tyranny to prevail among the nations.
We shall see rising, as from the ashes of the old world, a new and beautiful
structure; new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness. As wide
as is the difference between the appearance of the world, when it lay in its
primitive chaos, without form and void, and the appearance which it has now
assumed, when resplendent with the light of the sun, and decked with the
beauties of nature; such is the difference between the divine plans in their
beginnings, and in their full completion. At the conclusion, and not till then,
the glory of the Lord shall-become manifest to all; and as it is described in
the book of the Revelation, a voice shall be heard from every creature which is
in heaven and on the earth, and under the earth, saying. Blessing and honor,
and power and glory, be to him that sits on the throne. Great and mavelous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints. Rev. v. 13. xv. 3.


Application of the doctrines that have been illustrated may be made to two
classes of men.

First. To skeptics; who, from the present mysterious conduct of Providence,
hastily draw the conclusion, that no government is exercised over human
affairs, but that all things are suffered indiscriminately to come alike to all
men. -- I have shown that from the inadiquate views which we are at present
able to take of the general system, such mysterious appearances of Providence
must be expected to take place. Not only so, but I have also shown it to be fit
and necessary that this mixture of obscurity should now remain; as a full
display of regular justice and order would be inconsistent with the moral
improvement of men in this life. -- Let me desire the skeptic to look to the
state of the natural world. When he thinks of the order and magnificence that
prevails in it, he will perhaps, be unwilling to pronounce it the mere
proudction of chance. He cannot but recognize the hand of Intelligence, and
acknowledge it to have proceeded from a designing Cause. I ask him, Whether in
the natural world he discerns not as many mysterious and puzzling appearances
as are to be found in the moral world? Are not destructive storms, burning
mountains, uninhabitable deserts, as difficult to be reconciled to his
pre-conceived ideas of supreme wisdom and goodness in the Creator, as the
sufferings and afflictions which in the course of Providence befall the just?
The natural and the moral world are, in this respect, counterparts to one
another. Both are marked with the same characters, and carry the impress of the
same powerful and gracious hand. In both, it is evidently the intention of the
first Author not to render every thing level to our capacity; but in the midst
of high design and order, to allow certain objects ^o appear, which contradict
the ideas we had formed, and mock our vain researches. Now, if we are obliged
to admit that the order and beauty of the natural world sufficiently prove it
to be the work of a wise Creator, notwithstanding the seeming deformities which
it exhibits; are we not led by the same train of reasoning, to conclude that
the moral world is under the direction of a wise Governor, though much of what
he now does we cannot satisfactorily explain?

Secondly, The doctrine of the text is to be applied not only for silencing
skeptics but for comforting the pious. Never let them be dejected by the
darkness which now covers the ways of the Almighty. If he withdraws himself
from their view, it is not because he neglects them; but because they are
incapable of comprehending his designs; because it were not for their good that
all his designs were revealed to them. -- Instead of perplexing themselves
about what is obscure, let them rest on the clear and authentic discoveries
that have been given of, the divine goodness. Let them rest on those great and
signal facts that prove it; particularly on that illustrious fact, the
redemption of the world by Jesus Christ, He that spared not his own Son, but
gave him up for us all, will assuredly not always conceal himself from those
who serve him. Though what he does they know not now, the time approaches when
they shall know hereafter. Till that time come, let them believe and trust; let
them hope and adore. From this conclusion let them, never depart, that to fear
God and keep his commandments is in every situation the truest wisdom; that, if
there be government in the universe at all, the virtuous and the worthy are
loved and protected by Heaven; that in due season they shall reap if they faint
not; for the care of them is with the Lord, and their reward with the Most High.

SERMON X. ON THE SLAVERY OF VICE.
2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.


BONDAGE and subjection are disagreeable sounds to the ear, disagreeable ideas
to the mind. The advocates of vice, taking advantage of those natural
impressions, have in every age employed them for discrediting religion. They
represent it as the bondage and confinenement of the free-bron soul of man; as
a state of perpetual constraint, formed by a system of severe rules, which
designing men have contrived to impose as fetters on the multitude. On the
other hand, they paint a licentious course to themselves, and hold it out to
the world, as the gay and pleasurable enjoyment of life; whore, having
surmounted the prejudices of education, and timorous scruples of conscience,
men can think and act at pleasure, and give full scope to every wish of the
heart. -- But what if those pretended sons of freedom be themselves held in
miserable subjection, and their boasts of liberty be no more than the swelling
words of vanity? The Apostle asserts in the text, that while they promise
liberty to others, they are the servants, or slaves, of corruption, overcome,
and brought into bondage by it. This assertion of the Apostle I purpose to
illustrate. I shall endeavor to make it appear, that no true liberty can arise
from vice; that bad men undergo the w^^^t servitude; and that no one is free,
but he who is virtuous and good.

It is necessary to begin with removing false ideas of liberty, and showing in
what it truly consists. We are not to imagine that to be free imports our
being set loose from restraint or rule of every kind. No man, in any condition
of life, is at liberty to act always as he pleases, and to gratify every wish
he forms. The nature of the human state necersarily imposes on all men various
restraints. The laws of society allow no one to indulge himself in pursuits or
pleasures that are injurious to his neighbor. Even our own nature limits our
pleasures within certain bounds. A^l our desires cannot be gratified together.
They frequently interfere, and reqiure im who would indulge one favorite
passion, to deny himself in another. Distinctions, therefore, must be made,
preserences be given, and some general regolation of conduct be observed, by
every one who consults his own welfare. If there be any regulation which
ensures us of safety and happiness, to be disengaged from the observance of
that regulation is no article of liberty; at least of such liberty; as a wise
man would with to enjoy. It is in effect to be turned loose to our own ruin. It
is such liberty as a blind man enjoys, of wandering at random, and striking
into every devious path, without a guide to direct his steps, and save him from
destruction.

That unbounded licentiousness, therefore, which sinners prefer to every
regulation of conduct, is altogether different from true freedom. It is in
moral behavior the same as anarchy is in a state, where law and order are
extinct. Anarchy, surely, is no less incompatible with true liberty than
absolute despotism; and of the two it is hard to say which is the least
eligible, or the most miserable state. Liberty by no means supposes the absence
of all government. It only supposes that the government under which we are
placed is wise; and that the restraints to which we voluntarily submit
ourselves have been contrived for the general interest.

To be free, therefore, imports, in general, our being placed in such
circumstances, that within the bounds of justice and good order, we can act
according to our own deliberate choice, and take such measures for our conduce
as we have reason to believe are conducive to our ^^lfare; without being
obstructed either by external force, or by violent internal impulse. This is
that happy and dignified state which every wise man earnestly wishes to enjoy.
The advantages which result from it are chiefly these three; freedom of choice;
independence of mind boldness and security. In opposition to these
distinguishing characters of liberty, I now proceed to show that, in the first
place, vice deprives bad men of free choice in their actions; that, in the
second place, it brings them under a slavish dependence on external
circumstances; and that, in the third place, it reduces them to that abject,
cowardly, and disquieted state which is essentially characteristic of bondage.

I. Vice is inconsistent with liberty, as it deprives sinners of the power of
free choice, by bringing them under the dominion of passions and habits.
Religion and virtue address themselves to reason. They call us to look round on
every sule; to think well of the consequences of our actions; and, before we
take any step of importance, to compare the good with the evil that may ensue
from it. He therefore who follows their dectates, acts the part of a man who
freely consults, and chooses, for his own interest. But vice can make no
pretensions of this kind. It awaits no^ the test of deliberate comparison and
choice; but overpowers us at once by some striking impression of present
advantage or enjoyment. It hurries us with the violence of passion; captivates
us by the allurements of pleasure; or dazzels us by the glare of riches. The
sinner yields to the impulse, merely because he cannot resist it. Reason
remonstrates; conscience endeavors to check him; but all in vain. Having once
allowed some strong passion to gain the ascendant, he has thrown himself into
the ^^^^dle of a torrent, against which he may sometimes faintly struggle, but
the impetuosity of the stream bears him along. In this situation he is so far
from being free, that he is not master of himself. He does not go, but is
driven; tossed, agitated, and impelled; passive, like a ship to the violence of
the waves.

After passion has for a while exercised its tyrannical sway, its vehemence may
by degrees subside. But when by long indulgence, it has established habits of
gratification, the sinner's bondage becomes then more confirmed, and more
miserable. For during the heat of pursuit he is little capable of reflection.
But when his ardour is abated, and nevertheless, a vicious habit rooted, he has
full leisure to perceive the heavy yoke he has brought upon himself. How many
slaves do we see in the world to intemperance, and all kinds of criminal
pleasure, merely though the influence of customs which they had allowed to
become so inveterate that it was not in their power to alter them? Are they not
often reduced to a condition so wretched, that when their licentious pleasures
have become utterly insipid, they are still forced to continue them, solely
because they cannot refrain: not because the indulgence gives them pleasure,
but because abstinence would give them pain; and this too, even when they are
obliged at last to condemn their habits of life, as injuring their fortune,
impairing their constitution, or disgracing their character? Vice is not of
such a nature that we can say to it, Hitherto shall thou come and no further.
Having once entered into its territories, it is not in our power to make a
retreat when we please. He that commits sin is the servant of sin. No man
who has once yielded up the governmen of his mind, and given loose rein to his
desires and passions can tell how far these may carry him. He may be brought
into such a desperate state, that nothing shall remain for him but to look back
with regret upon the forsaken path of innocence and liberty; and, severely
conscious of the thraldom he suffers, to groan under fetters which he despairs
of throwing off. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good who are accustomed to do evil. Jeremiah xiii. 23.


Vice confirms its dominion, and extends it still farther over the soul, by
compelling the sinner to support one crime by means of another. Not only is he
enslaved to those vices which take their rise from his one inclination, but
they render others necessary, to which, against his inclination, he must
submit; and thereby strengthen the commanding power of iniquity within him. The
immoderate love of pleasure for instance, leads him into expense beyond his
fortune. In order to support that expense, he is obliged to have recourse to
low and dishonorable methods of gain, which originally he despised. To cover
these, he is forced upon arts of dissimulation and fraud. One instance of (...)
obliges him to support it by another; till, in the (...) there arises a
character of complicated vice; of luxury shooting forth into baseness,
dishonesty, injustice, and perhaps cruelty. It is thus that one favorite
passion brings in a tribe of auxiliaries to complete the dominion of sin. Among
all our corrupt passions there is a strong and intimate connection. When any
one of them is adopted into our family, it never quits us until it has fathered
upon us all its kindred. -- By such means as these, by the violence of
passions, by the power of habits, and by the connection of one vice with
another, sin establishes that servitude over the will, which deprives bad men
of all power of free choice in their actions.

II. The slavery produced by vice appears in the dependence under which it
brings the sinner, to circumstances of external fortune. One of the favorite
characters of liberty, is the independence it bestows. He who is truly a
freeman is above all servile compliances, and abject subjection. He is able to
rest upon himself; and while he regards his superiors with proper deference,
neither debases himself by cringing to them, nor is tempted to purchase their
favor by dishonorable means. But the sinner has forfeited every privilege of
this nature. His passions and habits render him an absolute dependant on the
world, and the world's favor; on the uncertain goods of fortune, and the
fickel humors of men. For it is by these he subsists, and among these his
happiness is sought; according as his passions determine him to pursue
pleasures, riches, or preferments. Having no fund within himself whence to draw
enjoyment, his only resource is in things without. His hopes and fears all hang
upon the world. He partakes in all its vicissitudes; and is moved and shaken by
every wind of fortune. This is to be in the strictest sense a slave to the
world.

Religion and virtue, on the other hand, confer on the mind principles of noble
independence. The upright man is satisfied from himself. He despises not the
advantages of fortune; but he centers not his happiness in them. With a
moderate share of them he can be contented; and contentment is felicity. Happy
in his own integrity, conscious of the esteem of good men, reposing firm trust
in the providence, and the promises of God, he is exempted from servile
dependence on other things. He can wrap himself up in a good conscience, and
look forward, without terror, to the change of the world. Let all things shift
around him as they please, he believes that, by the divine ordination, they
shall be made to work together in the issue for his good: And therefore, having
much to hope from God, and little to fear from the world, he can be easy in
every state. One who possesses within himself such an establishment of mind, is
truly free -- But shall I call that man free, who has nothing that is his own,
no property assured; whose very heart is not his own, but rendered the
appendage of external things, and the sport of fortune? Is that man free, let
his outward condition be ever so splendid, whom his imperious passions detain
at their call, whom they send forth at their pleasure, to drudge and toil, and
to beg his only enjoyment from the casual^ies of the world? Is he free, who
must flatter and lie to compass his ends; who must bear with this man's
caprice, and that man's scorn; must profess friendship where he hates, and
respect where he contemns; who is not at liberty to appear in his own colors,
nor to speak his own sentiments; who dares not be honest, lest he should be
poor? -- Believe it, no chains bind so hard, no setters are so heavy, as those
which fasten the corrupted heart to this treacherous world; no dependence is
more contemptible than that under which the voluptuous, the covetous, or the
ambitious man lies to the means of pleasure, gain, or power. Yet this is the
boasred liberty, which vice promises, as the recompense of setting us free from
the salutary restraints of virtue.

III. Another character of the slavery of vice, is that mean, cowardly,
disquieted state, to which it reduces the sinner. Boldness and magnanimity have
ever been accounted the native effects of liberty. He who enjoys it, having
nothing to apprehend from oppressive power, performs the offices, and enjoys
the comforts of life, with a manly and undisturbed mind. Hence his behavior is
dignified, and his sentiments are honorable; while he who is accustomed to
bend under servile subjection, has always been found mean-spirited, timorous,
and base. -- Compare, in these respects, the virtuous and the vicious man, and
you will easily see to which of them the characteristics of freedom most justly
belong. The man of virtue, relying on a good conscience and the protection of
Heaven, acts with firmness and comage; and in the discharge of his duty, fears
not the face of man. The man of vice, conscious of his low and corrupt aims,
shrinks before the steadfast and piercing eye of integrity; is ever looking
around him with anxious and fearful circumspection, and thinking of
subterfuges, by which he may escape from danger. The one is bold as a lion; the
other sticth when no man pursues. To the one, nothing appears contemptible, by
which he can procure any present advantage. The other looks with disdain on
what ever would degrade his character. "I will not," says he, so demean myself,
as to catch the favor of the greatest man, by this or that low art. It shall
not be said or thought of me, that I did what was base in order to make my
fortune. L^^ ^hers stoop so low, who cannot be without the savours of the
world. But I can want them, and therefore at such a price I will not purchase
them. This is the voice of true liberty; and speaks that greatness of mind
which it is formed to inspire.

Corresponding to that abject disposition which characterises a bad man, are
the fears that haunt him. The terrors of a slave dwell on his mind, and often
appear in his behavior. For guilt is never free from susp^cion and alarm. The
sinner is afraid, sometimes, of the partners of his crimes, lest they betray
him; sometimes, of those who have suffered by his crimes, lest they revenge
themselves; frequently, of the world around him, lest it detect him; and what
is worst of all, he is reduced to be afraid of himself. There is a witness
within him that testifies against his misdeeds; and threate^^ him in secret,
when other alarms leave him. Conscience holds up to his view the image of his
past crimes, with this inscription engraved upon it, "God will bring every work
into judgment." How opposite is such a state as this, to the peaceful security
arising from the liberty enjoyed by the virtuons? -- Were there nothing more in
the circumstances of sinners to affix upon them the marks of servitude, this
alone would be sufficient, that, as the scripture expresses it, through fear of
death they are all their lifetime subject to bondage. Heb. ii. 15.
Death sets all other captives free. The slave who digs in the mine, or labors
at the oar, can rejoice in the prospect of laying down his burden together with
his life; and tastes the hope of being at last on equal terms with his cruel
oppressor. But to the slave of guilt there arises no hope from death. On the
contrary he is obliged to look forward with constant terror to this most
certain of all events, as the conclusion of all his hopes and the commencement
of his greatest miseries.

I have thus set before you such clear and unequivocal marks of the servitude
undergone by sinners, as fully verify the assertion in the text, that a state
of vice and corruption is a state of bondage. In order to perceive how severe a
bondage it is, let us attend to some peculiar circumstances of aggravation
which belong to it.

First, It is a bondage to which the mind itself, the native feat of liberty,
is subjected. In other cases, a brave man can comfort himself with reflecting
that let tyrants do their worst, let prisons or fetters be his lot, his mind
remains unconquered and free. Of this liberty they cannot rob him; here he
moves in a higher sphere, above the reach of oppression or confinement. But
what avails the show of external libberty, to one who has lost the government
of himself? As our Savior reasons, in another case, If the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? So we may reason here, if that
part of thy nature, thy mind, thy will, by which only thou can enjoy and
relish liberty, be itself in bondage to evil passions and habits, how miserable
must be that bondage?

Next. It is aggravated by this consideration, that it is a bondage which we
have brought upon ourselves. To have been forced into slavery, is misfortune
and misery. But to have renounced our liberty and chosen to be slaves, is the
greatest reproach added to the greatest misery. Moments there frequently must
be, when a sinner is sensible of the degradation o^ his state; when he feels
with pain the slavish dependence under which he is brought to fortune and the
world, to violent passions and settled habits, and to fears and apprehensions
arising from conscious guilt. In such moments, how cruel is the reflection,
that of all this disgrace and misery he has been the author to himself; that by
voluntary compliance, he has given to his passions that haughty ascendant which
they now exercise over him; has forged the chains with which he is bound; and
sold himself to do iniquity!

Lastly, The servitude of vice is accompanied with this farther aggravation,
that it is subjection to our own servants. Those desires and passions, which
the sinner has raised to lawless rule, were given us as instruments of
self-preservation; but were plainly designed to be under the direction of a
higher power. Of themselves, they are headstrong and blind; they bear all the
marks of intended subordination; and conscience is invested with every ensign
of authority and supremacy. But sin inverts the whole frame of human nature. It
compels reason to bow down before those passions which it was formed to
command^ and leads it, as is were in triumph, to grace the shameful conquest of
its ministers and servants. It has been always observed that none are so
insolent in power, as they who have usurped an authority to which they had no
right; and so it is found to hold in this instance. The desires and passions of
a vicious man, having once obtained an unlimited sway, trample him under their
feet. They make him feel that he is subject to diverse, and contradictory as
well as imperious masters, who often pull him different ways. His soul is
rendered the receptacle of many repugnant and jarring dispositions; and
resembles some barbarous country, cantoned out into different principalities,
who are continually waging war on one another. -- Such is the state into which
sinners have brought themselves, in order to be free from the supposed
confinement of virtue. Where they had promised themselves nothing but ease and
pleasure, they are made to experience restraints more severe, and
mortifications more painful, than any which they would have undergone under the
discipline of religion.

It will perhaps be contended by some, that although the representation which
has now been given of the slavery of sin holds true in certain instances, yet
that is applicable only to those who come under the description of atrocious
sinners. They imagine that a certain moderate course may be held in vice, by
means of which, men, without throwing altogether aside the restraints of
reason, may enjoy an easy and pleasurable life. -- By reasoning thus, my
friends, you flatter and deceive yourselves to your own destruction. Be
assured, that by every vicious indulgence, you are making an approach to a
state of complete slavery; you are forfeiting a certain share of your liberty;
how soon the whole of it may be forfeited, you are not aware. It is true that
all which has now been said of the servitude of sin, applies only to a
character corrupted in the extreme. But, remember that to this extreme no man
ever arrives at once. He passes through many of those intermediate stages, in
one of which you are now perhaps found. Vice always creeps by degrees; and
insensibly twines around us those concealed fetters by which we are at last
completely bound. -- As you value therefore your liberty and your happiness,
avoid every approach to evil. Consider all vicious pleasures as enchanted
ground, by entering on which, you will be farther and farther ensnared within
the magic circle, till at length you are precluded from all retreat. The most
pure and virtuous man is always the freest. The religion of Christ is justly
entitled the perfect law of liberty. James i. 25.
It is only when the Son makes us free, that we are free indeed: and it was
with reason the Psalmist said, I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts.
Psalm. cxlx. 47.


SERMON XI. ON THE IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WORSHIP.
PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor awelleth.


GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in
truth. That religion chiefly consists in an inward principle of goodness, is
beyond dispute, and that its value and efficacy are derived from its effects in
purifying the heart, and reforming the life. All external services, which have
not this tendency, are entirely insignificant. They degenerate into mere
superstition, equally un-acceptable to God, and unprofitable to man. Hence they
are so often treated in scripture with high contempt, when substituted in the
room of the important duties of a virtuous life.

Notwithstanding this, it is certain that external services have their own
place, and a considerable one too, in the system of religion. What their proper
place is no one can be at a loss to discern, who will only make a just
distinction between the means, and the end, in religion. It is evident there is
danger of men's erring here, either on one side or other; and it is certain that
they have erred on both. After it was observed, that mankind were prone to lay
too much weight on the external parts of religion, it began to be thought, that
no weight was to be allowed to them at all. The time was, when all religion
centered in attending the duties of the church, and paying veneration to
whatever was accounted sacred. This alone sanctified the character, and
compensated every blemish in moral conduct. From this extreme, the spirit of
the age seems to be running fast into the opposire extreme, of holding every
thing light that belongs to public worship. But if superstition be an evil, and
a great one it undoubtedly is, irreligion is not a smaller evil. And though the
form of godliness may often remain, when the power of it is wanting; yet the
power cannot well subsist where the form is altogether gone. -- The holy
Psalmist, whose words are now before us, discovers much better principles.
Expressing always the highest regard for the laws of God, and the precepts of
virtue, he breathes, at the same time, a spirit of pure devotion. Though loaded
with the cares of royalty, and encircled with the splendor of a court, he
thought it well became him to show respect to the great Lord of nature; and on
many occasions expresses, as he does in the text, his delight in the public
service of the temple. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the
place where thine honor dwells. In discoursing from which words I purpose to
show the importance of the public worship of God, and the benefits resulting
from it. I shall consider it in three lights; as it respects God; as it
respects the world; as it respects ourselves.

I. Let us consider it with respect to God. If there exist a Supreme Being, the
Creator of the word, no consequence appears more natural and direct than this,
that he ought to be worshipped by his creatures, with every outward expression
of submission and honor. We need only appeal to every man's heart, whether
this be not a princ^ple which carries along with it its own obligation, that to
Him who is the Fountain of our life, and the Father of our mercies; to Him who
has raised up that b^autiful structure of the universe in which we dwell, and
where we are surrounded with so many blessings and comforts; solemn
acknowledgments of gratitude should be made, praises and prayers should be
offered, and ali suitable marks of dependence on him be expressed. -- This
obligation extends beyond the silent and secret sentiments of our hearts.
Besides private devotion, it naturally leads to associations for public
worship; to open and declared professions of respect for the Deity. Where
blessings are received in common, an obligation lies upon the community,
jointly to acknowledge them. Sincere gratitude is always of open and diffusive
nature. It loves to pour itself forth; to give free vent to its emotions; and,
before the world, to acknowledge and honor a Benefactor.

So consonant is this to the natural sentiments of mankind, that all the
nations of the earth have, as with one consent, agreed to institute some forms
of worship; to hold meetings, at certain times, in honor of their deities.
Survey the societies of men in their rudest state; explore the African deserts,
the wilds of America or the distant islands of the ocean; and you will find
that over all the earth some religious ceremonies have obtained. You will every
where trace, in one form or other, the temple, the priest, and the offering.
The prevalence of the most absurd superstitions furnishes this testimony to the
truth, that in the hearts of all men the principle is engraved, of worship
being due to that invisible Power who rules the world. -- Herein consists the
great excellency of Christian religion, that it has instructed us in the
simple and spiritual nature of that worship. Disencumbered of idle and
unmeaning ceremonies, its ritual is pure, and worthy of a divine Author. Its
positive institutions are few in number, most significant of spiritual things,
and directly conductive to good life and practice. How inexcusable then are we,
if, placed in such happy circumstances, the sense of those obligations to the
public worship of God shall be obliterated among us, which the light of nature
inculcated, in some measure, on the most wild and barbarous nations?

The refinements of false philosophy have indeed suggested this shadow of
objection, that God is too great to stand in need of any external service from
his creatures: that our expressions of praise and honor are misplaced with
respect to him, who is above all honor and all praise; that in his sight the
homage we seek to pay must appear contemptible; and is therefore in itself
superfluous and trifling. -- But But who has taught those vain reasoners, that
all expressions of gratitude and honor toward a superior become unsuitable,
merely because that superior needs not any returns? Where they ever indebted to
one whose favors they had it not in their power to repay; and, did they, on
that account, feel themselves set loose from every obligation to acknowledge,
and to praise their benefactor? On the contrary, the more disinterested his
beneficence was, did not gratitude, in any ingenuous mind, burn with the
greatest ardour, and prompt them the more eagerly to seize every opportunity of
publicly testifying the feelings of their hearts? -- Almighty God, it is true,
is too great to need our service or homage. But he is also too good not to
accept it, when it is the native expression of a grateful and generous mind. If
pride and self-sufficiency stiffle all sentiments of dependence on our Creator;
if levity, and attachment to worldly pleasures, render us totally neglectful of
expressing our thankfulness to Him for his blessings; do we not hereby discover
such a want of proper feeling, such a degree of hardness and corruption in our
affections, as shows us to be immoral and unworthy; and must justly expose us
to the high displeasure of heaven? On the contrary, according to every notion
which we can form of the Father of the universe, must it not be acceptable to
him to behold his creatures properly affected in heart toward their great
benefactor; assembling together to express, in acts of worship, that gratitude,
love, and reverence which they owe him; and thus nourishing and promoting in
one another an affectionate sense of his goodness? Are not such dispositions,
and such a behavior as this, intimately connected with all virtue?

O Come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our maker.
For he is our God; and we are the flock of his pasture. Enter into his gates
with thanksgiving and his courts with praise. The prayer of the upright is his
delight. It comes before him as incense, and the uplifting of their hands as
the evening sacrifice. -- Having thus shown the reasonableness of public
worship with respect to God, let us now.

II. Consider its importance in another view, as it respects the world. When we
survey the general state of mankind, we find them continually immersed in
worldly affairs; busied about providing the necessaries of life, occupied in
the pursuits of their pleasures, or eagerly prosecuting the advancement of
their interests. In such a situation of things, a small measure of reflection
might convince any one, that without some returns of sacred days, and some
solemn calls to public worship, it were impossible to preserve in the world any
sense of objects, so foreign to the general current of thought as an invisible
Governor, and a future state. If it be of importance to the peace and good
order of society, that there should prevail among men the belief of One in the
heavens, who is the protector of righteousness and the avenger of crimes; if it
be of importance that they be taught to look forward to a day of judgment, when
they are to be brought to account for their most secret actions and eternally
rewarded or punished, according as their conduct has been good or evil; if such
principles as these, I say, be of consequence to the public welfare, they
certainly enforce the authority of public worship, and prove the necessity of
religions instruction.

I speak now particulary with a view to the multitude, the great mass and body
of the people. We all know, how seldom from education, or private instruction,
they have the advantage of deriving sentiments of religion or morality. Early
obliged to labor for their bread, they would remain all their days in gross
ignorance of every moral or sacred principle, were it not for those public
assemblies in which they hear of God, and Christ, and judgment, and heaven and
hell. Shut up those temples to which they resort with reverence; exclude them
from (...) opportunities they now possess of receiving religious instruction,
and imbibing religious ideas; and what can you expect them to become? no other
than a ferocious rabble, who set free from checks of conscience, and fears of
divine vengeance, would be prone to every outrage which they could commit with
impunity. It is well known that, in the early ages of the world, sages and
legislators who endeavored to same and associate the barbarous hordes of men,
sound it necessary for this purpose, to have recourse to religion. By bringing
the rude multitudes to worthip together, and at stated times and places, to
join in hymns and songs to their deities, they gradually ^^^trained them from
violence, and trained them to subordination and civilized life.

During the progress of society in after periods, religious assemblies at
church continue, I am persuaded to have a very considerable influence on the
civilization and improvement of the people. Even independent of effect upon
their moral pri^ciples, by leading numbers of them to meet together in an
orderly way, and in their most decent appearance, they tend to humanize and
polish their manners. They strengthen the social connections, and promote
friendly intercourse among those who are in the same neighborhood, and in the
same lines of life. It must at the same time, be agreeable to every humane mind
to think, that one day in seven is allotted for rest to the poor from their
daily labors, and for such enjoyments of ease and comfort as their station
affords. It is the only day which gives them occasion to feel themselves as
belonging to the same class of beings with their superiors; when joining with
them in the same acts of worship, and recognizing a common Lord. Amidst those
distinctions which the difference of ranks necessarily in^^oduces into human
society, it is surely fit that there be some occasions when man can meet with
man as a brother, in order that the pride of the great may be checked; and the
low may be taught that, if they discharge properly their appointed part, they
have reason to expect, from the Lord of the universe, the same rewards with the
rich and the mighty.

It will, I believe, be generally admitted that forms of public worship, and
means of religious instruction, are important, on several accounts, for the
body of the people, and belong to the maintenance of public safety and order.
But many who admit this are apt to think, that to the common people alone they
may be left. To persons of liberal education and enlarged minds, what benefit
can arise from hearing what the already know; and what, perhaps, is to be
inculcated on them by those who are of inferior capacity to themselves? --
Admitting this plea of superiority which their vanity forms, and setting aside
for the present any personal obligation they are under to worship God, I must
ask such persons, how they can expect that religious assemblies will be long
respected by the lower ranks of men, if by men of rank and education they are
discountenanced and forfaken? Do not they know, that those lower ranks are
ready to copy the manners, and to follow the example of their superiors in all
things; but assuredly in nothing more, than in what appears to set them free
from restraint, and to gratify licentiousness? While they acknowledge the
importance, and even the necessity, of public religion to certain classes of
men, do they, nevertheless, contribute by their behavior to defeat the end of
public religion, and to annihilate that importance which they ascribe to it? --
They are employed in framing laws and statutes for preventing crimes, and
keeping the disorderly multitude within bounds; and at the same time, by
personally discountenancing public worship, they are weakening, they are even
abolishing, among the multitude, that moral restraint, which is of more general
influence upon manners than all the laws they frame. In vain they complain of
the dishonesty of servants of the insolence of mobs, of the attacks of the
highwayman. To all these disorders they have themselves been accessory. By
their open disregard of sacred institutions, they have disseminated profligacy
among the people. They have broken down the floodgates which served to restrain
the torrent; they have let it loose to overflow the land; and by the growing
deluge may themselves be swept away. -- But I must next argue upon a different
ground; and proceed.

III. To set forth the importance of the public worship of God to every
individual, in every rank of life. Whatever his station be, he is still a man;
and has the duties of a man to perform. Were his attendance on divine worship
of no other effect, than to add countenance to a salutary institution, this
alone would render it his duty. But moreover, we assert it to be his duty on
his own account; if it be the duty of every man to use the proper means of
preserving and fortifying his virtue. All the Christian institutions have a
direct tendency to this end. They all serve to give warmth to piety, and to add
solemnity to moral virtue. A very high opinon, indeed, that man must have of
his own character, who imagines that, amidst all the follies and corruptions of
the world, he, stands in need of no assistance for enabling him to act his part
with propriety and dignity.

The question is not, whether persons of rank and education are to learn any
thing that is new to them by frequenting the places of public worship. The
great principles of piety and morality are obvious and easily known; and we
shall readily admit, that there are many to whom no new instruction is
communicated in the house of God. But, my friends, the purpose of your going
there is to have known truths recalled to your mind, and their dormant
influence awakened; is to have serious meditations suggested; to have good
dispositions raised; to have the heart adjusted to a composed and tranquil
frame. Is there any man of reason and reflection, who will not acknowledge such
effects, as far as they follow from attendance on religious ordinances, to be
of the most beneficial nature? These occasional cessations from the cares and
anxieties of life, these interruptions to the bustle and passions of the world,
in order to think and hear of eternity, are both a relief and an improvement to
the mind. By this retreat from its ordinary circle of thoughts, it is enabled
to return, with more clearness and more vigor, to the business of the world,
after a serious and proper pause.

But I must ask the persons with whom I now reason, whether there be no other
call to come to God's house, than to hear instruction there? Is not the devout
adoration of the God of heaven the principal object of our religious
assemblies; and is this what any man of reflection, and of sober mind, dare to
make light of? In the temple of the Lord, the rich and the poor, the prince and
the peasant, appear as suppliants alike for the protection and favor of the
Almighty. -- Great and flourishing as thou may think thyself, know that thou
stand as much in need of that protection, as the meanest of the crowd whom
thou beholdest worshipping, with lowly reverence, the God of their fathers. The
sun of prosperity shines at present on thy head, and the favorable gale
carries thee sof^ly along the stream of life. But the Almighty needs only to
give the word, and instantly the tempest shall rise; and thy frail bark shall
be driven into the ocean, and whelmed in the deep. In my prosperity I said I
shall never be moved. Thou, Lord, did hide thy face, and I was troubled. --
Look up, with dread, to that awful hand of providence which is stretched over
your heads. Remember the instability of all human things; Remember it, and
tremble, ye who despise the devout acknowledgment of Him who disposes of the
human fate! Though ye live many years and rejoice in them all, remember the
days of darkness; for they shall be many. Eccles. ii. 8.


But after all that has been urged on this subject, I am sensible it may be
objected, that many who make conscience of paying strict regard to the
institutions of religion, do not appear to have derived much benefit from them.
They are not, it will be said, more improved in moral conduct, and the proper
discharge of the several duties of life, than others who have been apparently
negligent of the services of the church. On the contrary, a formal regard to
these appears to be substituted by many, in the room of the weightier matters
of the law. -- Though this should be admitted, it goes no farther than to show
that human weakness, or corruption, may defeat the purpose of the most
promising means of moral improvement. That a superstitious attention to
external worship, has to often usurped the character, and supplanted the place
of real virtue, will not be denied. Admonitions against so dangerous an error
cannot be given too often. But because the best things have been often
misapplied and abused, no argument thence arises for their being undervalued,
and thrown aside. So also reason, instruction, and discipline of every kind,
have been frequently perverted to bad ends; and yet their intrinsic worth and
usefulness remain untouched and acknowledged. -- Besides this, it cannot be
admitted that, because religious instituted produce not all they good the might
be wished, and hoped for, they therefore do no good at all. This were a rash
and ill-sounded conclusion. If the morals of men are not always amended by them
as they ought to have been, there is reason, however to think that they would
have been worse without them. Some check is always given by them to open
prosligacy. Some assistance is furnished to good dispositions of heart; at
least, to decency of manners. Even momentary impressions of seriousness made on
the thoughtless by the solemnities of religion, are not without their fruit.
They leave generally some trace behind them; and when the traces are often
renewed, they may be hoped, through the divine blessing, to form at last a deep
impression on the mind.

At the same time, I do not say that religious institutions work upon the mind
like a charm; and that mere bodily attendance on them will always ensure us of
some profitable effect. Let the means that are employed, for the improvement of
rational beings, be ever so powerful in themselves, much of their success will
always depend on the manner in which they are received and applied. I shall
therefore conclude my reasonings on this subject, with a few observations
concerning the dispositions requisite on our part, for deriving benefit from
the public ordinances of religion.

The ends for which we assemble in the house of God are two; to worship God,
and to listen to religious instructions.

The public worship of God is the chief and most sacred purpose of every
religious assembly of Christians. Let it here be remembered, that it is not the
uttering, or the hearing of certain words, that constitutes the worship of the
Almighty. It is the heart that praises, or prays. If the heart accompany not
the words that are spoken or heard, we offer the sacrifice of fools. By the
inattentive though, and the giddy and wandering eye, we prosane the temple of
the Lord, and turn the appearance of devotion into insult and mockery. With
regard to religious instruction, attention and reverence are unquestionably
due. All religious and moral knowledge comes from God. It is a light from
heaven, first transmitted to man by the orginal constitution of his nature, and
afterward made to shine with fairer and fuller luster by the revelation of the
gospel in Jesus Christ. Its brightness may sometimes be stronger, and sometimes
weaker, according to the mediums by which it is conveyed. But still, as far as
the instructions delivered from the pulpit are illuminated by the ray from
heaven, they are the truths of God, and ought to be received as such.
Refinements of vain philosophy, or intricate subtilities of theological
controversy, are undoubtedly not entitled to such regard. But when the great
principles of natural or revealed religion are discussed; when the important
doctrines of the gospel concerning the life, and sufferings, and death of our
blessed Redeemer are displayed; or useful instructions regarding the regulation
of life, and the proper discharge of our several duties, are the subjects
brought into view; it is not then the human speaker, but the divine authority
that is to be regarded.

In the speaker, many imperfections and infirmities may be discovered. The
discoveries of the gospel are represented in scripture, as a hidden treasure
brought to light; but, by the appointment of God, we have this treasure in
earthen vessels. 2 Cor iv. 7.
It is not the spirit of curiosity that ought to bring us to church. Too often,
is to be feared, we assemble there merely as crities on the preacher; crities
on his sentiments, his language, and his delivery. But, such are not the
dispositions which become us on so serious an occasion. It is with humility,
with fairness, and candor, with an intention to improve ourselves in piety and
virtue, with a view to make personal application to our own character, that we
ought to hear the word of God. -- When we enter the sacred temple, let us ever
consider ourselves as creatures surrounded with darkness, seeking illumination
from heaven; as guilty creatures, imploring forgiveness from our judge; as
frail and mortal creatures, preparing for that eternal habitation into which we
know not how soon we are to pass.

If, with such sentiments and impressions we join in the worship of God, and
the ordinances of religion, we may justly hope that they shall be accompanied
to us with the divine blessing. It is the express precept of God. not to
forsake the assembling of ourselves together. Heb. x. 25.
Gether together the people, men, women, and children, that they may hear, and
that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the
words of this law. Deuteronomy. xxxi. 12.
Enter his gates with thanksgiving, and his courts with praise. Give unto the
Lord the glory due to his name. -- Thus has God commanded, and he never
commanded his people to seek his name in vain. For, where two or three are
gathered together in his name, our Lord has told us that he is in the midst of
them. Matthew. xviii. 20.
God has said that he loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob. Psalm lxxxviii. 2.
The prayer of the upright is his delight. Both in their temporal and spiritual
concerns, they may be most expected to prosper, who can say with the Psalmist
in the next, Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells.

SERMON XII. ON THE FASHION OF THE WORLD PASSING AWAY.
1 COR. vii. 31. -- The fashion of this world passes away.


TO use this world so as not to abuse it, is one of the most important, and at
the same time one of the most difficul^ ^^ssons which religion teaches. By so
many desires and passions we are connected with the objects around us, that our
attachment to them is always in hazard of becoming excessive and sinful. Hence
religion is often employed in moderating this attachment, by rectifying our
erroneous opinions, and instructing us in the proper value we ought to set on
worldly things. Such was particularly the scope of the Apostle in this context.
He is putting the Corinthians in mind that their time is short: that every
thing here is transitory; and therefore, that in all the different occupations
of human life, in weeping and rejoicing, and buying and possessing, they were
ever to keep in view this consideration, that the fashion of this world passes
away. The original expression imports, the figure or form under which the world
presents itself to us. The meaning is. All that belongs to this visible state
is continually changing. Nothing in human affairs is fixed or stable. All is in
motion and fluctuation; altering its appearance every moment, and passing into
some new form. Let us meditate for a little on the serious view which is here
given us of the world, in order that we may attend to the improvements which it
suggests.

1. The fashion of the world passes away, as the opinions, ideas, and the
manners of men are always changing. We look in vain for a standard to ascertain
and fix any of these; in vain expect that what has been approved and
established for a while, is always to endure. Principles which were of high
authority among our ancestors are now exploded. Systems of philosophy which
were once universally received, and taught and as infallible truths. are now
obliterated and forgotten. Modes of living behaving, and employing time, the
pursuits of the busy, and the entertainments of the gay, have been entirely
changed. They were the offspring of fashion, the children of a day. When they
had run their course, they expired; and were succeeded by other modes of
living, and thinking, and acting, which the gloss of novelty recommended for a
while to the public taste.

When we read an account of the manners and occupations, of the studies and
opinions, even of our own countrymen, in some remote age, we seem to be reading
the history of a different world from what we now inhabit. Coming downwards
through some generations, a new face of things appears. Men begin to think, and
act, in a different train; and what we call refinements gradually opens.
Arriving at our own times, we consider ourselves as having widely enlarged the
sphere of knowledge on every side, having formed just ideas on every subject;
having attained the proper standard of manners and behavior; and wonder at the
ignorance, the uncouthness, and rusticity of our forefathers. But, alas! what
appears to us so perfect shall in its turn pass away. The next race, while they
shove us off the stage, will introduce their favorite discoveries and
innovations; and what we now admire as the height of improvement, may in a few
ages hence be considered as altogether rude and imperfect. As one wave effaces
the ridge which the former had made on the sand by the sea shore, so every
succeeding age obliterates the opinions and modes of the age which had gone
before it. The fashion of the world is ever passing away.

Let us only think of the changes which our own ideas and opinions undergo in
the progress of life. One man differs not more from another, than the same man
varies from himself in different periods of his age, and in different
situations of fortune. In youth, and in opulence, every thing appears smiling
and gay. We fly as on the wing of fancy; and furvey beauties wherev^^ we cast
our eye. But let some more years have passed over our heads, or let
disappointments in the world have depressed our spirits; and what a change
takes place? The pleasing illusions that once shone before us; the splended
fabries that imagination had reared; the enchanting maze in which we once
wandered with delight, all vanish and are forgotten. The world itself remains
the same. But its form, its appearance, and aspect, is changed to our view; its
fashion, as to us has passed away.

II. While our opinions and ideas are thus changing within, the condition of
all external things is, at the same time, ever changing without us, and around
us. Wherever we cast our eyes over the face of nature, or the monuments of art,
we discern the marks of alteration and vicissitude. We cannot travel far upon
the earth, without being presented with many a striking memorial of the changes
made by time. What was once a flourishing city, is now a neglected village.
Where castles and palaces stood, fallen towers and ruined walls appear. Where
the magnificence of the great shone, and the mirth of the gay resounded, there,
as the prophet Isaiah descibes, the owl and the raven now dwell, thorns come
up, and the nettle and the bramble grow in the courts. -- When we read the
history of nations, what do we read but the history of incessant revolution and
change? We behold kingdoms alternately rising and falling; peace and war taking
place by turns; princes, heroes, and statesmen, coming forth in succession on
the stage, attracting our attention for a little by the splendid figure they
make, and then disappearing and forgotten. We see the fashion of the world
assuming all its different forms, and in all of them, passing away.

But to historical annals there is no occasion for our having recourse. Let any
one, who has made some progress in life, recollect only what he has beheld
passing before him, in his own time. We have seen our country rise triumphant
among the nations; and we have seen it also humbled in its turn. We have seen
in one hemisphere of the globe new dominions acquired, and in another
hemisphere, our old dominions lost. At home, we have seen sactions and parties
shift through all their different forms; and administrations, in succession,
rise and fall. What were once the great themes of eager discussion, and
political contest, are now forgotten. Fathers recount them to their children as
the tales of other times. New actors have come forth on the stage of the world.
New objects have attracted the attention, and new intrigues engaged the
passions of men. New members fill the seats of justice; new ministers the
temples of religion; and a new world, in short, in the course of a few years,
has gradually and insensibly risen around us.

When from the public scene we turn our eye to our own private connections, the
changes which have taken place in the fashion of the world, must touch every
reflecting mind with a more tender sensibility. For where are now, many of the
companions of our early years; many of those with whom we first began the race
of life; and whose hopes and prospects were once the same with our own? In
recollecting our old acquaintance and friends, what devastations have been made
by the hand of time? On the ruins of our former connections, new ones have
arisen; new relations have been formed; and the circle of those among whom we
live is altogether changed from what it once was. Comparing our present
situation with our former condition of life; looking back to our father's
house, and to the scenes of youth; remembering the friends by whom we were
trained, and the family in which we grew up; who, but with inward emotion,
recollects those days of former years, and is disposed to drop the silent tear,
when he views the fashion of the world thus always passing away!

III. Not only our connections with all things around us change, but our own
life, through all its stages and conditions, is ever passing away. How just,
and how affecting is that image, employed in the sacred writings to describe
the state of man, we spend our years as a tale that is told! Psalm xc. 9.
It is not to any thing great or lasting that human life is compared; not to a
moment that is built, or to an inscription that is engraved; not even to a book
that is written, or to a history that is recorded; but to a tale, which is
listened to for a little; where the words are fugitive and passing, and where
one incident succeeds and hangs on another, till, by insensible transitions, we
are brought to the close; a tale, which in some passages may be amusing, in
others, tedious; but whether it amuses or fatigues, is soon told, and soon
forgotten. Thus, year steals upon us after year, Life is never standing still
for a moment; but continually, though insensibly, sliding into a new form.
Infancy rises up fast to childhood; childhood to youth; youth passes quickly
into manhood; and the gray hair and the saded look are not long of admonishing
us, that old age is at hand. In this course all generations run. The world is
made up of unceasing rounds of transitory existence. Some generations are
coming foward into being, and others hastening to leave it. The stream which
carries us all along it ever flowing with a quick current, though with a still
and noiseless course. The dwelling place of man is continually emptying, and by
a fresh succession of inhabitants, continually filling anew. The memory of man
passes away, like the remembrance of a guest who has tarried but one night.

As the life of man, considered in its duration, thus fleets and passes away,
so during the time it lasts, its condition is perpetually changing. It affords
us nothing on which we can set up our rest; no enjoyment or possession which we
can properly call our own. When we have begun to be placed in such
circumstances as we desired, and wish our lives to proceed in the same
agreeable tenor, how often comes some unexpected event across, to disconcert
all our schemes of happiness? Our health declines; our friends die; our
families are scattered; something or other is not long of occurring, to show us
that the wheel must turn round; the fashion of the world must pass away. Is
there any man who dares to look to futurity with an eye of confident hope; and
to say, that against a year hence, he can promise being in the same condition
of health of fortune, as he is at present? The seeds of change are every where
sown in our state; and the very causes that seemed to promise us security, are
often secretly undermining it. Great fame provokes the attacks of envy and
reproach. High health gives occasion to intemperance and disease. The elevation
of the mighty never sails to render their condition tottering; and that
obscurity which shelters the mean, exposes them, at the same time, to become
the prey of oppression. So completely is the fashion of this world made by
Providence for change, and prepared for passing away. In the midst of this
instability, it were some comfort, did human prosperity decay as slowly as it
rises. By slow degrees, and by many interveining steps, it rises. But one day
is sufficient to scatter, and bring it to naught. I might add,

IV. That the world itself in which we dwell, the basis of all our present
enjoyments, is itself contrived for change, and designed to pass away. While
the generations of men come forth in their turns, like troops of succeeding
pilgrims, to act their part on this globe, the globe on which they act is
tottering under their feet. It was once overflowed by a deluge. It is shaken by
earthquakes; it is undermined by subterraneous fires; it carries many a mark of
having suffered violent convulsions, and of tending to dissolution. Revelation
informs us, that there is a day approaching, in which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise: the elements shall melt with fervent heat; and the
earth and the works therein shall be burnt up. When this destined hour arrives,
the fashion of the world shall have finally past away. Immortal spirits shall
then look back upon this world, as we do at present on cities and empires,
which were once mighty and flourishing, but now are swept from existence, and
their place is no more to be found.

I shall insist no longer on this representation of things. Enough has been
said, to show that the fashion of the world, in every sense, passes away.
Opinions and manners, public affairs and private concerns the life of man, the
conditions of fortune, and the earth itself on which we dwell, are all changing
around us. -- Is every thing, then, with which we are connected, passing and
transitory? Is the whole state of man no more than a dream or fleeting vision?
Is he brought forth, to be only the child of a day? Are we thrown into a river,
where all flows, and nothing stays; where we have no means of resisting the
current; nor can reach any firm ground, on which to rest our foot? -- No, my
brethren; man was not doomed to be so unhappy; nor made by his Creator so much
in vain. There are three fixed and permanent objects, to which I must now call
your attention, as the great supports of human constancy amidst this fugitive
state. Though this world changes and passes away, virtue and goodness never
changes; heaven and immortality pass not away.

First, Virtue and goodness never change. Let opinions and manners, conditions
and situations, in public and in private life, alter as they will, virtue is
ever the same. It rests on the immovable basis of Eternal Truth. Among all the
revolutions of human things it maintains its ground; ever possessing the
veneration and esteem of mankind, and conferring on the heart, which enjoys it,
satisfaction and peace. Consult the most remote antiquity. Look to the most
savage nations of the earth. How wild, and how fluctuating soever the ideas of
men may have been, this opinion you will find to have always prevailed, that
probity, truth, and beneficence, form the honor and the excellency of man. In
this, the philosopher and the savage, the warrior and the hermit, join. At this
altar all have worshipped. Their offerings, many have been unseemly. Their
notions of virtue may have been rude, and occasionally tainted by ignorance and
superstition; but the fundamental ideas of moral worth have ever remained the
same.

Here then is one point of stability, affected by no vicissitudes of time and
life, on which we may rest. Our fortunes may change, and our friends may die;
but virtue may still be our own; and as long as this remains, we are never
miserable. Till I die I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness
I hold fast, and will not let it go. My heart shall not reproach me so long as
I live. Job xxvii. 5, 6.
He who, with the holy man of old, can hold this language, may with undisturbed
mind survey time flying away, life decaying, and the whole fashion of the world
changing around him. He has within himself, a source of consolation and hope,
independent of all earthly objects. Every terrestrial glory sparkles only for a
little, with transient brightness. But virtue shines with eternal and
unalterable splendor. It derives its origin from heaven; and partakes both of
the luster, and the stability, of celestial objects. It is the brightness of
the everlasting light; the unspotted mirror of God, and the image of his
goodness.

In the second place, God never changes. Amidst the unceasing vicissitude of
earthly things, there remains at the head of the universe an eternal protector
of virtue, whose throne is established for ever. With him there is no
variableness, neither any shadow of turning; no inconstancy of purpose, and no
decay of wisdom or of power. We know that he loved righteousness from the
beginning of days, and that he will continue to love it unalterably to the
last. Foreseen by him was every revolution which the course of ages has
produced. All the changes which happen in the state of nature, or the life of
men, were comprehended in his decree. How much soever worldly things may change
in themselves, they are all united in his plan; they constitute one great
system or whole, of which he is the Author; and which, at its final completion,
shall appear to be perfect. His dominion holds together, in a continual chain,
the successive variety of human events; gives stability to things that in
themselves ars fluctuating; gives constancy even to the fashion of the world
while it is passing away. Wherefore, though all things change on earth, and we
ourselves be involved in the general mutability, yet as long as, with trust and
hope, we look up to this Supreme Being, we rest on the rock of ages, and are
safe amidst every change. We possess a fortress to which we can have recourse
in all dangers; a refuge under all storms; a dwelling place in all generations.

In the third and last place, heaven and immortality pass not away. The
fleeting scenes of this life are to be confidered as no more than an
introduction to a nobler and more permanent order of things, when man shall
have attained the maturity of his being. This is what reason gave some ground
to expect; what revelation has fully confirmed; and in confirming it, has
agreed with the sentiments and anticipations of the good and wise in every age.
We are taught to believe that what we now behold, is only the first stage of
the life of man. We are arrived no further than the threshold, we owell as in
the outer courts of existence. Here, tents only are pitched; tabernacles
erected for the sojourners of a day. But in the region of eternity, all is
great, stable, and unchanging. There, the mansions of the just are prepared:
there, the city which has foundations is built; there is established, the
kingdom which cannot be moved. Here, every thing is in stir and fluctuation;
because here good men continue not, but pass onward in the course of being.
There, all is serene, steady and orderly; because there remains the final
reft of the people of God. Here, all is corrupted by our folly and guilt; and
of course must be transient and vain. But there, purchased by the death, and
secured by the resurrection of the Son of God, is an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away. There reigns the tranquillity which is
never troubled. There shines that sun which never sets. There flows that river
of pleasures, which is always unruffled and pure. Looking forward to those
divine habitations, the changes of the present world disappear to the eye of
faith; and a good man becomes ashamed of suffering himself to be dejected by
what is so soon to pass away.

Such are the objects you ought to oppose to the transient sashion of the
world; Virtue, and God, and Heaven. Fixing your regard on these, you will have
no reason to complain of the lot of man, or the world's mutability. -- The
design of the preceding representation which I gave of the world, was not to
indulge vain declamation; to raise fruitless melancholy; or to throw an
unnecessary cloud over human life. But to show the moderation requisite in our
attatchment to the world; and at the same time, to point out the higher objects
both of attention and consolation which religion affords. -- Passing and
changeable as all human things are, among them, however, we must at present act
our part; to them we must return from religious meditation. They are not below
the regard of any Christian; for they form the scene which providence has
appointed at present for his activity, and his duty. Trials and dangers they
may often present to him; but amidsts these he will safely hold his course, if,
when engaged in worldly affairs, he keep in view those divine objects which I
have been setting before him. Let him ever retain connection with Virtue, and
God, and Heaven. By them let his conduct be regulated, and his constancy
supported. So shall he use this world without abusing it. He shall neither
droop under its missortunes, nor be vainly elated by its advantages; but
through all its changes shall carry an equal and steady mind; and in the end
shall receive the accomplishment of the promise of scripture, that though the
world passes away, and the lust thereof, he that does the will of God shall
abide for ever. 1 John ii. 17.


SERMON XIII. ON TRANQUILLITY OF MIND.
PSALM XV. 5. -- He that does these things shall never be moved.


TRANQUILLITY of mind, or, in the words of the text, a mind not moved o^
disquieted by the accidents of life, is undoubtedly one of the greatest
blessings that we can possess on earth. It is here, mentioned as the reward of
the man, whose character had been described in this psalm, as leading a
virtuous life, and discharging his duty toward God and his neighbor. It is
indeed the ultimate aim, to which the wishes of the wise and reflecting have
ever been directed, that with a mind undisturbed by anxieties, cares, and
fears, they might pass their days in a pleasing serenity. They justly concluded
that, by enjoying themselves in peace, they would enjoy, to the greatest
advantage, all the comforts of life that came within their reach.

This happy tranquillity, the multitude conceive to be most readily attainable
by means of wealth, or, at least, of an easy fortune; which they imagine would
set them above all the ordinary disturbances of life. That it has some effect
for this purpose, cannot be denied. Poverty and straitened circumstances are
often inconsistent with tranquillity. To be destitute of of those conveniences
that suit our rank in the world; to be burdened with anxiety about making
provision for every day which passes over our head; instead of bringing comfort
to a family who look up to us for aid, to behold ourselves surrounded with
their wants and complaints, are circumstances which can not fail to give much
uneasiness to every feeling mind. To take measures, therefore, for attaining a
competent fortune, by laudable means, is wise and proper. Entire n^^ligence of
our affairs, and indifference about our worldly circumstances, is, for the most
part, the consequence of some vice, or some folly. -- At the same time, I must
observe, that the attainment of opulence is no certain method of attaining
tranquillity. Embarassments and vexations often attend it; and long experience
has shown, that tranquillity is far from being always found among the rich.
Nay, the higher that men rise in the world, the greater degrees of power and
distinction which they acquire, they are often the farther removed from
internal peace. The world affords so many instances of miseries abounding in
the higher ranks of life, that it were needless to enlarge on a topic so
generally known and admitted.

Assuming it, therefore, for an undoubted truth, that the mere possession of
the goods of fortune may be consistent with the want of inward tranquillity, we
must look around for other more certain grounds of it. We must inquire whether
any line of conduct can be pointed out, which, independent of external
situation in the world, shall tend to make us easy in mind; shall either
bestow, or aid, that tranquillity which all men desire. The remaining part of
this discourse shall be employed in suggesting, with great plainness of speech,
such directions as appear to me most material on this important subject.

The first direction, which I have to suggest, is, that we imitate the
character of the man who is described in this psalm as walking uprightly,
working righteousness, and speaking the truth, as he thinks in his heart;
that we study to preserve a clear conscience, and to lead a virtuous and
honorable, at least an inoffensive and innocent, life. Of such a man only it
can be said, that doing these things be shall never be moved. So great is the
power of conscience over every human being, that the remembrance of crimes
never fails to overthrow tranquillity of mind. Be assured, that he who defrauds
his neighbor, who has e^^^ared the innocent, has violated his trust, or
betrayed his friend, shall never enjoy within himself undisturbed quiet. His
evil deeds will at times recur to his thoughts, like ghosts rising up in black
array before him to haunt his couch. Even the sense a foolish and trifling
conduct, of a life past in idleness and dissipation; by which, though a man has
not been guilty of great crimes, he has however wasted his substance, misspent
his time, and brought upon himself just reproach; even this, I say, is
sufficient to or the much uneasiness and disquiet to the heart. Let (...)
therefore who wishes to enjoy tranquillity, (...) above all things, to act an
irreproachable part. With comfort he will rest his head on his pillow at night,
when ^^e is conscious that throughout the day he has been doing his duty
toward God and man; when none of the transactions of that day come back, in
painful remembrance, to upbraid him. To this testimony of a good conscience,
let him be able,

In the second place to join humble trust in the favor of God. As, after the
best endeavors we can use, no man's behavior will be entirely faultless, it
is essential to peace of mind, that we have some ground for hope in the Divine
mercy, that through the merits of Jesus Christ, our defects shall be forgiven,
and grace be shown us by Heaven. This includes all the duties of faith and
repentance that are required by the Gospel; the faithful discharge of which
duties is absolutely necessary for delivering us from those fears of another
world, which, if not allayed, are sufficient to banish all tranquillity from
the heart. Our religious principles must at the same time be sound and pure;
and carefully preserved from the taint of superstition, whose gloomy horrors,
taking possession of weak and ill-informed minds, convert what they mistake for
religion, into a source of misery. -- Moreover, it is necessary, that we be
able to place trust in God, not only as our future Judge, but as the present
Governor of human affairs. So uncertain is the continuance of every earthly
comfort, that he, who reposes no confidence in the Supreme Disposer of events,
must be often disquieted and dejected. He alone possesses firm tranquillity,
who, amidst all human vicissitudes, looks up, with settled trust, to an
almighty Ruler, as to one under whose conduct he is (...). To him alone belongs
that happy privilege, described by the Psalmist; He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; his heart is fixed; trusting in the Lord. Psalm cxii. 7.


I have pointed out the primary and essential foundations of tranquillity;
virtuous conduct, good principles, and pious dispositions. At the same time, a
man may be both pious and virtuous, and yet, through some defects in the
management of his mind and temper, may not possess that happy serenity and
self-enjoyment, which ought to be the portion of virtue and piety. Instances of
this will occur to every one who is acquainted with the world. We too often
behold persons, whose principles, and whose moral conduct, are in the main
unexceptionable, leading an uncomfortable life; throught fretfulness of temper,
peevishness of manners, or sullenness of disposition. There is, therefore, some
discipline to be studied; there are some subsidiary parts of character to be
attended to, in order to give piety and virtue their full effect for conferring
tranquillity. To the consideration of these secondary means I now proceed. Let
me then advise you.

In the third place, to attend to the culture and improvement of your minds. A
fund of useful knowledge, and a stock of ideas, afford much advantage for the
enjoyment of tranquillity. I do not mean, that every man must study to become
deeply learned. The situation of many would not allow it. The taste, and the
habits of others, prevent it. But what I mean is, that every man who wishes to
lead a comfortable life should provide for himself, as much as he can, by means
of observation, reading, and reflecting, a large field of useful thoughts. In a
mind absolutely vacant, tranquillity is seldom found. The vacancy too often
will be filled up by bad desires and passions. Whereas, the mind of a wise man
is a kingdom to itself. In his lonely, or melancholy hours, he finds always
resources within himself, to which he can turn for relief. As there are many
occasions when external objects afford no pleasure, it is only by being able to
rest on the entertainments afforded to himself by his mind, that any one can
pass his days with self-enjoyment Let me recommend for the same purpose,

In the fourth place, that we be always careful to provide proper employment
for our time. Regular industry and labor, with intervals of ease, is perhaps
the state most conducive of any to tranquillity. If our station give no call to
industry, it will be profitable that we study to have some end or object in
view, to which our attention shall be directed. Relaxation from intense, of
incessant pursuit, is requisite for comfort. But if relaxation degenerate into
total idleness, it becomes in a high degree adverse to tranquillity. Every man
by his nature, is formed, more or less, for action. In a mind that is entirely
quiescent, and that has no object to put it into motion, instead of
self-enjoyment, there will be constant languor, tediousness, and misery. Life
stagnates in such a situation, like a pool of dead waters; and the man becomes
a burden to himself. Violent and dangerous pursuits, which distract and embroil
those who are engaged in them. I cannot be understood to recommend. Every one
sees how foreign these are to a state of tranquillity. But in the ordinary
^^nor of calm and easy l^^e, I would advise every one to have some and before
him (...) some object which shall bring the mind into action, and fill up the
vacuities of time. Provided the ^^ject be innocent, and of no unsuitable or
degrading nature, it may answer this purpose, though it should not be in itself
of high importance. It is better for the mind to have some determinate
direction given it, than to be always left floating, as it were, in empty
space. -- But about whatever objects we are employed, it is still more material
to tranquillity that, in the

Fifth place, we learn to govern our passions. These are the most frequent
disturbers of our peace. Necessary as their impulse is to give activity to the
mind, yet if they are not kept in subordination to reason, they speedily throw
all things into confusion. Such of them as belong to the malignant and unsocial
class, evidently tend to produce vexation and disquiet. Against suffering these
to gain possession of the heart, admonition is scarcely necessary. But I must
admonish you, that even those which are accounted of innocent nature, and which
therefore may lay hold of virtuous minds, if they obtain the entire mastery,
are sufficient to overthrow the tranquillity of life. Let every one, therefore,
who values that tranquillity, study to retain moderation and self-command, even
in the midst (...) passions which have a fair and bland appearance. He will
find that the gratification of any one of them, compensates not that perpetual
slavery to which it will reduce him, when it becomes inordinate.

I have farther to admonish you, that this self-command is particularly
necessary in all that relates to habitual temper. Even where strong passions
are out of the question, those slighter emotions which ruffle or four the
temper, are sufficient, by their frequent recurrence, to poison all
self-enjoyment. He who would possess a tranquil state, must, above all things,
cultivate calmness and gentleness of disposition. He ought especially to
cultivate it in that society, whether domestic or social, with which he has
most frequent intercourse. We all know, that there are thousands who in
pub^^^^^d in formal companies, appear to be all gentleness and sweetness, but
who, at home, and among their nearest relations, give vent, with freedom, to
the most harsh and peevish dispositions. Such persons are not likely to enjoy
much real comfort. For it is in the daily and familiar intercourse of life,
that temper chiefly exerts its power, either for promoting or for disturbing,
the tranquillity of our days. On occasions when men come closest together, if,
instead of meeting in smooth contact, they rub and grate on one another, the
feelings produced on both sides are of the most offensive and displeasing kind.
Nothing can be assumed as a more certain axiom, than that he who allows either
inordinate passions, or a cross temper, to govern him, must, though he should
possess all that flourishing fortune can bestow, be a stranger to tranquillity.

In the sixth place, let me advise you never to expect too much from the world.
High hopes, and florid views, are great enemies to tranquillity. When rashly
indulged, they are constantly producing disappointments. Their indulgence, in
the mean time, occasions discontent with our present f^^^^ion; and he who is
discontented cannot be happy. One of the first lessons, both of religion and of
wisdom is, to moderate our expectations and hopes; and not to set forth on the
voyage of life like men who expect to be always carried forward with a
favorable gale. Let your views be suited to your rank and station in the
world; and never soar fantastically beyond them. Content yourselves with sober
pleasures, and form your relish to them. Be thankful when you are free from
pain, though you be not in the midst of high enjoyment, Be satisfied if the
path you tread be easy and smooth, though it be not strewed with flowers. Human
life admits not of continued pleasure; nor is it always rendered happy by great
exaltation. Remember, that it is a middle region which is the native station of
tranquillity. It neither aspires to those heights of the atmosphere where the
thunder is formed; nor creeps always on the ground. Affect not, on every
occasion, to put yourselves forward. Be content to retire sometimes into the
shade; and allow others to take their proper place. -- It will be easily seen,
that I speak not now to the ambitious and aspiring; but to those who value
tranquillity more than splendid appearance in the world.

Such persons I also advise, while they expect not too much from the world,
neither, also, to form too high expectations from the characters of those on
whose friendship they rest, and with whom it is their lot to be connected,
either in social or domestic relations. If you have looked for perfection any
where, you will find yourself disappointed; and the consequence of this
disappointment will be, that friendship will cool, and disgust succeed. If you
wish to enjoy comfort in any of your connections, take your fellow creatures as
they are, and look for their imperfections to appear. You know you have your
own; bear with those of others, as you expect that they are to bear with you.
As no one is without his failings, few also are void of amiable qualities.
Select for your companions, those who have the greatest share of such
qualities; and value them accordingly. -- In a word make the best of this world
as you find it. Reckon both on the state of human life, and on the society of
men, as mixed and cheek quered with good and evil. Carrying always in your eye
such views of things, you will be best formed to those equal spirits, and that
reasonable disposition of mind, which make the basis of tranquillity. I shall
only and as my

Seventh, and last advice on the subject, to mi^ retreat with the active
business of the world, and to cultivate habits of serious thought and
recollection. I before advised those who are not particularly engaged in active
life, to form to themselves some object of pursuit, in order to furnish proper
employment to time and thought. But the great multitude of men are in a
different situation. Industry is required of them; business and cares press;
and active pursuits occupy their closest attention. He, who, in this situation,
pours himself fourth incessantly on the world, cannot escape partaking much of
its disturbance and trouble. Amidst bustle, intrigue, and dissension, he must
pass many an uneasy hour. Here an enemy encounters him; there, a rival meets
him. A suspicious friend alarms him one hour; an ungrateful one provokes him
the next. I do not recommend, that for these reasons, he who studies
tranquillity should retire from all public business, and forsake the haunts of
men. This were the retreat of a monk, not of a good and a wise man.
Tranquillity were too dearly purchased by the neglect of those duties which
belong to a man, and a Christian. Nor indeed in absolute seclusion from the
world is tranquillity ever found. On the contrary, when the human mind is cut
off from those employments for which it was designed by nature and Providence,
it preys on itself, and engenders its own misery. Tranquillity is always most
likely to be attained, when the business of the world is tempered with
thoughtful and serious retreat. Commune with your hearts on your bed, and be
still. Leaving this world to itself, let there be seasons which you devote to
yourselves, and to God. Reflection and meditation allay the workings of many
unquiet passions; and place us at a distance from the tumults of the world.
When the mind has either been ruffled or cast down, in intercourse with God and
heaven we find a sanctuary to which we can retreat. In the hours of
contemplation and devotion, a good man enjoys himself in peace. He beholds
nobler objects than what worldly men can behold. He assumes a higher character.
He listens to the voice of nature and of God; and from this holy sanctuary
comes forth with a mind fortified against the little disturbances of the world.
Such habits, therefore cannot be too much recommended to the lovers of
tranquillity, as powerful subsidiary means for attaining that happy state.

I have thus pointed out what appears to me the discipline of religion and
wisdom for tranquillity of mind. He that does these things shall never be
moved. During the early periods of life, vivid sensations of pleasure are the
sole objects thought worthy of pursuit. Mere ease and calmness are despised, as
the portion of the aged only and the feeble. Some longer acquaintance with the
world, with its disappointed hopes and fallacious pleasures, teaches almost all
men, by degrees, to wish for tranquillity and peace. But you must not imagine,
that these are blessings which will drop on men of their own accord, as soon as
they begin to desire them. No: the thoughtless, and the profligate, will ever
remain strangers to them. They will remain the sport of every accident that
occurs to derange their minds, and to disturb their life. -- The three great
enemies to tranquillity are, Vice, Superstition, and Idleness: Vice which
poisons and disturbs the mind with bad passions; Superstition, which fills it
with imaginary terrors; Idleness, which loads it with tediousness and disgust.
It is only by following the path which Eternal Wisdom has pointed out, that we
can arrive at the blessed temple of Tranquillity, and obtain a station there:
By doing, or at least endeavoring to do, our duty to God and man; by acquiring
a humble trust in the mercy and favor of God through Jesus Christ; by
cultivating our minds, and properly employing our time and thoughts; by
governing our passions and our temper; by correcting all unreasonable
expectations from the world, and from men; and, in the midst of worldly
business, habituating ourselves to calm retreat and serious recollection. -- By
such means as these, it may be hoped, that, through the divine blessing, our
days shall flow in a stream as unruffled as the human state admits. The wicked
are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest. But the work of righteousness
is peace; and the effect of righteousness is quietness and assurance for ever.
Isaiah xxxii. 17.


SERMON XIV. ON THE MISFORTUNES OF MEN BEING CHARGEABLE ON THEMSELVES.
PROVERBS xix. 3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord.


HOW many complains do we hear from every quarter, of the misery and distress
that fill the world! In these the high and the low, the young and the aged,
join; and since the beginning of time, no topic has been more fertile of
declamation, than the vanity and vexation which man is appointe to suffer. But
are we certain that this vexation, and this vanity, is altogether to be
ascribed to the appointment of heaven? Is there no g^ound to suspect that man
himself is the chief and immediate author of his own sufferings? What the text
plainly suggests is, that it is common for men to complain groundlesly of
Providence; that they are prone to accuse God for the evils of life, when in
reason they ought to accuse themselves; and that after their foolishness has
perverted their way, and made them undergo the consequences of their own
misconduct, they impiously fret in heart against the Lord. This is the doctrine
which I now purpose to illustrate, in order to silence the skeptic, and to
check a repining and irreligious spirit. I shall for this end make some
observations, first, on the external, and next, upon the internal, condition of
man; and then conclude with such serious and useful improvement as the subject
will naturally suggest.

1. Let us consider the external condition of man. We find him placed in a
world where he has by no means the disposal of the events that happen.
Calamities sometimes besal the worthiest and the best, which it is not in their
power to prevent, and where nothing is lest them, but to acknowledge and to
submit to the high hand of Heaven. For such visitations of trial, many good and
wise reasons can be assigned, which the present subject leads me not to
discuss. But though those unavoidable calamities make a part yet they make not
the chief part, of the vexations and sorrows that distress human life. A
multitude of evils beset us. for the source of which we must look to another
quarter. -- No sooner has any thing in the health, or in the circumstances of
men, gone cross to their wish, than they begin to talk of the unequal
distribution of the good things of this life; they envy the condition of
others, they repine at their own lot, and fret against the Ruler of the world.

Full of these sentiments, one man pines under a broken constitution. But let
us ask him, whether he can, fairly and honestly assign no cause for this but
the unknow decree of heaven? Has he duly valued the blessing of health, and
always observed the rules of virtue and sobriety? Has he been moderate in his
life, and temperate in all his pleasures; If now he be only paying the price of
his former, perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has he any title to complain,
as if he were suffering unjustly? Were you to survey the chambers of sickness
and distress, you would find them peopled with the victim^ of intemperance and
sensuality, and with the children of vicious indolence and sloth. Among the
thousands who languish there, you would find the proportion of innocent
sufferers to be small. You would see faded youth, premature old age, and the
prospect of an untimely grave; to be the portion of multitudes who, in one way
or other, have brought those evils on themselves; while yet these martyrs of
vice and folly have the assurance to arraign the hard fate of man, and to fret
against the Lord.

But you, perhaps, complain of hardships of another kind; of the injustice of
the world; of the poverty which you suffer, and the discouragements under which
you labor; of the crosses and disappointments of which your life has been
doomed to be full. -- Before you give too much scope to your discontent, let me
disires you to reflect impartially upon your past train of life. Have not
sloth, or pride, or ill temper, or sinful passions, misled you often from the
path of sound and wise conduct? Have you not been wanting to yourselves in
improving those opportunities which Providence offered you, for bettering and
advancing your state? If you have chosen to indulge your humor, or your taste,
in the gratifications of indolence or pleasure, can you complain because
others, in preference to you, have obtained those advantages which naturally
belong to useful labors, and honorable pursuits? Have not the consequences of
some false steps, into which your passions, or, your pleasures, have betrayed
you, pursued you through much of your life; tanted, perhaps, your character,
involved you in embarassments or sunk you into neglect? -- It is an old saying,
that every man is the artificer of his own fortune in the world. It is certain,
that the world seldom turns wholly against a man, unless through his own fault.
Godliness is, in general, profitable unto all things Virtue, diligence and
industry, joined with good temper and prudence, have ever been found the surest
road to prosperity; and where men fail of attaining it, their want of success
is far oftener owing to their having deviated from that road, than to their
having encountered insuperable bars in it. Some, by being too artful, forfeit
the reputation of probity. Some, by being too open, are accounted to fail in
prudence. Others, by being fickle and changeable, are distrusted by all. -- The
case commonly is, that men seek to ascribe their disappointments to any cause,
rather than to their own misconduct; and when they can devise no other cause,
they lay them to the charge of Providence. Their folly leads them into vices;
their vices into misfortunes; and in their misfortunes they fret against the
Lord. They are doubly unjust toward God. In their prosperity, they are apt to
ascribe their success to their own diligence, rather than to God's blessing;
and in their adversity, they impute their distresses to his providence, not to
their own misbehaviour. Whereas, the truth is the very reverse of this. Every
good and every perfect gift comes from above; and of evil and misery, man is
the author to himself.

When from the condition of individuals, we look abroad to the public state of
the world, we meet with more proofs of the truth of this assertion. We see
great societies of men torn in pieces by intestine dissensions, tumults, and
civil commotions. We see mighty armies going forth, in formidable array,
against each other, to cover the earth with blood, and to fill the air with the
cries of widows and orphans. Sad evils these are, to which this miserable world
is exposed. -- But are these evils, I beseech you, to be imputed to God? Was it
he who sent forth slaughtering armies into the field, or who filled the
peaceful city with massacres and blood? Are these miseries any other, than the
bitter fruit of men's violent and disorderly passions? Are they not clearly to
be traced to the ambition and vices of princes, to the quarrels of the great,
and to the turbulence of the people? -- Let us say them entirely out of the
account, in thinking of Providence; and let us think only of the foolishness of
men. Did man control his passions, and form his conduct according to the
dictates of wisdom, humanity and virtue, the earth would no longer be desolated
by cruelty; and human societies would live in order, harmony and peace. In
those scenes of mischief and violence which fill the world, let man behold,
with shame, the picture of his vices, his ignorance, and folly. Let him be
humbled by the mortifying view of his own perverseness; but let not his heart
fret against the Lord. -- From the external condition, let us proceed,

II. To consider the internal state of man. It is certain that much disquiet
and misery may be found there, although his outward condition appear
undisturbed, and easy. As far as this inward disquietude arises from the stings
of conscience, and the horrors of guilt, there can be no doubt of its being
self-created misery; which it is altogether impossible to impute to Heaven. But
even, when great crimes, and deep remorse, are not the occasions of torment,
how often is poison infused into the most flourishing conditions of fortune, by
the follies and the passions of the prosperous? We see them peevish and
restless; corrupted with luxury, and enervated by ease; impatient of the
smallest disappointment oppressed with low spirits, and complaining of every
thing around them. How many Hamans, Hazaels, and Herod's, are there in the
world, who, from that they suffer within, pass their days in more vexation and
misery, than they who undergo the hardships of poverty? Dare such men, in their
most discontented moments, charge the providence of Heaven with miseries of
their own procuring? Providence had put into their hands the fairest
opportunity of passing their life with comfort. But they themselves blasted
every comfort that was offered; and verified the prediction, that the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Prove. i. 32.


As it is man's own foolishness which ruins his prosperity, we must not omit to
remark, that it is the same cause which aggravates and embitters his adversity.
That you suffer from the external afflictions of the world, may often be owing
to God's appointment; but when, in the midst of these, you also suffer from the
disorders of your mind and passions, this is owing to yourselves; and they are
those inward disorders which add the severest sting to external afflictions.
Many are the resources of a good and a wise man, under all the disasters of
life. In the midst of them, it is always in his power to enjoy peace of mind,
and hope in God. He may suffer; but under suffering he will not sink, as long
as all is sound within. But when the spirit has been wounded by guilt and
folly, its wounds open, and bleed afresh, upon every blow that is received from
the world. The mind becomes sensible and sore to the slightest injuries of
fortune; and a small reverse is felt as an insupportable calamity.

On the whole; the farther you search into human life, and the more you observe
the manners and the conduct of men, you will be the more convinced of this
great truth, that of the distresses which abound in the world, we are the chief
authors. Among the multitudes who are, at this day, bewailing their condition
and lot, it will be found to hold of far the greater part, that they are
reaping the fruit of their own doings; their iniquities are reproving them, and
their backslidings correcting them. Unattainable objects foolishly pursued,
intemperate passions nourished, vicious pleasures and desires indulged, God and
God's holy laws forgotten; these, these are the great scourges of the world;
the great causes of the life of man being so embroiled and unhappy. God has
ordained our state on earth to be a mixed and imperfect state. We have
ourselves to blame for its becoming an insupportable one. If it bring forth
nothing to us but vexation and vanity, we have sown the seeds of that vanity
and vexation; and as we have sown, we must reap. -- I now proceed to make
improvement of those truths which we have been considering.

In the first place, let us be taught, to look upon sin as the source of all
our miseries. It may sometimes assume the gentler names of folly, irregularity,
or levity; but under whatever form it appears, it always imports a deviation
from that sacred law which ought to regulate our conduct. It is still the root
that bears gall and wormwood; Deuteronomy. xxix. 18.
and in exact proportion to the quantity of this poisonous weed, which we
ourselves have infused into our cup, we must expect to drink the waters of
bitterness. If the foolishness of man did not pervert his ways, his heart would
have no occasion to fret against the Lord. He would enjoy competent
satisfaction in every situation of life; and under its unavoidable evils, would
derive consolation from religion and virtue. -- Indeed, of every evil which we
now endure, of those evils which we look upon to be the appointment of
providence, as well as of others, sin is ultimately the cause; as it was man's
revolt from God, which gave rise originally to those evils, and which rendered
the chastisements we undergo, in this state of discipline, necessary, even for
the sons of God. -- But at present, we confine our observation to those
miseries of which men are the immediate procurers to themselves; and from them
alone, we find sufficient reason to consider sin as the capital foe to man; as
the great troubler and di^^urber of his life. To Providence, then, let us look
up with ^everence. On sin let our indignation be vented; and, what is of more
consequence, against sin and all its approaches, let our utmost caution be
employed. As we proceed through the different paths of life, let us accustom
ourselves to beware of s^^, as the hidden snake lurking among the grass, from
whose fatal touch we must fly in haste, if we would not experience its sting.
-- Too many have no just apprehensions of this danger. Fools, said the wise man
make a mock at sin. A fool indeed he must be, who dares to think lightly of it.
He shows not only the depravity of his heart, but, what perhaps he will be more
ashamed to be charged with, he shows his ignorance of the world. He shows that
he knows not, he understands not, even his worldly interest, nor the interest
and happiness of human society.

In the second place, let us learn from what has been set forth, one of the
most awful and important of all truths, the reality of a divine government
exercised over the world. Blind must that man be, who discerns not the most
striking marks of it, in the doctrine which has been under our review. If there
be a skeptic, who contends, that unrestrained liberty in the gratification of
desire is given to man; that in the sight of his Creator, all actions are
equal; and that no rule of moral conduct has been prescribed, or by any
penalty enforced; in order to confute such a man, we have not recourse to
reasonings, but simply appeal to plain and obvious facts. We bid him look only
to the life of man; and take notice how every vice, is by the constitution of
things, connected with misery. We bid him trace the history of any one, with
whose conduct he had particular occasion to be acquainted; and observe, whether
the chief misfortunes which pursued him were not brought upon him by his own
misbehaviour. We bid him remark in the history of nations, whether public
virtue has not always exalted them; and whether licentiousness and crimes have
not paved the way for their ruin. These are testimonies to the truth of
religion, which cannot by any sophistry be evaded. This is a voice, which
speaks its warnings loud and strong to every heart.

The system upon which the divine government at present proceeds, plainly is,
that men's own wickedness should be appointed to correct them; that sinners
should be snared in the work of their hands, and sunk in the pit which
themselves had dug: that the backslider in heart should be silled with his
own ways. -- Of all the plan; which could have been devised for the government
of the world, this approves itself to reason, as the wise^t and most worthy of
God; so to frame the constitution of things, that the divine laws should in a
manner execute themselves, and carry their sanctions in their own bosom. When
the vices of men require punishment to be inflicted, the Almighty is at no loss
for ministers of justice. A thousand instruments of vengeance are at his
command; innumerable arrows are always in his quiver. But such is the profound
wisdom of his plan, that no peculiar interposals of power are requisite. He has
no occasion to step from his throne, and to interrupt the order of nature. With
that Majesty and solemnity which befits omnipotence, He pronounces, Ephraim is
joined to his, idols; let him alone; Ho^^a iv. 17.
He leaves transgressors to their own guilt, and punishment follows of course.
Their sins do the work of justice. They lift the scourge; and with every stroke
which they inflict on the criminal, they mix this severe admonition, that as he
is only reaping the fruit of his own actions, he deserves all that he suffers.
-- From what has been said, I might take occasion,

In the third place, to show the injustice of our charging Providence with a
promiscuous and unequal distribution of its favors, among the good and the
bad. That unequal distribution takes place in appearance only, not in reality.
The whole conduct of Providence sufficiently marks, which of those classes of
men it blesses and protects. The prosperity of sinners is no more than a
deceitful show. The great materials of happiness are provided for the virtuous;
and evil never faits to pursue the wicked. I shall close the discourse with
observing,

In the fourth and last place, the necessity which plainly arises from our
present condition, of looking up to God for direction and aid, in the conduct
of life. The result of the whole doctrine I have now delivered is, that man's
happiness or misery is, in a great measure, put into his own hands. In vain he
complains of Providence. If his heart fret against the Lord, it is only because
his foolishness has perverted his way: for on himself, and his own behavior,
it d^pends, to be free of those miseries which harrass the wicked. -- But alas!
when we say that this depends upon man, on what uncertain ground do we place
his security? Is man, when left to himself, equal to this high trust that is
reposed in him, this important charge that is committed to him, of attaining
happiness, by wise and irreproachable conduct? Inconstant as he is in virtue,
variable in his resolutions, soft and yielding in his nature to a thousand
temptations; how shall he guide himself through such slippery and dangerous
paths as those of human life; where many hidden precipices surrounded him; many
false lights lead him astray; and where the consequence of every step he takes
may be destruction and ruin? -- Thankful (...) us be to heaven, that in this
situation, a merciful guide stretches out his hand to aid us; that a celestial
light shines upon us from above; that a divine Spirit is promised to illuminate
and strengthen us. Let us humbly request of Heaven, that this Spirit of the
Almighty may ever be our guide; never presum^^^ously trusting in our own
wisdom; but listening ^^tentively to the voice of God; and in all our ways
(...) knowledging Him who only can direct our steps. -- (...) on the whole, let
us hold fast the persuasion of (...) fundamental truths; -- that in all his
dispensati^^ (...) God is just and good; that the cause of all the (...) ^^bles
we suffer is in ourselves, not in him; that (...) is the surest guide to a
happy life; that he who forsakes this guide, enters upon the path of death; but
that he who walks uprightly, walks surely; and that he who keeps the
commandment, keeps his own soul.

SERMON XV. ON INTEGRITY AS THE GUIDE OF LIFE.
PROVERBS xi. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. --


RIGHTEOUSNESS and sin are, in this book of Proverbs. frequently contrasted
with each other, and the advantages of the former displayed. The righteous man
in shown to be more excellent than his neighbor, as the ways in which he walks
are ways of pleasantness, while the way of transgressors is hard. Honor is
repesented as attending the one, while shame is the portion of the other. The
path of the one leads to life; that of the other to destruction. In the text,
an advantage of righteousness is specified, which is not commonly attended to,
and which some will not readily allow that it possesses. We are told by the
wise man, that it affords light and direction to conduct, and will prove our
best guide through all the intricacies of life. The integrity of the upright
shall guide them; or, as it is added, to the same purpose, in a following
verse, the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way. There are many
who will admit, that integrity is an amiable quality; that it is entitled to
much respect, and in most cases ought to influence our behavior; who
nevertheless are unwilling to allow it the chief place in the direction of
their worldly conduct. They hold, that a certain artful sagacity, founded upon
knowledge of the world, is the best conductor of every one, who would be a
successful adventurer in life; and that a strict attention to integrity, as his
only guide, would often lead him into danger and distress. In opposition to
tenets of this kind, I now purpose to show, that amidst all perplexities and
dangers, there is no guide we can choose so safe, and so successful on the
whole, as the integrity of an upright mind; and that upon every trying
occasion, principles of probity and honor will conduct a good man through life
with more advantage, than if he were to act upon the most refined system of
worldly wisdom.

It will not take much time to delineate the character of the man of integrity,
as by its nature it is a plain one, and easily understood. He is one, who makes
it his constant rule to follow the road of duty, according as the word of God,
and the voice of his conscience, point it out to him. He is not guided merely
by affections, which may sometimes give the color of virtue to a loose and
unstable character. The upright man is guided by a fixed principle of mind,
which determins him to steem nothing but what is honorable; and to abhor
whatever is base and unworthy, in moral conduct. Hence you find him ever the
same; at all times, the trusty friend, the affectionate relation, the
conscientious man of business, the pious worshipper, the public spirited
citizen. He assumes no borrowed appearance. He seeks no mask to cover him; for
he acts no studied ^art; but he is in truth what he appears to be, full of
truth, candor, and humanity. In all his pursuits, he knows no path but the
fair and direct one; and would much rather fail of success, than attain it by
reproachful means. He never shows you a smiling countenance, while he mediates
evil against you in his heart. He never praises you among your friends; and
then joins in traducing you among your enemies. You will never find one part of
his character at variance with another. In his manners, he is simple and
unaffected; in all his proceedings, open and consistent. -- Such is the man of
integrity spoken of in the text. Let us now proceed to show, in what manner,
and with what effect, integrity serves for the guide of his life.

Every one, who has begun to make any progress in the world, will be sensible,
that to conduct himself in human affairs with wisdom and propriety, is often a
matter of no small difficulty. Amidst that variety of characters, of jarring
dispositions, and of interfering interests, which take place among those with
whom we have intercourse, we are frequently at a stand, as to the part most
prudent for us to choose. Ignorant of what is passing in the breasts of those
around us, we can form no more than doubtful conjectures concerning the events
that are likely to happen. They may take some turn altogether different from
the course in which we had imagined they were to run, and according to which we
had formed our plans. The slightest incident often shoots out into important
consequences, of which we were not aware. The labyrinth becomes so intricate,
that the most sagacious can lay hold on no clue to guide him through it: He
finds himself embarrassed, and at a loss how to act. -- In public and in
private life, in managing our own concerns, and in directing those of others,
the doubt started by the Wise man frequently occurs; Who knows what is good
for man in this life? -- While thus fatigued with conjecture, we remain
perplexed and undetermined in our choice; we are at the same time pulled to
different sides, by the various emotions which belong to our nature. On one
hand, pleasure allures us to what is agreeable; on the other, interest weighs
us down toward what seems gainful. Honor attracts us toward what is
splendid; and indolence inclines us to what is easy. In the consultations which
we hold with our own mind, concerning our conduct, how often are we thus
divided within ourselves; puzzled by the uncertainty of future events, and
distracted by the contest of different inclinations?

It is in such situations as these, that the principle of integrity interposes
to give light and direction. While worldly men fluctuate in the midst of those
perplexities which I have described, the virtuous man has one Oracle, to which
he resorts in every dubious case, and whose decisions he holds to be
infallible: He cousults his conscience. He listens to the voice of God. Were it
only on a few occasions that this Oracle could be consulted, its value would be
less. But it is a mistake to imagine, that its Responses are seldom given.
Hardly is there any material transaction whatever in human life, any important
question, that holds us in suspense as to practice, but the difference between
right and wrong will show itself; and the principle of integrity will, if we
listen to it impartially, give a clear decision. Whenever the mind is divided
within itself, conscience is seldom or never neutral. There is always one side
or other to which it leans. There is always one scale of the balance, into
which it throws the weight of some virtue; or some praise: of something that is
just and true lovely, honest, and of good report. These are the forms, which to
the observation of the upright man. By others they may be unseen or overlooked;
but in his eye, the luster of virtue outshines all other brightness, Wherever
this pole star directs him, he steadily holds his course. -- Let the issue of
that course be ever so uncertain; let his friends differ from him in opinion;
let his enemies clamor; he is not moved; his purpose is fixed. He asks but one
question of his heart, what is the most worthy and honorable part; what is the
part most becoming the station which he possesses, the character which he
wishes to bear the expectations which good men entertain of him? Being once
decided as to this, he hesitates no more. He shuts his ears against every
solicitation. He pursues the direct line of integrity, without turning either
to the right hand or to the left. It is the Lord who calls. Him I follow. Let
him order what seems good in his sight. -- It is in this manner that the
integrity of the upright acts as their guide.

But as, upon a superficial view, it may appear hazardous to place ourselves
entirely under such a guide, let us now proceed to consider what can be said in
defense of this plan of conduct, and what advantages serve to recommend it.

In the first place, I affirm, that the guidance of integrity is the safest
under which we can be placed; that the road in which it leads us is, upon the
whole, the freest from dangers. Perfect immunity from danger is not to be
expected in this life. We can chose no path, in which we may not meet with
disappointments and misfortunes. Our life, at the best, is a pilgrimage, and
perils surround it. Against these perils, the men of the world imagine that
craft and dexterity furnish the best defense; and if, in any instance, they
overreach the upright, they consider it as a manifest decision in favor of
their plan. But instead of resting on a few instances, let us take an extensive
survey of the course of human affairs. Let us enquire who the persons are that,
in all the different lines of life, have gone through the world with most
success; and we shall find, that the men of probity and honor form by far the
most considerable part of the list; we shall find that men of plain
understanding, acting upon fair and direct views, have much oftener prospered,
than men of the deepest policy, who were devoid of principle. How few are the
instances of persons who by fidelity, worth, and steadfast adherence to their
duty, have either lost their fortunes, or incurred general displeasure, in
times when human affairs were proceeding in their ordinary train? But how
numerous and frequent are the examples of those whose prospects have been
blasted, whose circumstances have been ruined, and their names sunk into
contempt by vice and dishonesty?

The man of the world aims at higher things, and more rapid success, than the
man of moderation and virtue. But at the same time, he incurs greater risques
and dangers. No calculation of probabilities can ensure safety to him who is
acting a deceitful part. Amidst the unforeseen vicissitudes of the world, he
has to dread, not only disappointment to his plans, but the miseries also which
detected fallacies may bring on his dead. He walks on the edge of precipices,
where a single false step may be fatal. He follows a wandering light, which, if
it fail of guiding him by a short path to the Palace of ambition, lands him in
the pit, or the lake. Whereas he who follows the guidance of integrity, walks
in the high road on which the light of the sun shines. He sees before him the
Habitation of peace to which his steps are directed; and if he be longer of
arriving at it, he is sure of neither wandering far astray, nor of meeting on
his road with any forms of unusual terror. -- Let it be always remembered that
the principle of integrity which directs a good man, is far from excluding
prudence in the conduct of life. It implies no improvident or thoughtless
simplicity. On the contrary, it is closely connected with true wisdom. A man of
enlarged capacity, and extensive views, is always upright. Craft is merely the
supplement of inferior abilities. It characterizes a narrow comprehension, and
a little mind. -- As the path of integrity is on the whole the safest path of
conduct; so,

In the second place, it is unquestionably the most honorable. Integrity is
the foundation of all that is high in character among mankind. Other qualities
may add to its splendour; but if this essential requisite be wanting, all their
luster fades. Were I drawing the character of one who claimed the admiration of
the world; and after I had ascribed to him eloquence, valor, and every
endowment that is most shining and captivating, did I add, that he was a man of
too much art to be trusted, I appeal to every one, whether, by this single
stroke, the whole character would not be sunk and degraded? An interested and
crafty man may perhaps rise into influence and high station; he may be a rich
and a powerful, but will never be a great, man. He may be ^eared, and
externally honored and courted; but in the secret thoughts of men he finds no
respect. We all feel, that magnanimous sentiments cannot dwell in the same
breast with selfishness and deceit.

He who rests upon an internal principle of virtue and honor, will act with a
dignity and a boldness, of which they are incapable who are wholly guided by
interest. He is above those timid suspicions, and cautious restraints, which
fetter and embarrass their conduct. That firmness which the consciousness of
rectitude in spirits, gives vigor and force to his exertions on every great
occasion. It adds double weight to all the abilities of which he is possessed. It
even supplies the place of those abilities in which he is defective. They who
oppose him are obliged to honor him. They look up to him with a secret awe, as
to one who moves above them in a superior sphere; regardless of their good or
ill opinion, of their promises or their threatenings; like one of those
celestial luminaries which holds its course through its orbit, without being
affected by any commotions among the elements below. Such a man is trusted, and
relied upon, as well as esteemed, because all know where to find him, and upon
what system he acts. He attaches friends and followers to himself, without
courting them; and though his progress toward fame should be slow, and
interrupted at first by crooked arts, it is nevertheless certain and sure. The
public may be misled for a while, in judging of real merit; but it is seldom
unjust at the last. As persons continue to come forward to view, and to act
their part in trying circumstances, their characters are at length sully
ascertained; and, almost always, rated as they deserve. How corrupt soever the
world may be, they cannot with hold approbation from him, whose conduct is
marked by unifor^^ integrity and honor. Enemies he will have; but the public
favors him; the multitude of men wish him success; and destine him, in their
thoughts, to every step of his preferment, before he arrives at it.

In the third place, the plan of conduct, on which the man of integrity
proceeds is the most comfortable; that is, attended with the great at
satisfaction in a man's own mind. Amidst the various and perplexing events of
life, it is of singular advantage to be kept free from doubt, as to the part
most proper to be chosen. He who consults nothing but worldly interest must,
upon every turn of fortune, undergo much painful suspense. He is obliged to
listen with anxious ear to every whisper of report; and upon every new aspect
which the face of affairs assumes, must study how to place himself in a new
posture of defense. But the man of principle is a stranger to these inward
troubles. His time is not lost; nor his temper fretted by long and anxious
consultations. One light always shines upon him from above. One path, the path
of integrity, always opens clear and distinct to his view. -- But this is not
his only advantage, to be freed from embarrassments, by having placed himself
under the charge of one constant guide. He is also rewarded with the sense of
having chosen his guide well and wisely. He is delivered from all inward
upbraidings, from all misgivings of mind, from all alarms founded on the dread
of discovery and disgrace. A good conscience enables him to look back on the
part which he has acted with satisfaction; and to look forward to the issue
which it may bring, without concern. It is in the case of one issue only, that
the man who acts from worldy interest can enjoy satisfaction; that is when his
designs have succeeded according to his wish. But it is the felicity of the man
who acts under the direction of integrity, that in every issue, he has
something to comfort him. Though success has failed him, the consolation
remains of having done his duty, and studied to approve himself to God.

This reference of all his actions to divine approbation, furnishes another
source of satisfaction and peace. He looks up, with pleasing hope, to a
Protector in the heavens, who loves righteousness, and whose countenance
beholds the upright. The man of worldly wisdom is conscious of having no
title to the favor of that high administration which rules the universe. By
quitting the path of righteousness he has left that straight road, in which God
had appointed him to walk. He has taken the direction of his way to himself;
and chosen to be his own guide and master. To his own abilities, therefore,
such as they are, he must trust; and is become wholly responsible for the issue
of his conduct. But the man of virtue has committed his way to the Lord. He
follows the divine signal. He co-operates with the divine purpose. The power
which sways the universe is engaged on his side. By natural consequence, he has
ground to expect, that any seeming disappointments which he may now incur,
shall be overruled at the end to some salutary effect. Hence, that peace of
God keeping the heart, to which worldly men are strangers Hence a degree of
firmness and resolution in conduct, which it is impossible for them to possess.
Especially when we add,

In the fourth and last place, that he who thus pursues a course of integrity,
has always in his view the prospect of immortal rewards. That surely is the
wisest direction of conduct, which is most amply recompensed at last. But what
recompense can worldly wisdom bestow, comparable to what is promised by the
gospel to them who, by patient continuance in well doing, look for glory,
honor, and immortality? -- The recompense indeed is distant; but the hope of
it is present; and hope is one of the most powerful principles of human action.
Let a man be firm in the belief that he is acting under the immediate
protection of Heaven, and that through all eternity he shall be rewarded for
what he now performs; and, as far as this belief is prevalent, his conduct will
be steady and determined. Wherever religion directs him to hold his course, he
will advance with intrepidity. He will submit to restraints without reluctance.
He will meet dangers without fear. To every motive which reason suggests in
favor of virtue, the hope of life eternal adds supernatural strength. --
Accordingly, in the behavior of many holy men under the most trying
circumstances of distress, we behold this effect eminently exemplified. It
appears, with much luster, in the spirited and magnanimous sentiments of the
Apostle Paul, when he had the prospect of death before him. Behold I go bound
in the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there,
save that the Holy Ghost witnesses that bonds and afflictions abide me. But
none of these things move me; neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that
I may finish my course with joy. Acts xx. 22.
-- I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I
have fought a good fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteous^ess, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day. Timothy iv. 6.


Thus I have endeavored to show in what manner the integrity of the upright
guides them; and what the advantages are of placing ourselves under its
guidance. If it be the line of safety, or the line of honor, which we choose to
pursue; if we consult our present comfort, or look forward to future rewards;
in all these respects, the course which integrity points out is by far the most
eligible.

It is a great recommendation of the guidance offered to us by integrity, that
it is easily understood by all men. Plans of worldly policy are deep and
intricate; and experience shows how often the ablest persons are mistaken in
the measures which they adopt for carrying them on. But when men's intentions
are fair and upright, it will be found, that a moderate share of understanding
and attention is all that is requisite, for conducting themselves with safety
and propriety. Providence never intended, that the art of living happily in
this world should depend on that deep penetration, that acute sagacity, and
those refinements of thought, which few possess. It has dealt more graciously
with us; and made happiness to depend on uprightness of intention, much more
than on extent of capacity. For the most part, the first sentiment which
strikes a good man, concerning what he ought or ought not to do, is the
soundest, and suggests the best and wisest counsel. When he hesitates, and
begins to deliberate how far his duty, or his honor, can be reconciled to what
seems his interest, he is on the point of deviating into a dangerous path. --
At the same time, it is of great consequence, that he who seeks to surrender
his conduct to the direction of integrity, should be well apprized of what true
integrity requires. Let him guard against burdening conscience unnecessarily;
lest a superstitious regard to trifles lead him to relax in matters of higher
obligation. Let him avoid minute scrupulosity, on the one hand. Let him keep at
a distance from loose casuistry, on the other. But when he is satisfied that
his conscience has been well informed, let him, without wavering, adhere to its
dictates in the whole of his conduct. This will prove the truest wisdom both
for this world and the next. For he who walks uprightly walks surely. The
path of the ^^sts as the shining light; And it shall shine more and more unto
the perfect day.

SERMON XVI. ON SUBMISSION TO THE DIVINE WILL.
JOB ii. 10. -- Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil?


FEW subjects of religions exhortation are of more general concern than those
which respect the distresses incident to human life. For no society, no family,
no person, can expect to be long exempted from them; and when we speak of the
prosperous, we can only mean those who are more rarely subject to them than
others. Now, under those distresses, religion performs two offices: It teaches
us how we ought to bear them; and it assists us in thus bearing them. Materials
for both are found in the words of the text, which contain a sentiment so
natural and just, as to carry conviction to every reasonable mind. They were
the words of Job, at a time when, to his other calamities, this domestic
affliction was added, that one, who ought to have assuaged and soothed his
sorrows, provoked his indignation by an impious speech. Thou speak, Job
replies, as one of the foolish women speaks: What? shall we receive good at
the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? -- Three instructions naturally
arise from the text: First, That this life is a mixed state of good and evil:
Secondly, That both the goods and the evils in it proceed from God: And,
thirdly, That there are just reasons for our receiving with patience the evils
of life, from the same hand which bestows its goods.

I. This life is a mixed state of good and evil. This is a matter of fact,
which will be denied by none, and on which it is not necessary to bestow much
illustration. It is evident to the slightest inspection, that nothing here is
unallayed and pure. Every man's state is checquered with alternate griefs and
joys, disappointment and success. No condition is altogether stable. No life
preserves always the same tenor. The vicissitudes of the world sometimes bring
forward the afflicted into comfortable circumstances; and often trouble the joy
of the prosperous. This is the train in which human affairs have ever been
found to proceed; and in which we may expect them always to go on.

But though this be universally admitted in speculation, and often confessed in
discourse, the misfortune is, that few think of applying it to their own case.
The bulk of mankind discover as much confidence in prosperity, and as much
impatience under the least reverse, as if Providence had first given them
assurance that their prosperity was never to change, and afterward had cheated
their hopes. Whereas, what reason ought to teach us, is, to adjust our mind to
the mixed state in which we find ourselves placed; never to presume, never to
despair; to be thankful for the goods which at present we enjoy, and to expect
the evils that may succeed. -- Thou have been admitted to partake of the feast
of life. Its good things are distributed. in various portions, among the
guests. Thou have had thine allotted share. Complain not, when thy portion is
removed. It is not permitted to any, to remain always at the banquet.

II. We are taught by the text, that both the goods and the evils which compose
this mixed state, come from the hand of God. A little reflection may convince
us, that, in God's world, neither good nor evil can happen by chance. If there
were any one moment, in which God quitted the reins of the universe, and
suffered any power to interfere with his administration, it is evident, that
from that moment, the measures of his government must become disjointed and
incomplete. He who governs all things, must govern continually; and govern the
least things as well as the greatest. He never slumbers nor sleeps. There are
no void spaces, no broken plans, in his administration; no blessings that drop
upon us without his intention; nor any crosses that visit us unsent by him. I
am the Lord, and there is none else. I form the light, and create darkness, I
moke peace, and create evil. I the Lord do all these things. Isaiah xlv. 6, 7.


How it has come to pass, that this life should contain such a mixture of goods
and evils, and that the mixture too should be of God's appointment, gives rise
to a difficult inquiry. For how can any thing but what is good proceed from the
God of love? Can darkness issue from the source of light? or can it be any
satisfaction to the Father of mercies, to behold the sorrows of creatures whom
he has made? -- Here there was room for much perplexity, till revelation
informed us, that the mixture of evils in man's estate is owing to man himself.
Had he continued as God originally made him, he would have received nothing but
good from his Creator. His apostasy and corruption opened the gates of the
taben ac^^^^ darkness. Misery issued forth, and has ever s^^^e pursued him. In
the present condition of his nature, that misery is partly punishment, partly
trial. He is become incapable of bearing uninterrupted prosperity; and by the
mixture of evils in his lot, merciful designs are carried on for his
improvement and restoration.

What the text leads us at present to consider is, the effect that will follow
from imitating the example of Job, and refering to the hand of the Almighty,
the evils which we suffer, as well as the good, which we enjoy. Such a
reference of the distressful events of our life to the appointment of Heaven,
not only is a duty which piety requires, but tends also to mitigate distress,
and to suggest consolation. For to dwell, as is too commonly done, upon the
instruments and subordinate means of our trouble, is frequently the cause of
much grief, and much sin. When we view our sufferings as proceeding merely from
our fellow creatures, the part which they have acted in bringing them upon us,
is often more grating than the suffering itself. The unreasonableness, perhaps,
of an enemy, the treachery of a friend, the ingratitude or insolence of one
whom we had much obliged, add weight to a load laid upon us by means so
provoking. The thoughts of their malignity, or of our own neglect in guarding
against it, serve to poison the sore. Whereas, if instead of looking to men, we
beheld the cross as coming from God, these aggravating circumstances would
effect us less; we would feel no more than our proper burden; we would submit
to it more patiently; and many resources would open to us, as shall in a little
be shown, from thinking of the hand that lays it on. Had Job, when despoiled of
all his substance, thought of nothing but the Chaldeans and Sabeans who robbed
him, with what violent passions would he have been transported, and with what
eager desires of revenge tormented? Whereas, considering them as rods and
instruments only in the divine hand, and receiving the correction as from the
Almighty himself, the tumult of his mind subsided; and with respectful
composure he could say, The Lord gave; and the Lord has taken away: Blessed be
the name of the Lord. This leads me,

III. To consider the l^^t, and most important instruction, arising from the
text; namely, that there are many reasons why we, who receive good from the
hand of God, should receive with patience the evils which he is pleased to
inflict. This is strongly conveyed by that interrogatory form of speech, in
which the sentiment of Job is expressed: What? shall we receive good at the
hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In order to unfold all that is
contained in this appeal made to every man's conscience, let us consider,

In the first place, that the good things which God has bestowed, afford
sufficient evidence for our believing, that the evils which he sends, are not
causelessly or wantonly inflicted. Did we live in a world which bore the marks
of a malicious or cruel governor, there might be reason for distrusting every
step of his conduct. But in the world which we inhabit, we behold, on the
contrary, plain marks of predominant goodness. We behold the structure of the
universe, the order of nature, the general course of Providence, obviously
arranged with a benevolent regard to the welfare of men. All the art and
contrivance of which the divine works are full, point to this end; and the more
they are explored, create the firmer belief, that the goodness of the Deity
gave rise to the system of creation. What is the conclusion to be thence drawn,
but that in such parts of the divine administration as appear to us harsh and
severe, the same goodness continues to preside, though exercised in a hidden
and mysterious manner?

Let me desire you to consider, whether, if some powerful friend had placed you
in an opulent and comfortable station, and, in the general conduct of your
affairs, had discovered the most disinterested kindness, you would not ascribe
any occasional discouragements you received, to some unknown reason or cause,
rather than to his unfaithfulness or cruelty? Ought not the experience which we
have had, and the discovery which all nature affords, of the divine goodness,
lead us to put a like construction on the evils which we suffer from a hand
that has so frequently loaded us with good? -- Have we forgotten, in the midst
of our complaints, who brought us unto the light of day; who watched over our
helpless infancy; who reared our growing childhood; and through ten thousand
surrounding dangers, has been our protector and guardian until this day? How
often has he rescued us from sickness and death, and made our hearts glad with
unexpected comforts? Now, that some cloud is thrown over our prosperity, or
some blessing withdrawn, in which for a time we had rejoiced, can we imagine
that there is no good cause for this change of his proceeding? Shall we suspect
that this nature is entirely altered? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has
he in anger shut up his tender mercies? No, let us say with the Psalmist. This
is my infirmity; but I will remember the works of the Lord. I will remember the
years of the right hand of the most High. Ps. lxxvii. ix. 10.
-- One signal work of the most High, at least, let us remember, and rejoice in
the remembrance of it; even that final remedy which he has provided for all the
evils occasioned by sin, in the redemption of the world accomplished by Jesus
Christ. He who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, will
he, in any case, wantonly afflict the children of men with superfluous and
unnecessary sorrows? Is not this a proof so satisfactory, so express and
demonstrative, of the gracious purposes of God, as should dispose us to take in
good part, every thing which proceeds from him? Consider,

In the second place, that the good things we receive from God are undeserved,
the evils we suffer are justly merited. Every reasonable person must feel the
weight of this consideration, for producing patience and submission. For,
though to suffer at any rate be grievous, yet to suffer unjustly, is doubly
galling. Whereas, when one receives a mixed portion, whereof the goods are
above his deserts, and the evils below his deserts, to complain, in such a
case, is unreasonable; there is no more ground for being thankful. -- All, it
is true, have not deserved evil equally. Yet all of us deserve it moreor less;
and to merit good at the hand of the Lord, is what none of us can pretend. At
the best we are but unprofitable servants. Even this is more than we are
entitled to claim. For if God were to enter into judgment with us, who could
stand before him? who could justify himself in his sight? When the most
inoffensive compare their conduct with God's holy law; when they reflect upon
the duties they have omitted, and the actual guilt they have contracted, they
will find more reason to accuse themselves, than to complain of the divine
chastisements. Whatever innocence any of us may plead, nay, whatever merit we
may claim, with respect to men and the world, we suffer no more than what we
deserve from the Governor of the world; and of his displeasure, we know that
the wrath of man is no other than the instrument.

Not only all of us have done evil, but, what ought to be particularly attended
to, God has a just title to punish us for it. Although a man know that he
deserves punishment, yet he will not allow every one to inflict it. A child
will submit to his parents, a servant to his master, a subject to the
magistrate, when he would not bear correction from another hand. But no parent
can have so complete a right to authority over his children, no master over his
servants, no magistrate over his subjects, as the Almighty has over us. When
we were born, we brought nothing with us into God's world. During our
continuance in it, we have lived on the good things which God was pleased to
lend us; and of which, God and our own conscience know that we have made but a
sorry improvement. When he thinks proper to take any of them away, no wrong is
done us; for they were not ours. To have enjoyed them so long, was a favor. To
enjoy them always, was what we neither deserved, nor had any title to expect.

In the third place, the good things which at different times we have received
and enjoyed, are much greater than the evils which we suffer. Of this fact, I
am sensible it will be difficult to persuade the afflicted. But would they
weigh, in a fair balance, the whole of their circumstances, they would find it
true. Whatever persons feel at the present, makes so strong an impression upon
them, as very commonly to obliterate the memory of all the past. When one is
oppressed with some painful disease in his body, or wrung with some sore
distress of mind, every former comfort, at that moment, goes for nothing. Life
is beheld in all its gloom. A dark cloud seems to hang over it; and it is
reviled, as no other than a scene of wretchedness and sorrow. But this is to be
unjust to human life, as well as ungrateful to its author. -- Let me only
desire you to think how many days, how many months, how many years, you have
passed in health, and ease, and comfort; how many pleasurable feelings you have
had; how many friends you have enjoyed; how many blessings, in short, of
different kinds you have tasted; and you will be forced to acknowledge, that
more materials of thanksgiving present themselves than of lamentation and
complaint. -- These blessings, you will say, are past. But though past, ought
they to be gone from your remembrance? Do they merit no place, in the
comparative estimate of the goods and evils of your state? Did you, could you
expect, that in this mutable world, any temporal joy was to last for ever? Has
gratitude no influence to form your minds to a calm acquiescence in your
Benefactor's appointments? What can be more reasonable than to say. Having in
former times received so many good things from the hand of God, shall I not
now, without murmuring, receive the few evils which it pleases him to send?

In the fourth place, not only the goods of life are upon the whole greater
than its evils; but the evils which we suffer are seldom, or never, without
some mixture of good. As there is no condition on earth of pure unmixed
felicity, so there is none so miserable, as to be destitute of every comfort.
Entire and complete misery, if ever it take place, is of our own procuring, not
of God's sending. None but the most gross and atrocious sinners can be in such
a situation, as to discover no ray of relief or hope. In the ordinary
distresses of life, it is generally our own folly and and infirmity which, upon
the loss of some one blessing that we had highly prized, deprives us of
satisfaction in all other things. Many of our calamities are purely imaginary,
and self-created; arising from rivalship or competition with others, and from
false opinions of the importance of objects, to which custom and fashion have
annexed and idle value. Where these mistaken opinions once corrected by reason,
the evil would disappear, and contentment would resume its place. With respect
to those calamities which are inflicted by God, his providence has made this
wise and merciful constitution, that after the first shock, the burden by
degrees is lightened. Time brings a gentle and powerful opiate to all
misfortunes. What is very violent cannot last long; and what lasts long we
become accustomed to bear. Every situation that is permanent, at length is felt
to be tolerable. The mind accomodates itself to it; and by degrees regains its
usual tranquillity. Hence the greatest part of the evils of life are more
terrible in the previous apprehension, than in the actual feeling; and it
seldom happens but in one corner or other, something is found on which the mind
can lay hold for its relief.

How many, for instance, do we behold around us, straightened in their worldy
circumstances, and yet finding the means to live cheerfully, with poverty and
peace in the same habitation? If we are deprived of friends whom we tenderly
loved, are there not still some remaining, from whom we may expect much
comfort? If our bodies are afflicted with sore disease, have we not reason to
be thankful that our mind continues vigorous and entire; that we are in a
situation to look around us for whatever can afford us ease; and that after the
decay of this frail and mouldering tabernacle, we can look forward to a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens? -- In the midst of all distresses,
there remains to every sincere Christian, that mixture of pure and genuine
consolation, which springs from the promises and hopes of the gospel. Consider,
I beseech you, what a singularly happy distinction this makes in your
situation, beyond the state of those who, under the various troubles of life,
are left without hope, and without God in the world; without any thing to look
t^, but a train of unknown causes and accidents, in which they see no light nor
comfort. -- Thank the Father of mercies, that into all the evils he sends, he
infuses this joyful hope, that the sufferings of the present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in the end, to the
virtuous and good.

In the fifth and last place, as the evils which we suffer are thus eleviated
by a mixture of good; so we have reason to believe, that the evils themselves
are, in many respects, good. When borne with patience and dignity, they improve
and enoble our character. They bring into exercise several of the manly and
heroic virtues; and by the constancy and fidelity with which we support our
trials on earth, prepare us for the highest rewards in heaven. -- It has always
been found that the present constitution of human nature cannot bear
uninterrupted prosperity, without being corrupted by it. The poisonous weed^
which spring up in that too luxuriant soil, require the hand of adversity to
extirpate them. It is the experience of sorrow and distress that subdues the
arrogance of pride cames the violence of passion, softens the hardness of the
selfish heart, and humanizes the temper to feel for the woes of others. Many
have had reason to say, that it was good for them to be afflicted. Isalm cxix.
71.
When men take the timbr^l and the harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ,
they are apt to say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? But when they are
holden in cords of affliction, then he shows them their work, and their
transgressions that they have exceeded. He opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity. Job xxi. 12. xxxvi.
8.
Is his case to be deplored as highly calamitous, who, by forfeiting some
transient enjoyments of the world, purchases lasting improvement in piety and
virtue, and exchanges a few of the good things of this life for the better
things of another?

Influenced by such considerations as these, let us look up with reverence to
the great D^^poser of events; and under any distress with which he is pleased
to visit us, let us utter no other voice but this; Shall we receive good at the
hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? -- Men are too often ingenious in
making themselves miserable, by aggravating to their own fancy, beyond bounds,
all the evils which they endure. They compare themselves with none but those
whom they imagine to be more happy; and complain that upon them alone has
fallen the whole load of human sorrows. Would they look with a more impartial
eye on the world, they would see themselves surrounded with sufferers; and find
that they are only drinking out of that mixed cup, which Providence has
prepared for all -- I will restore your daughter again to life, said the
Eastern sage, to a prince who grieved immoderately for the loss of a beloved
child, provided, you are able to engrave on her tomb the names of three persons
who have never mourned. The prince made inquiry after such persons; but found
the inquiry vain, and was silent. -- To every reasonable person who retains the
belief of religious principles, many alleviating circumstances, and many
arguments for patience, will occur under every distress. If we rest on this
firm persuasion. That there is a wise and just Providence which disposes of all
events, we shall have reason to conclude, that nothing happens to us here
without some good design. Trusting that a happy termination shall at last
arrive to the disorders of our present state, we shall be enabled, amidst all
the varieties of fortune, to preserve that equanimity which befits Christians;
and under every trial to say. It is the Lord; let him do what seems good in
his sight!

SERMON XVII. ON FRIENDSHIP.
PROVERBS xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend; forsake not. --


WHATEVER relates to the behavior of men in their social character, is of
great importance in religion. The duties which spring from that character, form
many branches of the great law of charity, which is the favorite precept of
Christianity. They, therefore, who would separate such duties from a religious
spirit, or who at most treat them as only the inferior parts of it, do a real
injury to religion. They are mistaken friends of piety, who, under the notion
of exalting it, place it in a sort of insulated corner, disjoined from the
ordinary affairs of the world, and the connections of men with one another. On
the contrary, true piety influences them all. It acts as a vivifying spirit,
which animates and enlivens, which rectifies and conducts them. It is no less
friendly to men than zealous for the honor of God; and by the generous
affections which it nourishes, and the beneficent influence which it exerts on
the whole of conduct, is fully vindicated from every reproach which the infidel
would throw upon it. -- In this view, I am now to discourse on the nature and
duties of virtuous friendship, as closely connected with the true spirit of
religion. It is a subject which the inspired philosopher, who is the author of
this book of proverbs, has thought worthy of his repeated notice; and in many
passages has bestowed the highest elogiums on friendship among good men. As
ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend
by hearty counsel. As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance
of his friend. Make sure of thy friend; for faithful are the wounds of a
friend. A friend loves at all times; and a brother is born for adversity.
There is a friend that sticks closer than a brother, -- Thine own friend, and
thy father's friend, it is said in the text, forsake not.

I must begin the subject, by observing, that there are among mankind
friendships of different kinds, or, at least, connections which assume that
name. When they are no more than confederacies of bad men, they ought to be
called conspiracies, rather than friendships. Some bond of common interest,
some league against the innocent and unsuspecting, may have united them for a
time. But they are held together only by a rope of sand. At bottom they are all
rivals, and hostile to one annother. Their friendship can subsist no longer
than interest cements them. Every one looks with a jealous eye on his supposed
friend; and watches the first opportunity to desert, or to betray.

Friendships too there are of a different kind, and of a more respectable
nature, formed by the connection of political parties. It is not, pe^haps, on
selfish or crooked designs that such friendships are originally founded. Men
have been associa^ed together by some public interest, or general cause, or for
defense against some real or imagined danger; and connections thus formed,
often draw men into close union, and inspire for a season no small degree of
cordial attachment. When upon just and honorable principles this union is
founded, it has proved, on various occasions, favorable to the cause of
liberty and good order among mankind. At the same time, nothing is more ready
to be abused than the name of public spirit, and a public cause. It is a name,
under which private interest is often sheltered, and selfish designs are
carried on. The unwary allured by a specious appearance; and the hea^ of
faction usurps the place of the generous warmth of friendship.

It is not of such friendships, whether of the laudable or the suspicious kind,
that I am now to discourse; but of private friendships, which grow neither out
of interested designs, nor party zeal; but which flow from that similarity of
dispositions, that corresponding harmony of minds, which endears some person to
our heart, and make us take as much part in his circumstances, fortunes, and
fate, as if they were our own. The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of
David; and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 1 Samuel xviii. 1.
Such friendships certainly are not unreal; and for the honor of human nature,
it is to be hoped are not altogether unfrequent among mankind. -- Happy it is,
when they take root in our early years; and are engrafted on the ingenuous
sensibility of youth. Friendships then contracted, retain to the last a
tenderness and warmth, seldom possessed by friendships that are formed in the
riper periods of life. The remembrance of ancient and youthful connections
melts every human heart; and the dissolution of of them is, perhaps, the most
painful feeling to which we are exposed here below. -- But at whatever period
of life friendships are formed, as long as they continue sincere and
affectionate, they form, undoubtedly, one of the greatest blessings we can
enjoy. By the pleasing communication of all our sentiments which they prompt,
they are justly said to double our pleasures, and to divide our sorrows. They
give a brighter sunshine to the gay incidents of life; and they enlighten the
gloom of its darker hours. A faithful friend, it is justly and beautifully
said, by one of the Apocryphal writers is the medicine of life. Eccles. vi. 16.
A variety of occasions happe^^ when to pour forth the heart to one whom we
love and trust, is the chief comfort, perhaps the only relief, we can enjoy.
Miserable is he who, shut up within the narrow enclosure of selfish interest,
has no person to whom he can at all times, with full confidence, expand his
soul.

Since cordial friendship is so great a blessing to human life, let us proceed
to consider what duties it requires, and by what methods it may be cultivated
to most advantage. The fundamental qualities of true friendship are, constancy
and fidelity. Without these material ^ngredients, it is of no value. An
inconstant man is not capable of friendship. He may perhaps have affections
which occasionally glow in his heart; which excite fondness for amiable
qualities; or connect him with seeming attachment to one whom he esteems, or to
whom he has been obliged. But after these feelings have lasted for a little,
either fancied interest alienates him, or some new object attracts him; and he
is no longer the same person to those whom he once loved. A man of this
inconstant mind cannot be said to have any mind at all. For where there is no
fixedness of moral principle, occasional feelings are of no value; mind is of
no effect; and with such persons it is never desirable to have any connection.
Where constancy is wanting, there can be no fidelity, which is the other basis
of friendship. For all friendship supposes entire confidence and trust;
supposes the seal of secrecy to be inviolable; supposes promises and engagments
to be sacred; and no advantage of our own to be pursued, at the expense of our
friend's honor. An inconstant man, is despicable. A faithless man, is bas^^*

But supposing neither constancy nor fidelity to be altogether wanting, still
however friendship is in hazard of suffering from the follies, and unreasonable
humors, to which all of us are liable. It is to be regarded as a tender plant
in an unfavourable foil, which in order to its flourishing, requires to be
re^^^ed and nursed with care. The following directions may be of use for
promoting its cultivation, and preserving it from whatever might be apt to
blast and wither it.

In the first place, let me advise you not to expect perfection in any with
whom you contract friendship. It holds in general, with respect to all worldy
pursuits, that the more moderate our expectations are, they are likely to be
the more successful. If, in any situation of life, we hope to possess complete
happiness, we may depend on receiving mortifications. If, in any person, we
trust to find nothing but perfection, we may be assured that, on longer
acquaintance, we shall meet with disappointments. In the case of friendship,
this admonition is the more necessary to be given, as a certain warmth and
enthusiasm belong to it, which are apt to carry us beyond the bounds of nature.
In young minds, especially, a disposition of this kind is often ^^^d to take
place. They form to themselves rom^^^ (...) ^eas, gathered perhaps from
fictitious histo^^ (...) ^he high and heroic qualities which belong t^^^ (...)
nature. All those qualities, they ascribe, with (...) ^eserve or limitation, to
the person with whom they wish to enter into intimate friendship; and on the
least failure appearing, alienation instantly follows. Hence many a friendship,
hastily perhaps contracted, is as hastily dissolved, and disgust succeeds to
violent attachment. -- Remember, my friends, that a faithless character on
earth is a mere chimera. Many failings you experience in yourselves. Be not
surprised, when you discover the like in others, of whom you had formed the
highest opinion. The best and most estimable persons are they, in whom the
fewest material defects are found; and whose great and soild qualities
counterbalance the common infirmities of men. It is to these qualities you are
to look in forming friendships; to good sense and prudence, which constitute
the basis of every respectable character; to virtue, to good temper, to
steadiness of affection; and according to the union of those dispositions,
esteem yourselves happy in the friend whom you choose.

In the second place, I must admonish you not to be hurt by differences of
opinion arising in intercourse with your friends. It is impossible for these
not to occur. Perhaps no two persons were ever cast so exactly in the same
mould, as to think always in the same manner, on every subject, It was wisely
contrived by Providence, that diversity of sentiment should take place among
men, on purpose to exercise our faculties, and to give variety to human life.
Perpetual uniformity of ^^ought would become monotonous and insipid. -- When it
is with regard to trifles that diversity or con^rariety of opinions shows
itself, it is childish in the last degree, if this become the ground of
estranged affection. When f^^^ such a cause there arises any breach of
friendshi^^^ (...) in weakness is then discovered in a ^ortifyin^ (...). In
matters of serious moment, the sentimen^ (...) the best and worthiest may vary
from those of then friends, according as their lines of life diverge, or as
their temper, and habits of thought, present objects under different points of
view. But among candid and liberal minds, unity of affection will still be
preserved. No man has any title to erect his own opinions into an universal and
infallible stan^^rd: And the more enlarged that any man's mind is, the more
readily he will overlook difference in sentiments, as long as ^^e is persuaded
that the mind of his friend is upright, and that he follows the dictates of
conscience and integrity.

In the third place, It is material to the preservation of friendship, that
openness of temper and manners, on both hand^, be cultivated. Nothing more
certainly disolves friendship, than jealousy which ^^^s from darkness and
concealment. If your situation oblige you to take a different side from your
friend, do it openly. Avow your conduct; avow your motives; as far as honor
allows, disclose yourselves frankly; seek no cover from unnecessary and
mysterious secrecy. Mutual confidence is the soul of friendship. As soon as
that is destroyed or even impaired, it is only a show of friendship that
remains. What was once cordial intimacy, degenerates ^^st into formal civility.
Constraint on both sides next succeeds; and disgust or hatred soon follow. --
The maxim that has been laid down by certain crooked politicians, to behave to
a friend with the same guarded caution as we would do to an enemy, because it
is possible that he may one day become such, discovers a mind which never was
made for the enjoyments of friendship. It is a maxim which, not unreasonably I
admit, may find place in those political, and party friendships, of which I
before spoke, where personal advancement is always in view. But it, is
altogether inconsistent with the spirit of those friendships, which are formed,
and understood to be nourished, by the heart.

The fourth advice which I give is, To cultivate, in all intercourse among
friends, gentle and obliging manners. It is a common error to suppose, that
familiar intimacy supersedes ^ttention to the lesser duties of behavior; and
that under the notion of freedom, it may excuse a careless, or even a rough,
demeanor. On the contrary, an intimate connection can only be kept up, by a
constant with to be pleasing and agreeable. The nearer and closer that men are
brought together, the more frequent that the points of contact between them
become, there is the greater necessity for the surface b^ing smooth, and every
thing being removed that can grate o^ offend. -- Let no harshness, no
appearance of neglect, no supercilious a^^^ctation of superiority, occur in the
intercourse of friends. A tart reply, a proneness to rebuke, a captions and
contradictions spirit, are often known to embitter domestic life, and to set
friends at variance. In those smaller articles of behavior, where men are too
apt to be careless, and to indulge their humor without restraint, the real
character is often understood to break forth, and show itself. It is by no
means enough, that, in all matters of serious interest, we think ourselves
ready to prove the sincerity of our friendship. The ordinary tenor of life is
composed of small duties and offices, which men have occasion daily to perform;
and it is only by rendering daily behavior agreeable that we can long preserve
the comforts of friendship.

In the fifth place, let me caution you not to listen rashly to evil reports
against your friends. When upon proper grounds you have formed a connection, be
flow of believing any thing against the friend whom you have chosen. Remember,
that there is among mankind a spirit of malignity, which too often takes
pleasure in disturbing the society of those who appear to enjoy one another.
The scripture has warned us, that there is a whisperer who separateth chief
friends; there is a false witness who sows discord among brethren. Give not
therefore a ready ear to the officious insinuations of those who, under the
guise of friendly concern, come to admonish you, that you ought to stand on
your guard against those whom they see you disposed to trust. Consider,
whether, under this fair appearance, there may not lurk some secret envy and
rivalry, or some ^^^ncealed interest. Chase not every flying report. Suffer not
the poison of jealousy easily to taint your mind, and break your peace. A wide
difference there is between that weak credulity which allows itself to be
imposed upon blindly, and that dark and suspicious spirit which is always
inclined to the evil side. It forms part of the character of a wise and good
man, that he is not prone to take up a reproach against his neighbor.

In the sixth and last place, let me exhort you not to desert your friend in
danger or distress. Too many there are in the world, whose attachment to those
they call their friends is confined to the day of their prosperity. As long as
that continues, they are, or appear to be, affectionate and cordial. But as
soon as their friend is under a cloud, they begin to withdraw, and to separate
their interests from his. In friendships of this sort, the heart, assuredly,
has never had much concern. For the great test of true friendship, is constancy
in the hour of danger, adherence in the season of distress. -- When your friend
is calumniated, then is the time, openly and boldly to espouse his cause. When
his situation is changed, or his fortunes are falling, then is the time of
affording prompt and zealous aid. When sickness or infirmity occasion him to be
neglected by others, that is the opportunity which every real friend will seize
of redoubling all the affectionate attentions which love suggests, These are
the important duties, the sacred c^aims of friendship, which religion and
virtue enforce on every worthy mind. -- To show yourselves warm, after this
manner, in the cause of your friend commands esteem, even from those who have
personal interests in opposing him. This honorable zeal of friendship, has, in
every age, attracted the veneration of mankind. It has consecrated to the
latest posterity the names of those who have given up their fortunes, and have
even exposed their lives, in behalf of the friends whom they haved; while
ignominy and disgrace have ever been the portion of them, who deserted their
friends in the evil day. Thine own friend forsake not.

Before concluding, it must not be forgotten, that the inj^^^^ion of the Wise
Man in the text, is accompanied ^ith this remarkable expression; not only thine
own friend, but also, thy father's friend forsake not. These words bring back
to our remembrance the days of former years; and suggest a sentiment, which
cannot but touch every feeling heart. Thine own friend may be dear; thy
father's friend ought to be sacred. As long as life remains in any human
breast, the memory of those ancient ties should remain, which connected us once
with our father, and our father's house. -- Thy father has perhaps, long ago,
gone down to the dust. But when you recall the innocent days of childhood and
youth; when you think of those family transactions which once gladdened your
hearts; your father's friend in the midst of these will rise to your
remembrance. There was a time when you accosted him with respect, or looked up
to him with fondness, and was made happy by his kindly notice. Does such a one
now survive, and shall he not receive from you some portion of filial reverence
and honor? To disregard and neglect him, is to spurn your father's memory; is
to insult the ashes of him who now sleeps in the grave; is to transmit
yourselves to those who shall succeed you, as unfeeling and base. Thine own
friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not.

I have pointed out some of the chief duties which belong to virtuous
friendship; and some of the principal means by which this sacred bond should be
preserved unbroken; this holy flame should be kept alive in the human breast.
The spirit, and sentiments, which I have studied to inspire, are such as virtue
^^athes, and such as true piety should increase. It i^^^us we fulfill that great
law of love, which our divine Master taught. It is thus we prepare ourselves
for those happy regions, where charity never fails; where, in the presence of
the God of love, eternal and invariable friendships unite together all the
blessed; friendships, which, by no human infirmity disturbed, by death never
separated. shall constitute throughout endless ages, a great and distinguished
portion of the celestial felicity.

SERMON XVIII. ON THE CONDUCT TO BE HELD WITH REGARD TO FUTURE EVENTS.
PROVERBS xxvii. 1. Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou know not what a
day may bring forth.


FROM these words I purpose to di^^^urse of the proper conduct which we ought
to ho^d with regard to futurity, amidst the present uncertainties of use. Time
and life are always going on, and to each of us are preparing changes in our
state. What these may be, whether for the better or for the worse, we cannot
tell; as it has pleased the wisdom of Providence, to cover futurity with a
veil which no mortal can lift up. In the mean time, none of us can avoid
forming designs, and laying plans, for the time to come. The present-moment is
never sufficient to give full employment to the active mind of man, without
some excursions into futurity; and in these excursions, the present is often
wholly spent. It is therefore of the highest consequence, that a proper
direction be given to the mind, in its employments of thought relating to
futurity. Otherwise, in the prospects which we take of that unknown region,
false hopes, or ill-grounded ^ars, shall slatter or torment us in vain. We know
not, as the Wise Man Yells, what a day may bring forth. It may, very probably,
produce something that we had not looked for (...) and therefore, instead of
boasting ourselves of tomorrow, as the multitude are apt to do, it becomes us
to be disciplined and prepared, for whatever it may bring.

It is needless to spend much time in confirming the truth, which is the
foundation of the admonition in the text; in proving, either that change and
mutability belong to our present state, or that the changes of it cannot be
foreseen by us. These are truths so obvious and confessed, that an attempt to
confirm them is like proving, that all men are to die. At the same time,
obvious as they are, it were to be wished, that the thoughts of men dwelt upon
them more. For, by a strange but prevailing deception, it would seem, from the
general conduct of mankind, that almost every one thinks his own case an
exception from the general law; and that he may build plan^ with as much
confidence on his present situation, as if some assurance had been given him
that it were never to change. Hence it has been often observed by serious
persons, that there is no more general cause to which the vices of men can be
ascribed, their forgetfulness of God, and their neglect of duty, than to their
presuming upon the continuance of life, of pleasure, and prosperity.

Look but a little way, my friends, into your own state; and you must
unavoidably perceive that, from the beginning, it has been so contrived by
Providence, that there should be no permanent stability to man's condition on
earth. The seeds of alteration are every where sown. In your health, life,
possessions, connections, pleasures, there are causes of decay imperceptibly
working; secretly undermining the foundations of what appears to you the most
stable; continally tending, to abolish the present form of things, and to bring
forward new appearances, and new objects in their order: So that nothing is or
can be, stationary on earth. All changes, and passes. It is a stream which is
ever flowing; a wha^ which is ever turning round. When you behold the tree
covered with blossoms in the spring, or loaded with fruit in the autumn, as
well may you imagin^ that those blossoms or that fruit, are to remain in ^^e^^
place through the whole year, as believe that ^^^^an affairs are to continue,
for today and tomorrow for this year and the next, proceeding in the same
t^^or. -- To render this r^flection still more serious, th^^, I pray you, on
what small and inconsiderable causes those changes depend, which affect the
fortunes of men, throughout their whole lives. How soon is e^^ done! There
needs no great bustle or stir, no long reparation of events, to overturn what
seems most secure, and to blast what appears most flourishing. A gale of wind
rises on the ocean; and the vessel which carried our friends, or out fortunes,
is overwhelmed ^o the deep. A spark of a candle falls by night in some
neglected corner; and the whole substance of families is consumed in flames
before the morning. A casual blow or a sudden fall, deranges some of our
inter^^ parts; and the rest of life is distress and misery. It (...) awful to
think, at the mercy of how many seeming contingencies we perpetually lie, for
what we c^^ happiness in this world.

In the midst, however, of all th^^^pparent contingencies, plans and designs
for the future are every day formed? pursuits are undertaken; and life proceeds
in its usual train. Fit and proper it is, that life should thus proceed. For
the uncertainty of tomorrow was never designed by Providence, to deter us from
acting or planting to day; but only to admonish us, that we ought to plan, and
to act, soberly and wisely. -- What that wise and sober conduct is which
becomes us, what the rules and precautions are, which, in such a state as ours,
respect futurity. I now proceed to show. They may be comprehended in the
following directions. Boast not thyself of tomorrow; Despair not of tomorrow;
Delay not till tomorrow what is proper to be done to day; Prepare thyself for
whatever tomorrow may bring forth; Build thy hopes of happiness on something
more solid and lasting than what either today or tomorrow will produce.

I. In the words of the text, Boast not thyself of tomorrow; that is, never
presume arrogantly on futurity; in the most fair and promising state of
fortune, beware of pride and vanity; beware of resting wholly upon yourselves,
and forgetting Him who directs the changes of this mutable state. If there be
any virtues, which the uncertain condition of the world inculcated on man, they
are, ^^^^^lly, moderation and humility. Man was, for this end, placed in a
wor^^ where he knows so (...) of what is before him, (...) he might be
impressed with a sense of his depende^^ on the Ruler of the world; that he
might feel the ^^portance of acquiring favor and protection from Heaven. by a
life of piety and virtue; and that, not knowing how soon his own condition may
be the same wi^^ that of the most wretched, he might be prompted (...) act
toward all his brethren the humane and frien^^ part (...) The favors which
Providence ^^stowe (...) him at p^^^ent, he ought to receive with thankful
nes^, and may enjoy with cheerfulness. Though commanded not to boost himself of
tomorrow, the meaning (...) the precept is not, that he must be sad to day.
Rejoice he may in the day of prosperity; but certainly, Rejoice with trembling,
is the inscription that should be written on all human pleasures.

As for them who, intoxicated with those pleasures, become giddy and insolent;
who flattered by the illusions of prosperity, make light of every serious
admonition which the changes of the world give them, what can I say too strong
to alarm them of their danger? -- They have said to themselves, My mountain
stands strong, and shall never be moved. Tomorrow shall be as this day, and
more abundantly. I shall never see adversity. -- Rash and wretched men! are you
sensible how impious such words are? To the world, perhaps you dare not utter
them; but they speak the secret language of your hearts. Know, you are usurping
upon Providence; you are setting Heaven at defiance; you are not only preparing
sharper stings for yourselves, when the changes of life shall come, but you are
accelerating those changes; you are fast bringing ruin upon your own heads. For
God will not suffer pride in man; and the experience of all ages has shown,
how careful he is to check it. In a thousand memorable instances, the course of
his government has been ^^sibly pointed against it. He shows strength with
his arm, and scatters the proud in the imaginations of their hearts. The day
of the Lord is upon every one that is proud and lifted up; to ^^mble the lofty
^^ks of man, and to slain the pride of all g^ry. Luke i. 15. Isaiah ii. 11.
xxiii. 9.
Some of the ministers of divine displeasure are commissioned to go forth; and
to humble, without delay, the boasters of tomorrow.

II. As we are not to boast, so neither are we to despair, of tomorrow. The
former admonition was directed to those whom prosperity had elated with vain
hopes. This is designed for those whom a more adverse situation in life has
^uled with fears and alarms or what is to come. The reason of both admonitions
is the same; thou know not what a day may bring forth. It may bring forth
some unexpected misfortunes; and therefore thou should be humble in
prosperity. It may bring forth some unforeseen relief; and therefore thou
should hope under distress. -- It is too common with mankind, to be totally
engrossed, and overcome by present events. Their present condition, whatever it
is, they are apt to imagine, will never change; and hence by prosperity they
are lifted up. and by adversity are dejected and broken; prone, in the one
case, to forget God, in the other, to repine against him. Whereas, the
doctrine, which the changes of the world perpetually inculcate is, that no
state of external things should appear so important, or should so affect and
agitate our spirits, as to deprive us of a calm, an equal, and a steady mind.
Man knows neither the good, nor the evil which is before him. In your
patience, therefore, possess your souls: trusting, in the day of sorrow that
God has not forgotten to be gracious; and that though weeping way endure for a
night, joy comes to the upright in the ^^^^ing.

Distress not yourselves, then. with anxious ^ears about tomorrow. Let me
exhort you to dismiss all solicitude, which goes beyond the bounds of prudent
precaution. Anxiety, when it seizes the heart is a dangerous disease,
productive both of much sin and much misery. It acts a corrosive of the mind.
It eats out our present enjoyments, and substitutes, in their pl^^^. many an
acute pain. -- The Wise Man, in the text, has advised us not to boast of
tomorrow; and our Savior has instructed us to take no thought for tomorrow.
Matthew. vi. 33.
Both these directions. properly understood, are entirly consistent; and the
great rule of conduct, respecting futurity, is compounded of them both;
requiring us, neither arrogantly to presume on tomorrow, nor to be anxiously,
and fearfully solicitous about it. The ^^^^^w, says our Savior shall take
thought for the things of ^^^elf. We shall be better able to judge of the
course mo^^ proper for us to hold, when events have begun to come forward in
their order. Their presence often suggests wiser counsels, and more successful
expedients, than it is possible for us to contrive at a distance. By excess of
solicitude before hand, we frequently introduce that consussion of mind, and
that hurry and disorder of spirits, which bring us into the most unfavourable
state for judging soundly. -- Wherefore, never indulge either anxiety, or
despair, about futurity. Affright not yourselves with imaginary terrors.
Anticipate not evils, which perhaps may never come. Make the best which you can
of this day, in the fear of God, and in the practice of your duty; and, having
done so, leave tomorrow to itself. Sufficient for the day, when it comes, will
be the evil thereof.

III. Delay not till tomorrow any thing which is fit and proper to be done
today. Remember, that thou art not the lord of tomorrow. Thou art so far from
having any title to dispose of it, that thou art ignorant of the most material
circumstances relating to it; not only of what it shall bring forth, but
whether thou shall live to see it. -- Notwithstanding the uncontrovertible
evidence of this truth, procrastination has, throughout every age, been the
ruin of mankind. Dwel^ing amidst endless projects of what they are hereafter to
do, they cannot so properly be said to live, as to be always about to live; and
the ^uture has ever been the gu^^^ in which the present is swallowed up and
lo^^. -- Hence arise many of those misfortunes which b^^^l, men in their
worldly concerns. What might at present be arranged in their circumstances with
advantage, being delayed to another opportunity, cannot be arranged at all.
Tomorrow being loaded with the concerns of to day, in addition to its own, is
clogged, and embarrassed. Affairs, which had been pollponed, multiply and crowd
upon one another; till, at last, they prove so intricate and perplexed, and the
pressure of business becomes so great, that nothing is left, but to sink under
the burden. Of him, therefore, who indulges this lingering and delaying spirit
in worldly matters, it is easy to prognosticate that the ruin is not far off.

Evils of the same kind, arising from the same cause overtake men, in their
moral and spiritual interests. There are few, but who are sensible of some
things in their character and behavior, which ought to be corrected, and which
at one time or other, they intend to correct; some headstrong passion, which
they design to subdue; some bad habit, which they purpose to reform; some
dangerous connection, which they are resolved to break off. But the convenient
season for these reformations is not yet come. Certain obstacles are in the
way, which they expect by and by to surmount; and therefore they go on in peace
for the present, in their usual courses, trusting, at a future day, to begin
their designed improvement. In the mean time, the angel of death descends; and
in the midst of their distant plans, executes his commission, and carries them
away. -- Guard against delusions of this kind, which have been fatal to so
many. -- Thou art now in tranquillity, in health, in pessession of a calm mind.
Improve these advantages, for performing (...) that becomes thee, as a man, and
as a Christian for who can tell how long thou shall be p^^mi^^ to enjoy them?
Now alterations of fortune may be just conting forward; new troubles in puplic
et in ^^^ate li^e, about to arise; new exigencies ready to throw thee into some
condition, which shall leave thee neither leisure nor opportunity, to execute
any of the good purposes thon have at present in thy mind. Wherefore, triste no
longer with what is so serious, and what may be so critical; but to day, while
it is called to day, listen to the voice of God, and do his works. Do now, as
the Wife Man advises, with thy might whatsoever thy hand finds to do; for
there is no work, nor dever, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou gorst
Eccles. ix. 10.
-- Instead of delaying till tomorrow what ought to be done today, let me
exhort you.

IV. To be every day prepared for whatever tomorrow may bring forth. There is
a certain preparation for the vicissitudes of life, in which the multitude are
sufficiently busted; providing, as they think, against whatever may happen, by
increasing their riches, and strongthening themselves by friends, connections,
and worldly honors. But these bulwarks which they erect, are totally
insufficient against the dreaded storm. It is to some other quarter we must
look for our defense; for when it is the world it self, whose changes we have
reason to dread, the world, and the things of it, cannot afford us protection.
The best preparation for all the uncertainties of futurity cons^ts, in a well
ordered mind, a good conscience, and a cheerful submission to the will of
Heaven. You know not what shall be on ^^*morrow. But there is One who knows it
well; for his decree has six^d it. To him look up with reverence; and say, Not
my will, but thine be done; what ^o^^ appointest is ever wise, and just and
good. S^ek to fulfill the part which he has assig^ed you; to do the things
which he has commanded you to do; and leave all the rest to him. Whatever
tomorrow brings forth, let it find you employed in doing jus^ly, (...) mercy,
and w^^lking h^mbly with your God; and then you shall meet tomorrow without
fear, when you meet it without the upbraidings of gu^lt.

If it shall bring forth to you any ^^exp^cted good, prepare to receive it with
grati^^^^, temperance, and (...). If it shall bring (...) evil, prepare to
receive it with manly fortitude. Let no events of any kind, derange your (...)
^^ty, ^r th^k your consta^e. Contract your d^^res and m^^^ate your hopes.
Expect not more (...) than it is able to afford you. Take it for g^^^d that
what is naturally mutable, will one day change; that what w^^ designed to be
transient, wi^ p^ss away. -- Look forward to futurity without impatience. Be
not desirous to know it. It belongs to God. Let him bring forward the events of
the world, in his own way. Imagine that you conti^n^ly bear th^se words, which
our Lord once addressed to Peter, when he was inquiring about what was to
happen to a fellow disciple, What is that to thee? F^ll^w thou me. Amidst all
the uncertainty of future events, this road of clear and plain duty li^s before
you: follow Christ, and inquire no farther. Seek no ^^^ked path, in order to
a^oid impending dangers. (...) to the right ^a^d, nor to the lest: but (...)
unto the Lord: tr^s^^lso in him, and be ^^^d bring (...) the desires of ^^y
^eart.

V. Build your hopes of happiness on ^^^ewhat more s^lid and la^^ing, than what
either to da^ or tomorrow are likely to produce. From what has been said, you
(...) clearly perceive, that he who ^ei^s wholly upon (...) world, builds his
house upon the sand. This l^fe, by means of wisdom and virtue, may be rendered
to a good man, a tolerable, nay, a comfortable, state. But he who expects
complete happiness from it, will be greatly deceived. Man, in his most
floorishing condition, were much to be pitied, if he was destitute of any
higher hope. Rolling from change to change, throughout all the days of his
life, with a dark and unknown prospect always before him in futurity, what
would avail a few short interrupted glimpses of happiness, which from tim^ to
time, ^e was permitted to enjoy? Can we believe, that only for such a state as
this, man was designed by his great and good Creator? -- No: Let us bless the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again into a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fud^th not away.
Here is the Rock on which the mind, however tossed by the storms of life, can
securely rest. Here is the object to which a wise man will bend his chief
attention, that, after having acted his part on earth with fidelity and honor,
he may be enabled, through the merits of his Savior, to look for a place in
the mansions of eternal and untroubled peace. This prospect is the great
corrective of the present vanity of human life. It gives significancy and
importance to its most transitory scenes; and in the midst of its mutability,
discovers one fixed point of rest. He who is habitually influenced by the hope
of immortality, will be able to look without dismay, on the changes of the
world. He will neither boast, of tomorrow, nor be afraid of it; but will pass
through the varieties of life with a manly and unbroken mind; with a noble
superiority to those fears and expectations, those cares and sorrows, which
agitate the multitude. -- Such are the native effects of Christian faith and
hope. To them alone it belongs, to surmount all the discouragements to which we
are now exposed; to render our life comfortable, and our death blessed; nay.
^^make the day of our death better than the day of our birth.

SERMON XIX. ON FOLLOWING THE MULTITUDE TO DO EVIL.
EXODUS xxiii. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. --


IN this world, we are placed as companions and assistants to one another.
Depending, for most of the comforts of ^life, on mutual intercourse and aid, it
was necessary, that we should be formed to desire the company, and to take
pleasure in the good will of our fellow. But this sociability of man, though
essential to his present condition, has, like many other good principles, been
unhappily warped from its original purpose; and, in the present state of the
world, has proved the cause of much evil. For, as vice has abounded in every
age, it has propagated itself much more easily by the assistance of this
social disposition. We naturally mould ourselves on the pattern of prevailing
manners; and corruption is communicated from one to another. By mutually giving
and taking, the example of sinful liberties, licentiousness spreads and grows;
each jussisies himself by his neighbor; and the multitude of ^^^^^^s
strengthen one another's hands to commit i^iqui^y. In all ages of the world,
custom has had more power than reason. Few take the trouble of inquiring what
is the right path; the grea^^ p^rt content themselves with following that in
which the multitude have gone before them. No exhortation, therefore, is more
necessary to be frequently given, and to be seriously enforced, than that which
we receive from the text; Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

To acquire a full view of any danger to which we are exposed, is the first
measure to be taken, in order to our safety. Let us then begin the subject,
with considering how much we are in hazard of being missed into vice by the
general manners which we behold around us. -- No virtue is more necessary to a
Christian, but scarcely is there any more difficult to be put in practice, than
that firmness of mind which can enable a man to maintain his principles, and to
stand his ground against the torrent of custom, fashion and example. Example
has upon all minds a secret and insinuating influence, even when we ourselves
are insensible of its operation. We imperceptibly slide into some resemblance
of the manners of those with whom we have frequent intercourse. This often
shows itself, in the most indifferent things. But the resemblance is still more
readily contracted, when there is something within ourselves, leans to the same
side which is countenanced by the practice of others. We are always glad to
find any apology for indulging our inclinations and passions; and the example
of the multitude too readily suggests that apology. Even before corruption has
made great progress in our hearts, sometimes, mere complaisance and good nature
incline us to fall in with the ways of others. Sometimes, timidity and false
shame prevent our differing from them: Frequently, expectation and interest
impel us strongly to comply. How great is the danger we incur, when, in times
of prevailing vice, all these principles of imitation and compliance unite
together against our virtue?

The world is too justly said by scripture, to lie in wickedness. It is a
school wherein every vice is taught, and too easily learned. Even from our
earli^st childhood, false sentiments are instilled into our minds. We are bred
up in admiration of the external show of life. We are accustomed, as soon as we
can understand any thing, to hear riches and honor spoken of as the chief
goods of men, and proposed to us as the objects to which our future pursuits
ar^ to be directed. We see the measures of outward respect and deference taken
from these alone. Reli^ion and virtue are recommended to us, in a formal
manner, by our teachers and instructors; but all improvements of the mind and
heart, are visibly placed by the world, in an inferior rank to the advantages
of fortune. Vices, that chance to be fashionable, are treated as slight
failings; and colored over, in common discourse, with tho^^ ^^^t and gentle
names which express no condemnation. We enter, perhaps, on the world, with good
principles, and an aversion to downright vice. But when, as we advance in life,
we become initiated in that mystery of iniquity, which is called, the way of
the world; when we meet with deceit and artifice in all ranks of m^n; when we
behold iniquity authorized b^ great names, and often rewarded with success and
advancement, our original good impressions too soon decay. The practice of the
multitude renders vice familiar to our thoughts; and gradually wears off the
abhorrence with which we once beheld it. We begin to think, that what is so
very general, cannot be highly criminal. The malignity of sin appears
diminished, by so many being sh^^ers in the reproach; and instead of men^ v^^^s
detracting, as they ought to do, from our good opinion of the men, our
attachment (...) the men oftener reconciles us to the vices of which they are
guilty.

The countenance which sin receives from the practice of the multitude, not
only removes the restraints which are imposed by modesty and shame; but such is
the degeneracy of the world, that shame is too often employed against the cause
of religion and virtue. The ridicule of the giddy and unthinking bears down the
conviction of the sober and modest. Against their own belief, they appear to
adopt the notions of the infidel; and against their own choice, they join in
the vices of the libertine; that they may not be reproached as persons of a
narrow mind, and still enslaved to the prejudices of education. How much reason
is there to believe that, merely from this timidity of temper, many, whose
principles are on the side of religion and virtue, are nevertheless found
walking in the way of s^^^rs, and setting in the chair of the scornful? --
Interest, too often coincides with this weakness of disposition, in tempting
such persons to follow the multitude. To fall in with the prevailing taste, to
suit themselves to the passions of the great, or to the humors of the low,
with whom they chance to be connected, appears the readiest way to rise in the
world. Hence they are naturally lead to relinquish the firmness of an upright
character, for that supple and versable turn, which accomodates itself to the
times, and assumes whatever appearance seems most convenient for interest --
Such are the dangers to which we are exposed, in times of corruption, of
following the multitude to do evil; dangers of which require our most serious
attention and care, in order to guard ourselves (...) them. -- I proceed to lay
such considerations before you as may be useful for that purpose.

In the first place, Let us remember that the multitude are very bad guides;
are so far from having a title to implicit regard, that he who blindly follows
them, may be perfumed to err. For prejudice, and passion, are known to sway the
crowd. They are struck by the outside of things; they inquire superficially,
admire false appearances, and pursue false goods. Their opinions are for the
most part hastily formed, and of course are variable, floating, and
inconsistent. In every age, how small is the number of those who are guided by
reason, and calm inquiry? How few do we find, who have the wisdom to think and
judge for themselves, and have steadiness to follow out their own judgment;
Ignorance, and low education, darken the views of the vulgar. Fashion and
prejudice, vanity and pleasure, corrupt the sentiments of the great. The
example of neither, affords any standard of what is right and wise. If the
philosopher, when employed in the pursuit of truth, finds it necessary to
disregard established prejudices and popular opinion, shall we, in the more
important inquiry after the rule of life, submit to such blind guidance as the
practice of the many; esteeming whatever they admire, and following wh^^ever
they lead? Be assured, that he who sets up the general opinion as the standard
of truth, or the general practice as the measure of right, is likely, upon such
a foundation to build no other superstructure except vice and folly. -- If the
^^^^tice of the multitude be a good pattern for our (...), th^^r opinions
surely should be as good a (...) for our belief. Upon this principle, we must
exchange Christianity for Pag^nis^ or Mahometanism, and the light of the
Reformation for the superstitions of Popery; for these latter have ever had,
and still have, the numbers and the multitude on their side. -- Our Savior has
sufficiently characterised the way of the world, when he describes the broad
road in which the multitudes go as the road which leads to destruction; and the
path which leads to happiness, as a narrow path, which fewer find. From which
it is an easy inference, that to have the multitude on our side, is so far from
affording any presumption of our being safe, that it should lead us to suspect
that we are holding the course of danger.

In the second place, as the practice of the multitude is no argument of a good
practice, so it cannot afford us either justification, or safely, in what is
evil. -- It affords, us, I say, no justification. Truth and error, virtue and
vice, are things of immutable nature. The difference between them is grounded
on that basis of eternal reason, which no opinions or customs of men can effect
or alter. Whether virtue be esteemed, or not, in the world, this makes it
neither more nor less estimable in itself. It carries always a divine
authority, which men cannot impair. It shines with an essential luster, which
praise cannot brighten, nor reproach tarnish. It has a right to regulate the
opinions of men; but by their opinions cannot be controlled. Its nature
continues invariably the same, though all the multitude of fools should concur
in endeavoring to turn it into ridicule. Woe unto them, says the prophet
Isaiah, that call evil, good, and good, evil; that put darkness for light, and
light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. -- Their root shall
be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast
away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the holy one of
Israel. Isaiah v. 20, 24.


As the practice of the multitude furnishes no justification to the sinner, so
neither does it afford him any safety. Religion is altogether a matter of
person^ concern. God has delivered to every man the rule of life; and every
man must think and act for himself; because for himself he is to answer. If
others be wicked, (...) will be the worse for them; but it will not, on that
account, be the better for us, if we shall be evil also. Let vice be ever so
prevalent, it is still that evil thing which the Lord abhors; and, though
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not escape unpunished. So far is the number
of offenders from furnishing any ground of safety, that it calls more loudly
for divine justice to interpose. It is as easy for the Almighty arm to ^rush a
whole guilty society, as to punish a single individual; and when the
disobedient subjects of God countenance and strengthen one another in
licentiousness, by transgressing in troops and bands it becomes high time for
his government to exert itself, and let its vengeance forth. -- One could
scarcely think that any professor of Christian faith would fancy to himself any
apology from the way of the world, when he knows that the declared design of
his religion was, to distinguish him from the world, which is said to lie in
sin; and that Christ came to call out for himself a peculiar people, whose
character it should be, not to be conformed to the world, but transformed by
the renewing of their minds. -- So little, indeed, can the practice of the
world either justify or extenuate vice, that it deserves our serious
consideration,

In the third place, whether there be not several circumstances, which
peculiarly aggravate the guilt of those who follow the multitude in evil. Do
you not, thereby, strengthen the power of sin, and perpetuate the pernicious
influence of bad example? By striking off from the corrupted crowd, you might
be eminently useful. You might animate and recover many, whom weakness and
timidity keep under bondage to the customs of the world; whereas, by tamely
yielding to the current of vice, you render that current stronger for carrying
others along; you add weight and stability to the bad cause; you lend to the
multitude all the force of your example, for drawing others after them, to the
commission of evil. -- While you are thus accessory to the ruin of others, you
are, at the same time, stamping your own character with the foulest and deepest
impressions of corruption. By surrendering your judgment, and your conscience,
to the multitude, you betray the rights, and degrade the honor, of rational
nature. Nothing great or worthy can be expected of him, who, instead of
considering what is right in itself, and what part it is fittest for one in his
station to act, is only considering what the world will think, or say of him;
what sort of behavior will pass with the fairest show, and be most calculated
to please the many. When a man has thus given up the liberty and independence
of his mind, we can no longer reckon upon him in any thing. We cannot tell how
far he may be carried in vice. There is too much ground to dread, that he will
lie, dissemble, and betray; changing himself, without scruple, into every shape
that will find favor among those whom he seeks to gain. -- While this
servility to the world infers baseness toward men, it involves also the
highest imprety toward God. It shows that we yield to the world that reverence
and submission, which is only due to the divine law. We treat the government of
the Almighty with scorn; as if his precepts deserved to be obeyed, only when
they suited the caprice and the follies of the multitude; and were entitied to
no regard, as soon as they contradicted the reigning customs and fashions of
the world. -- While such conduct carries in it so much wickedness and folly,
let us observe,

In the fourth place, that the most excellent and honorable character which
can adorn a man and a Christian, is acquired, by resisting the torrent of vice
and adhering to the cause of God and virtue against a corrupted multitude. It
will be found to hold in general, that all those, who, in any of the great
lines of life, have distinguished themselves for thinking profoundly, and
acting nobly, have despised popular prejudices, and departed, in several
things, from the common ways of the world. On no occasion is this more
requisite for true honor, than where religion and morality are concerned. In
times of prevailing licentiousness, to maintain, unblemished virtue, and
uncorrupted integrity; in a public or a private cause, to stand from by what is
fair and just, amidst discouragements and opposition; despising groundless
censure and reproach; disdaining all compliance with public manne^^^, when they
are vicious and unlawful; and never as^^amed of the punctual discharge of every
duty toward God and man; -- this is what shows true greatness of spirit, and
will force approbation even from the degenerate multitude themselves. This is
the (...) their conscience will oblige them to acknowledge (...) we are unable
to bend to mean condesce^^o^s. We see it in vain either to flatter or to
threaten him; he rests on a principle within, which we cannot shake. To this
man you may, on any occasion, safely commit your cause. He is incapable of
betraying his trust, or deserting his friend, or denying his faith. Thus his
righteousness comes forth as the light, and his judgment ^r the noonday.

I^^es, accordingly, this steady inflexible virtue, this regard to principle,
superior to all custom and opinon, which peculiarly marked the characters of
those, in any age, who have shone as saints or heroes; and has consecrated
their memory to all posterity. It was this that obtained to ancient Enoch the
most singular testimony of honor from heaven. He continued to walk with God,
when the world apostatised from him. He pleased God, and was beloved of him; so
that, living among sinners, he was translated to heaven without seeing death;
Yea, speedily was he taken a way, lest wickedness should have allered his
understanding, or deceit beguiled his soul. Wisdom of Solomon iv. 11.
When Sodom could not furnish ten righteous men to save it, Lot remained
unspotted amidst the contagion. He lived like an angel among spirits of
darkness; and the destroying flame was not permitted to go forth, till the good
man was called away by a heavenly messenger from his devoted city. When all
flesh had corrupted their way upon the^^^l^, then lived Noah, a righteous man,
and a preacher of righteousness. H^^^^^d alone, and was scoffed by the (...)
crew (...) they by the deluge were swept away (...) on him. Providence
conferred the immortal (...), of being the restorer of a better race, and the
father in a new world. Such examples as these, and such honors conferred by
God on them who withstood the multitude of evil doers, should often be present
to our minds. Let us oppose them to the numbers of low and corrupt examples,
which we behold around us; and when we are in hazard of being swayed by such,
let us fortify our virtue, by thinking of those who, in former times, shone
like stars in the midst of surrounding darkness, and are now shining in the
kingdom of of heaven, as the brightness of the firmament, for ever and ever. --
As our honor is thus deeply concerned in our acting a steadfast and virtuous
part, let us also consider,

In the fifth, place how little in point of interest, can be gained by the
favor of the multitude, and how much will certainly be lost, by following them
to do evil. We may, thereby, render ourselves more agreeable to some with whom
we are connected; and by artful compliances, may please ourselves with the
prospect of promoting our fortune. But those advantages, such as they are,
remain doubtful and uncertain. The wind of popular opinion is ever shifting. It
will often leave us at a loss what course to steer; and, after all our trouble
and anxiety to catch the favorable gale, it may on a sudden forsake us. For
the versation of character, the meanness and inconsistency of e^^^act, into
which a dependent on the multitude is (...), frequently render him, in the end,
an object of contempt in those whom he sought to please. But supposing him
successful in his views, no worldly advantages, which are purchased by
dishonou^^^^^ means, can ^e either solid or lasting. They bring no g^^^ns
satisfaction to a man, who is conscious to (...) of ^^ving given up his
principles to serve the world. As long as he could be satisfied with his own
conduct, he might beat up under undeserved discouragement; but when he becomes
despicable in his own eyes, worldly honors lose their luster. -- What can the
multitude do for you, after you have followed them in evil? They cannot restore
to you the peace of an innocent mind, nor heal the sorrows of a wounded spirit,
nor shield you from the displeasure of God. They can do little to support you
in the hour of affliction, and nothing to deliver your souls in the day of
death. Forsaken and disconsolate, the world, for the most part, casts off its
votaries in the end; and when you compute the final amount, it will prove a
very small consolation, that as you have had shares in guilt, you shall have
companions also in punishment.

Look forward to the issue of things. The multitude of men possess now, in a
great measure, the distribution of praise and censure, of success and
disappointment, according to their caprice. But this confused and and
promiscuous distribution is not always to subsist The day comes, when we all
are to appear before a more discerning Judge, and a more impartial tribunal.
The day comes, when our Lord Jesus Christ, shall descend from heaven in all
the glory of his Father to unveil every character, and to render to every man
according to his works. At that day, how shall he lift up his head, who has
been all his life the slave of the world's opinion; who has molded his
principles, and his practice, solely to please the multitude; who has been
ashamed of his Savior and his words; and to gain favor with men, has
apostatised from the native sentiments and dictates of his heart? -- To say all
in one word; there is a contest now between God and the world. These form the
opposite sides which divide mankind. Consider well, to which of these you will
choose to adhere. On the one side, lie your allegiance, your honor, and your
interest; on the other, lie your guilt and your shame. For the one, conscience
and reason, for the other passion, and inclination, plead. On the one hand, are
the approbation of God, immortal honor, and divine rewards; on the other, --
remember and beware, -- are the stings of conscience, endless punishment, and
endless infamy.

SERMON XX. ON THE WISDOM OF GOD. This concluding discourse is chiefly
intended, to be a general recapitulation of instances of the wisdom of
Providence, several of which have been more fully illustrated in other
discourses, contained in this, or in some of the preceding volumes.

1 TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only Wise
God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


IT is of the highest importance to religious conduct, that our minds be filled
with suitable conceptions of the attributes of God. They are the foundations of
our reverence for him and reverence is the foundation of religion. All the
divine perfections are interesting to man. Almighty power, in conjunction with
eternity and Omnipresence, naturally inspires solemn awe. Infinite Goodness
relieves the mind from that oppression which Power alone would produce; and,
from our experience of present benefits, and our remembrance of the past,
creates love, gratitude, and trust. In the middle between these, stands the
contemplation of divine Wisdom, which conjoins impressions of awe with those of
comfort; and while it humbles us into profound submission, encourages, at the
same time our reliance on that King eternal, immortal, and invisible, who is
justly styled in the text, the only wise God.

Among men, wisdom is a quality entirely different from cunning or craft. It
always supposes good and fair intention in the person who possesses it; and
imports, that laudible ends are pursued by proper and justifiable means. In
like manner, wisdom in the Supreme Being cannot be separated from the rectitude
of his nature. It is, in him, an exertion of benevolence; and imports, that the
purposes of justice and goodness are carried on and accomplished, by means the
most effectual. To meditate on some of those instances in which this divine
wisdom is displayed, cannot but be highly favorable to the impressions both of
piety, and of virtue.

It is difficult to say, whether the natural, or the moral, world, afford the
most conspicuons and striking displays of the wisdom of God. Not one, nor many
discourses, nor indeed the study and labor of a whole life, were, in any
degree sufficient to explore them. Of the proofs of wisdom which the natural
world affords. I cannot attempt now to discourse. Any illustration of these
would lead to discussions of a scientific ^ind, which more properly belong to
the philosopher; and on which philosophy has often employed itself, with much
utility and honor. I shall only take notice that in proportion as human
knowledge has enlarged its sphere of a research and discovery, in the same
proportion, has the wisdom of the Creator struck the minds of all inquirers
and observers, with the highest admiration. All nature is in truth a scene of
wonders. In the disposition of the heavenly bodies, and the general arrangement
of the system of the universe; in the structure of the earth: in the endless
variety of living creatures that fill it; and in the provision made for them
all, to enable them to fulfill the ends of their being, it is not easy to
determine, whether power, wisdom, or goodness be most conspicuous. It belongs
not only to the heavens to declare the glory of God, and to the firmament to
show forth his handiwork; in the smallest and most inconsiderable, as well as
in the most illustrious works of God, equal marks appear of profound design and
consummate art. It has been justly said, that there is not a vegetable that
grows, nor an insect that moves but what is sufficient to confound the atheist,
and to afford the candid observer endless materials of devout adoration and
praise.

When we turn to the moral world, the field of admiration which opens to us is
no less extensive and striking. I can only mention a few instances of that
exquisite wisdom which every where meet us.

In the first place, let us attend to the constitution of human nature. Though
we are taught by revelation, to consider it as now impaired by the fall, yet,
as it stands, we behold the traces of a noble structure planned and executed
with the highest skill. All the powers and faculties bestowed on man are such,
as perfectly suit is condition, and adapt him to the purposes for which he was
designed. -- Senses were given him, that he might distinguish what is necessary
for the preservation and welfare of his body. Now, suppose that any one of
those senses, the sight, for instance, or the hearing, or the touch, had been
in a considerable degree either more blunt, or more acute, than it is at
present, what an unhappy change would this have made upon our state? On the one
hand, greater imperfections of the organs, would have deprived us of all the
comfort and advantage which we now enjoy from such powers. On the other hand, a
greater, degree of exquisite sensibility in them, would have rendered life a
burden to us. Our senses, instead of being inlets to knowledge and pleasure,
would then have become constant avenues to uneasiness and pain. Their powers
therefore, are skilfully adjusted to that measure of strength, which allows
them to answer the purposes of health, safety, and comfort; without either
falling short of this line of usefulness, or improperely, and hurtfully,
stretching beyond it.

In the mind, appetites and passions were placed, as the moving powers of the
soul, ^o impel its activity. But as their impulse required regulation and
restraint, reason was, at the same time, conferred as the directing power. --
Of all our passions, self-love, and the desire of self-preservation were, with
the utmost propriety, made the strongest, for a reason which the meanest
capacity may comprehend. Every man is most immediately committed by P^widence
to his own care and charge. He knows his own situation best; and has more
opportunities of promoting his own happiness, than he can have of advancing the
happiness of any other person. It was therefore fit and wise, that, by the
strongest instinct, he should be prompted to attend to himself. -- At the same
time, as no man standing alone is sufficient for his own welfare, it was
necessary that, by mutual sympathy and social instincts, we should be drawn to
give aid to one another. Here it deserves our particular notice that the force
of those social instincts is, with admirable propriety, proportioned by
Providence to the degree of their usefulness and importance. See Sermon. X. Vol.
ii.
Thus that parental affection, which the helpless state of infancy and
childhood renders so needful, is made the strongest of them all. Next, come
those ties of blood, which prompt mutual kindness among those who are
intimately joined together by brotherhood, and other family connections. To
these succeeds that valuable instinct of pity which impels us to assist the
distressed, wherever we behold them. To take part with others in there good
fortune belongs to man's social nature, and increases the sum of happiness. At
the same time, to take part with the prosperous is less necessary than to
sympathise with the unhappy; and therefore the principle which prompts us to
rejoice with them that rejoice, is made not to be so strong, as that which
impels us to weep with them that weep.

But they are not only the laudable and important parts of our disposition,
which discover the wisdom of the Author of our frame; even our imperfections
and follies, are by him rendered subservient to useful ends. -- Amidst those
inequalities of condition, for instance, which the state of human life
required, where it was necessary that some should be rich, and others poor,
that some should be eminent and distinguished, and others obscure and mean, how
seasonable is that good opinion which every one entertains of himself; that
self-complacency with which he compares himself to others; and that fond hope,
which is ever pleasing him with the prospect of future pleasures and advantages
in life? Without those flattering sensations, vain as they often are, how
totally insupportable would this world become, to many of its inhabitants?
Whereas, by means of them, Providence has contrived to balance, in a great
measure, the inequalities of condition among mankind. It has contrived to
diffuse pleasurs through all ranks; and to bring the high and the low nearer to
a level with each other than might at first be supposed. It has smoothed the
most rugged tracts of human life; and has gilded with rays of borrowed light
its most dreary scenes.

One instance of Divine wisdom, in framing our nature, is so remarkable as to
demand particular attention; that is, the measure according to which God has
dispensed knowledge and ignorance to man. There is nothing of which we are more
ready to complain, than of our narrow and confined views of nature, and of
Providence, and of all things around us: And yet, upon examination, it will be
found, that our views extend, on every side, just as far as they ought; and
that, to see and know more than is allowed us, instead of bringing any
advantage, would produce certain misery. See Sermon. IV. Vol. i. and Sermon. IX.
Vol. iv.
-- We pry, for instance with impatient curiosity, into future events. Happily
for us, they are veiled and covered up; and one peep behind that veil, were it
permitted, would be sufficient to poison the whole comfort of our days, by the
anticipation of sorrows to come. -- In like manner, we often wish with
eagerness to penetrate into the secrets of nature, to look into the invisible
world, and to be made acquainted with the whole destiny of man. Our wish is
denied; we are environed on all hands with mystery; and that mystery is our
happiness. For were those great invisible objects fully disclosed, the sight of
them would confound and overwhelm us. It would either totally derange our
feeble faculties; or would engross our attention to such a degree, as to lay us
aside from the business, and concerns of this world. It would have the same
effect, as if we were carried away from the earth, and mingled among the
inhabitants of some other planet. -- The knowledge that is allowed to us, was
designed to fit us for acting our part in our present state. At the exact point
therefore, where usefulness ends, knowledge stops, and ignorance commences.
Light shines upon us, as long as it serves to guide our path; but forsakes us,
as soon as it becomes noxious to the eye; and salutary darkness is appointed to
close the scene. -- Thoughtless and stupid must that man be, who, in all this
surniture of the human mind, in this exact adjustment of its several powers to
the great purposes of life, discerns not the hand of adorable Wisdom, as well
as of infinite Goodness.

In the second place, Let us contemplate the same wisdom as exhibiting itself
to us in the moral government of the world. We are informed by revelation, that
this life is designed by Providence to be an introductory part of existence to
intelligent beings; a state of education and discipline, where creatures fallen
from their original rank, may gradually recover their rectitude and virtue.
Under this view, which is in itself perfectly consonant to all that reason
discovers, we shall find the general course of human affairs, confused as it
may sometimes appear, to have been ordered with exquisite wisdom. -- It was
necessary to such a state, that all the active powers should be brought forth
into exercise, and completely tried. It became proper, therefore, that there
should be a mixture of characters in the world; and that men should be shown in
a variety of situations. See Sermon. IV. Vol. iv.
Hence that diversity of tempers and dispositions which are found in society;
those inequalities in rank and station, which we see taking place; and those
different talents (...), which prompt men to different pursuits. By these
means, every department in society is filled up? and every man has some sphere
prepared for him, in which he can act. He is brought forth as on a busy stage,
where opportunity is given for his character to display itself fully. -- His
life is, with great propriety, varied by interchanges of prosperity and
adversity. Always prosperous he would become, dissipated, indolent, and giddy:
Always afflicted, he would be fretful dejected, and sullen. There are sew
persons, therefore, or none, whose lot shares not of both these states; in
order that every disposition of the heart may be explored, and every mean of
improvement afforded. -- As man is ultimately designed for a higher state of
existence than the present, it was not proper that this world should prove a
paradise to him or should afford him that complete satisfaction which he
incessantly pursues. Disappointments, therefore, are often made to blast his
hopes; and, even while the comforts of life last, they are always mixed with
some troubles; in order that an excessive attachment to this world may
gradually be loosened. The course of things is evidently so ordered by
Providence, that occurrences shall be always happening, to bring down the most
prosperous to a level with the rest of his brethren, and to raise up, in their
turn, the low and the distressed.

In the midst of those vicissitudes, which are so obviously conducive to
improvement, both wisdom and goodness required, that the supreme Governor of
the world should be seen to protect the interests, and favor the side of
virtue. But in the degree of evidence, with which this was to be shown, it was
no less requisite, that a proper temperament should be observed. Had virtue
been always completely rewarded, and made happy on earth, men would no longer
have had a motive for aspiring to a more blessed state. In the case of every
crime, had divine justice interposed to bring complete punishment on the head
of the criminal; or had all the felicity which is prepared for the just in a
future world, and all the misery which there awaits the wicked, been already
displayed to the view, and rendered sensible to the feelings of men, there
would have been an end of that state of trial, for which our whole condition on
earth was intended. It was necessary, therefore, that, at present, we should
see through a glass darkly. A certain degree of mystery and obscurity was, with
perfect wisdom, left on the conduct of the Almighty. See Sermon. IV. Vol. i.
-- But, amidst that obscurity, sufficient encouragement and support is in the
mean time given to virtue; sufficient ground is afforded for the full belief,
that it is what the Deity loves, and will finally reward. His approbation of it
is signified to every man by the voice of conscience. Inward satisfaction and
peace are made always to belong to it; and general esteem and honor, for the
most part, to attend it. On the other hand, the wicked, in no situation of
life, are allowed to be truly happy. Their vices and their passions are made to
trouble their prosperity; and their punishment to grow out of their crimes. Let
any one attentively recollect the material incidents of his life; and he will,
for the most part, be able to trace the chief misfortunes which have befallen
him, to some guilt he has contracted, or some folly he has committed. See Sermon.
XIII. Vol. iii.
Such is the profound wisdom with which Providence conducts its counsels, that,
although is does not appear to interpose, men are made to reap from their
actions, the fruits which they had deserved; their iniquities to correct them,
and their backslidings to reprove them; and while they suffer, they are forced
to acknowledge the justice of their punishment. -- These are not matters of
rare or occasional observation; but deeply interwoven with the texture of human
affairs. They discover a r^^ular plan, a formed system, according to which the
whole train of Providence proceeds; and which manifests to every serious
observer the consummate wisdom of its Author. -- As thus, in the constitution
of human nature, and in the moral government of the world, divine wisdom so
remarkably appears, I must observe,

In the third place, That in the redemption of the world, and in the economy of
grace, it shines no less conspicuously. The subject which opens to us here is
too extensive to be fully illustrated at present; but the great lines of it are
obvious. See Sermon. V. Vol. i. -- Sermon. XX. Vol. i. -- Sermon. XXIII. Vol. ii.
Sermon. V. Vol. iii.
-- In carrying on a plan, by which forgiveness was to be dispensed to an
offending race, wisdom required that the authority of the legulator should be
fully preserved, and no such relaxation be introduced into government as might
give license or encouragement to offenders. Accordingly, the most admirable
provision was made for these important purposes, by the interposition of the
Son of God suffering and dying for sinners. The sovereign awe of justice is
maintained, while justice is tempered with mercy. Men are bound to
righteousness, under the highest sanctions; and ample security and consolation
are, at the same time, afforded to the penitent. By the instructions, and
example, of their Savior, they are instructed in their duty; and through a
Mediator and Intercessor, they are encouraged to offer their worship and
prayers to the Almighty. They are assured that, in whatever is too ardous for
human nature to perform, they shall be assisted by a Divine Spirit; and under
all trials and difficulties, they are sported by the express promise of that
eternal life, which is brought to light by the gospel. -- It is not possible
for the understanding to conceive any method of salvation, planned with more
goodness, and executed with more wisdom, than what is shown in the gospel of
Christ. The consideration of this constitution alone, gives us full reason to
join in that exclamation of the Apostle: O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Romans ii. 33.


From this short survey which we have taken of Divine wisdom, as discovering
itself, in the whole complex frame of the moral world; in the constitution of
human nature; in the government of human affairs; and in the redemption of the
human race; we cannot but perceive how much reason we have to prostrate
ourselves before God, and with all humility to worship and adore. -- When we
view that immense structure of the universe in which we dwell; when we think of
Him, whose wisdom has planned the whole system of being; whose mind
comprehends, whose counsels direct, the whole course of events, from the
beginning to the end of time; by whom nothing is so inconsiderable as to be
overlooked, or so transient as to be forgotten; who attends to the concerns of
the poor man in his cottage, while he is steering the sun and the moon in their
course through the heavens; into what astonishment and self-annihilation do we
fall! Before him all our boasted knowledge is ignorance, and our wisdom is
folly. Wherever we cast (...) eyes on his works and ways, we find all things
adju^^^^ (...) number, weight, and measure; and after all that we can survey,
Lo! these are but a part of his ways; and how small a portion is heard of him!

It is the power of God, which produces among the multitude of men any
impressions of religion. When thunder roars in the heavens, or an earthquake
shakes the ground, they are struck with awe, and disposed to worship an
invisible power. But such impressions of Deity are occasional, and transitory.
The lasting reverence of a Supreme Being arises, in a well informed mind, from
the display of that infinite wisdom which all the universe presents. Its
operations are constantly, though silently, going on around us. We may view it
in the peaceful and sedate state of the universe, as well as in its greatest
commotions; we behold it in every insect that moves on the ground, at the same
time that we admire it in the revolutions of the celestial bodies. Happy for
us, if the contemplation shall nourish that temper of habitual devotion, which
so well becomes dependent beings, and is so intimately connected with all
virtue! See Sermon. XXVII. Vol. ii.


But the chief effect that ought to be produced by meditation on the divine
wisdom, is perfect resignation to the Governor of the universe, and entire
trust in his administration. Our private misfortunes and disappointments are
too often the subject of querulous complaints, and even of unjust suspicions of
Providence. But when in the whole natural and moral world, we behold an
arrangement of things which plainly discovers the most consummate wisdom, can
we believe, that in the arrangement of our petty concerns, this wisdom is
dormant and neglectful? How much more reason is there to think, that our
ignorance of the divine plans misleads our judgment, than that the wisdom of
the Almighty has erred in directing our private affairs. -- ^^^ine wisdom, as I
observed in the beg^ni^^ (...) exertion of divine benevolence. It ha^^ it can
have, no other scope than to accomplish the best ends, by the most proper
means. Let the Wisdom, therefore, and the Goodness, of the deity, be ^ver
conjoined in our idea. Let every new discovery of divine wisdom, be a new
ground of hope, of joy, and of cordial submission, to every virtuous man. Let
him be thankful that he lives in a world, were nothing happens to him by
chance, or at random; but where a great, a wise, and beneficent Mind
continually superintends every event.

Under the faith of this great principle of religion, let us proceed in the
course of our duty, with steadfast and undismayed mind. Let us retain faithful
allegiance to our Creator and our Redeemer; and then we may always hope the
best; and cast our care upon him who cares for us. Wait on the Lord; be of
good courage, and He shall strengthen your heart. Although thou say, thou
can not see him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou in him. --
Let us begin every undertaking, with humble dependence on his assistance for
enabling us to prosecute it to the end. When our undertakings are finished, and
the close of life approaches, with praise to him let us conclude all our
labors.

Unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only Wise God, be honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY ROBERT CAMPBELL, Bookseller, No. 54, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET.
THE Philosophy of Natural History, by William Smeilie. Member of the
Antiquarian and Royal Societies of Edinburgh, 8 vo. The Conductor Generalis; or
the Office, Duty and Authority of Justices of the Peace, High-sheriffs,
Under-sheriffs, Coroners, Constables, Jailers, Jureymen, and Overseers of the
poor. As also the Office of Clerks of Assize and of the Peace, etc. To which
are added, the Excise and Military Laws of the United States; and the act
called the Ten pounds act, of the State of Pennsylvania and New York 8vo. The
New art of Cookery, according to the present practice -- consisting of
Thirty-eight Chapters; by Richard Briggs, many years Cook at the Globetavern
Fleet Street, the White Heart, Holborn, and now at the Temple Coffee-house,
London, 12mo. A Simple Story, by Mrs. Inchbald; 12mo The life of Baron
Frederick Trenck containing his Adventures, his cruel and excessive Sufferings,
during Ten Years Imprisonment in the Fortress of Magdeburg, by command of the
late King of Prussia; also Anecdotes, Historical, Political, and Personal. To
which are now added, his late adventures in France, 12mo. The Beauties of
Hervey; or, Descriptive Picturesque, and Instructive Passages, selected from
the works of this deservedly admired author. To which are now added, Memoirs of
the Author's Life and Character; with an E^^giac Poem on his Death, 12mo. The
rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul: Illustrated in a course of serious
and practical addresses, suited to persons of every character and circumstance.
With a devout Meditation and Prayer, added to each Chapter. To which are added,
a Funeral Sermon on the One Thing Needful. By Philip Doddridge, D. D. 12mo,
Sermons on important subjects, by the Reverend Samuel Davies, A. M. late
President of the College of New Jersey, 2 vols, 8vo. The Westminster Assembly's
Shorter Chatechism, explained by way of question and answer, by Erskin and
Fisher, 80 cents. Meditations and C^^templations -- containing Meditations
among the Tombs: Reflections on a Flower Garden: Contemplations on the Night:
Contemplations on the Starry Heavens; and a Winter Piece. 80 cents. R.
CAMPBELL, Has for Sale, a General Assortment of BOOKS, in all the different
Departments of Literature. Also a complete Assortment of STATIONARY, which will
be sold, either by wholesail or retail, on the lowest terms.

