Information for Immigrants to the New England States.
SINCE the commencement of the present unhappy war among the European nations,
great numbers of people from France, Great Britain, and their West India
islands, impelled by necessity, or prompted by a desire to avoid impending
evils, have taken refuge in the United States. The principles of religion and
humanity require the friendly attention of Americans to these strangers, many
of whom arrive in circumstances of such wretchedness as to give pain to every
feeling mind. It was in consequence of seeing among us, many immigrants of this
description, to whom a little friendly advice and assistance would be
acceptable, and useful, that a number of gentlemen in Boston, and its vicinity,
associated at the close of the year 1793, under the name of "The Massachusetts
Society for the aid of immigrants." Since the formation of this society, others
have been instituted on similar principles in New York, Philadelphia, and
Charleston, (S. C.); at which places most of the immigrants arrive.

Not with design to encourage immigration, was our society formed; for, in our
opinion, the happiness of our country depends not on any forced increase of its
population, its natural increase being sufficiently rapid, and more conducive
to uniformity in principles, habits, and manners, the basis of political and
social order and happiness; but solely with a view to afford comfort and relief
to such as voluntarily, and from real or supposed necessity, seek an asylum
among us, to take such by the hand and direct them in the way to be useful to
themselves, and to that country which protects and befriends them.

To promote the design of their institution, in the circulation of information,
useful to foreigners, the society have thought proper to publish short answers
to the following queries, proposed to them by an intelligent literary
immigrant, and which appear to embrace most of the objects concerning which
information is desired.

Quest. 1. Would it not be more advisable for farmers from Great Britain, or
other European countries, where agriculture has been carried to a high pitch of
perfection, to settle in the cultivated, rather than in the uncultivated parts
of America?

Ans. Farmers from Europe will very probably find the cultivated parts of the
United States more pleasant, and probably more agreeable to their views: For
although the uncultivated parts offer the fairest prospect of laying the
foundation for an estate for their posterity, yet in an unsubdued wilderness
their business will be altogether new. The Americans are undoubtedly better
calculated to subdue wild lands, than the English, who have been accustomed to
a kind, mellow soil: So that though, with much spirit and enterprise, they may
conquer many of the difficulties of settling a wild tract, yet, as their own
knowledge will carry them most of the way, and a little information the rest,
in managing improved farms, where they have considerable capital, preference is
to be given to the latter.

Quest. 2. Are the difficulties of cultivating new land of long duration? Would
they not be almost insurmountable to an English farmer, who has always lived on
land in a pretty high state of cultivation?

Ans. The difficulties will be great, and of several years duration, to the
English farmer, who will find every thing in the business a perfect contrast to
the ease of cultivation in his own country, and have to encounter much hardship
and toil; whilst, however, the progressive improvement of his situation, and
that of his neighbors, will from the first be a source of pleasure to him. In
many parts, it has been found that the first settler of new lands clears it of
the wood under the shelter of a hut only; and after a short and imperfect
cultivation of it, unable to pay for the soil, or influenced by a roving
disposition, leaves it to a successor, who builds a small house and barn, and
brings to the soil; and he is often followed by a third occupier, purchasing
his improvements, who brings the farm to a high state of cultivation. Yet this
rotation cannot be said to be general in the New England states, and seldom
takes place but in case of the extreme poverty and rudeness of the first
settler. The American farmer, who removes from old towns to new, generally
increases his property faster by removal than he otherwise could; and after a
few years, gets into a comfortable way of living. In some instances, English
farmers have succeeded in the uncultivated parts; and where they have some
property, need not be discouraged from making settlements in them.

Quest. 3. Can aliens hold lands in their own names in New England? If not, how
can they purchase land with safety?

Ans. (...) their own names, by act of assembly: But five years residence, by
the last naturalization act, passed by Congress, are necessary to obtain
citizenship.

Quest. 4. Can many farms be purchased at a reasonable rate in New England, and
particularly in Connecticut and Massachusetts?

Ans. By prudent management in the application, there is no doubt that many
good farms may be purchased at reasonable rates. The price has been raised in
consequence of the present war in Europe, which has increased the price of
provisions; but when a peace takes place, farms will probably revert to their
former value.

Quest. 5. Are Connecticut and Massachusetts overstocked with inhabitants? Are
the people obliged to migrate from those states? Is there not still room for
farmers, who have been used to land in a higher state of cultivation than
Connecticut and Massachusetts?

Ans. They are not over-stocked with inhabitants. This is evident from
observing in our towns, where the numbers increase, that individual affluence
increases proportionally. The young people migrate, not from necessity, but in
expectation of getting larger estates. In consequence, partly, of this
disposition to migrate, many excellent tracts may be purchased in old settled
towns, which will suit good farmers, and be found capable of great improvement.

Quest. 6. Is wheat blighted, or destroyed by the Hessian fly?

Ans. It is a received opinion, that wheat is subject to blight within 30 or 40
miles from the sea; but in the interior parts, no such complaint is made, and
it is generally raised. The Hessian fly is almost unknown in New England.

Quest. 7. Is the land in Connecticut and Massachusetts pretty good? Is it
better adapted for grazing than grain?

Ans. Probably as good as in any part of America, excepting new land. It is
hilly and stony, and well watered. The western counties of Massachusetts, and
the middle and eastern parts of Connecticut, are esteemed very good. Many parts
are equally fitted for grazing and grain; it is preferable for the former to
the southern states: Yet the average produce of all sorts of grain in
New England exceeds that of the southern states.

Quest. 8. Can produce be easily conveyed to market?

Ans. There are so many navigable rivers in the New England states, that few
situations are more than 50 miles distant from water conveyance; as may be seen
by recurring to maps. Connecticut river, particularly, lies convenient to a
great extent of the New England states. By these and other rivers, by several
canals now cutting; by the post roads, which are pretty good, though far
inferior to those in England; and by the snow in winter, the conveyance of
produce to market is rendered generally easy.

Quest. 9. Do different sorts of fruit come to perfection?

Ans. All sorts of English fruit come to perfection in New England, and some
which do not commonly grow in England. Orchards are universal in this country,
except in the eastern parts of Maine.

Quest. 10. Are the eastern states as healthful as the middle and southern
states? the people as virtuous and well informed? education as good, cheap, and
convenient?

Ans. We are not subject, except from some local, temporary cause, to the fever
and ague in New England; though consumptions, and other diseases known in
England, prevail. The inhabitants here are more robust, and live to a greater
age, generally, than at the southward. It is well known that the body of the
people are better informed, more industrious and temperate; education better
provided for, by schools, which are established, by law, in all the settled
parts of New England.

See Amer U. Geog. Vol. I. p. 310, 311, 314, 315, 316.

Quest. 11. Does slavery exist in New England?

Ans. It does not exist in Massachusetts; and in the other New England states,
efficacious measures have been adopted for its certain, but gradual abolition.

Quest. 12. What religious sects are there in New England? What (...) is most
(...)?

(...)

Quest. 13. Are the people inclined to persecute each other for religious or
political opinions?

Ans. A persecuting power is not known in America, but a persecuting spirit is
not extinguished. Zeal for religious opinions sometimes, and for wild democracy
in opposition to rational republicanism, often manifests itself by abusive and
inflammatory writings and speeches only; for the laws effectually restrain
opposite sects and parties from injuring one another.

Quest. 14. How are the Clergy and Schoolmasters supported?

Ans. Every town, consisting of 50 householders, is obliged, by law, to
maintain a Schoolmaster; whom they select and contract with voluntarily; and
whose salary is paid either by annual assessments on the property of the
inhabitants of the town or parish, or voluntary contributions. Pew rents,
assessments of the property of the inhabitants of the parish, parsonages,
moneys at interest, and voluntary contributions, are the principal means of
supporting the Clergy.

Quest. 15. How are the poor maintained?

Ans. Every town is obliged, by law, to support its poor inhabitants; which are
not numerous. The paupers, who are not inhabitants of any particular town, are
maintained by the state.

Quest. 16. Are the people in general well affected to the federal government?

Ans. They are in general; for they consider the national prosperity connected
with it.

Quest. 17. Is the expense of living moderate?

Ans. Since the present European war, the price of living has been dear, having
increased from 50 to 70 per cent. When the war is over, it will probably be
much diminished.

Quest. 18. Are the taxes moderate?

Ans. Yes. The expenses of government are less, by much, in proportion to
numbers and wealth, than in any nation on the old continent.

Quest. 19. Are servants scarce, and wages high?

Ans. Common laborers and servants of both sexes are much wanted. Women's
wages, in the sea ports, are from 25 to 50 dollars per annum, and considerably
less in the country. Men's wages are from 60 to 120 dollars per annum, in the
maritime towns; and somewhat less in the country.

Quest. 20. Are mechanics scarce, and wages high?

Ans. House-carpenters and masons are much wanted at present. Their common
wages are from 80 to 125 cents per day; 100 cents being a dollar. Mechanics of
sober character, and skilled in their trades, of almost every kind, may find
employment, and wages equal to their support; but particularly sail-cloth
weavers and flax-dressers, and workers in iron.

Quest. 21. Can manufactures be as advantageously established in New England as
in the southern and middle states?

Ans. Almost every attempt to establish manufactures in the southern states,
has failed; whereas, in Massachusetts, several important manufactures have been
brought to perfection. Wood and water, those powerful and necessary agents in
manufactures, are every where plenty; but the high price of labor is a great
obstacle to the success of this branch of business.

Quest. 22. Is the climate of Connecticut and Massachusetts as temperate as
that of the middle and southern states?

Ans. Our winters are generally longer and colder, though the winter is often
as severe in Pennsylvania as in the eastern states. Our summers are not so hot,
and our hot days are succeeded by cool nights, which render them more
tolerable. Sudden changes of temperature are probably more frequent here; but
still our climate is more healthful.

Quest. 23. Of what extraction are the people of New England?

Ans. They are very generally of English extraction, and resemble the English
in their character, manners, and habits.


