A REVEALED KNOWLEDGE OF THE PROPHECIES AND TIMES, PARTICULARLY OF THE PRESENT
TIME, THE PRESENT WAR, AND THE POPHECY NOW FULFILLING. THE YEAR OF THE WORLD
5913.

BOOK THE SECOND.

Containing, with other great and remarkable things, not revealed to any other
person on earth, the sudden and perpetual fall of the Turkish, German, and
Russian Empires.

WROTE UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE LORD GOD AND PUBLISHED BY HIS SACRED COMMAND;
IT BEING A SECOND SIGN OF WARNING FOR THE BENEFIT OF ALL NATIONS.

By the Man that will be Revealed to the Hebrews as their PRINCE AND PROPHET.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, No. 40, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1795.

PREFACE.
LENGTH of time, change of countries and governments, corruption of language,
and hasty copies in writing, before the more exact method of printing became
generally used, has been the means of not only introducing, without design,
into the Hebrew Bible, an insertion of some new words, but likewise an
expulsion of some of the old, which produces a disagreement in some few parts,
and makes it differ now from what it originally was in the times of David,
Solomon, and at the commencement of the Babylonian captivity: some parts of the
English translation are consequently erroneous; but they are so immaterial as
not to affect, in the least, the truth of its sacred Records, or the tendency
of its divine instruction. The few parts of the English translation, which I am
instructed to alter in my writings, the propriety will be allowed by every
person that has discernment to perceive, or conviction to believe: -- beyond
the limits of my authority, for it is prescribed, I am not suffered to proceed
in any word or in any way whatever.

The following are the words which the Lord God spoke to me in a vision, soon
after I was commanded to write and make known his judgments, for the good of
London and general benefit of all nations: -- There is no other man under the
whole heaven that I discover the errors of the Bible to, and reveal a knowledge
how to correct them, so that they may be restored as they were in the
beginning, but yourself.

Moreover, when I began to write I believed it necessary to adopt the same
language as the Scripture does, regularly imitating it in the words -- ye,
thee, and thou; but God spoke to me in a vision of the night, and said -- Write
in the same manner as I always speak to you; write as other men do; write
according to the custom of the country you live in; you will then be better
attended to, and what you write will be more easily understood.

A man that has been an officer in the navy, whose immediate ancestors have
been separated from the Jews such a considerable length of time as to make them
forget they ever belonged to the name, such a man declaring himself openly to
the world a Prophet of God, the revealed Prince allotted to order the sudden
return of the Hebrews from all nations, and govern them in the land of Israel,
will, with some reason, I allow, excite both astonishment and doubt; but from
the multiplied recorded testiomonies I produce, which no other on earth can, it
ought not to prevail with any person as a just objection against believing what
I write.

For observe, some hostile profession was necessary for me to be engaged in, to
fulfill the recorded judgment on the family I am designed to represent in the
seat of government; therefore, with all the certain proofs I have and will
constantly bring forward, with all the just reasons I advance, the surprise and
doubt, entertained at the beginning, ought to vanish in as little time as would
be requisite to read again the book which contains the account.

But remember likewise, from the records of Scripture, that Moses was taken
away in his infancy, and remained separated from his brethren for eighty years:
the first forty of which he was reared in the palace of the king of Egypt, and
educated in the language and customs of the country like one of its own native
princes; yet he was revealed to the Israelites as the prophet of God, to order
their hasty departure from Pharaoh's bondage, and afterward to conduct them to
the promised land.

Saul, the son of Kish, after being anointed king, prophesied in company with
other men, to the great astonishment of all that saw him.

David, king of Israel, the greatest favorite that ever God had on earth,
whose wars, though many, originated at that time from necessity and justice,
never undertook, but to prevent the introduction of idolatry, and preserve in
the land of Israel a true uninterrupted worship of God, was a prophet; and for
whose sake, in remembrance of his name, besieging armies were destroyed, and
Jerusalem safely delivered. Yet this great monarch, this unequalled favorite,
this pattern of mercy to all kings, and who alone, of all men under heaven,
possessed the established promise of everlasting national government, could
not, (but the objection did not proceed from any charge of injustice or sin,)
for, being a man of war, and having shed much blood on the earth, although done
by the express concurrence of the Most High, be permitted to build at Jerusalem
a temple of worship for him: The great honor was given to Solomon, a king of
peace, his son and immediate successor; so averse, though necessitated to order
it, was the Creator of the world to the effusion of blood and the destruction
of man.

First of Chronicles, Chap. xxii.
7. And David said to Solomon, my son, as for me, it was in my mind to build a
house to the name of the Lord my God.

8. But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, thou have shed much blood, and
have made great wars; thou shall not build a house to my name, because thou
have shed much blood on the earth in my sight.

9. Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest, and I will
give him rest from ^ll his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon,
and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days.

10. He shall build a house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I will be
his father; and I will establish his kingdom over Israel for ever.

Samuel was not only a priest, but likewise principal judge of Israel, yet he
was a great prophet.

Isaiah was a prince of the family of David, and likewise a prophet.

Ezekiel was one of the principal priests.

Jeremiah one of the poorer; yet both were alike great prophets.

Amos was a poor herdsman of Tekoa, in the land of Israel;

Daniel, a captive prince at Babylon, in Assyria; and yet both were great
prophets.

God, without being accountable to any man for what he does, will sanctify,
with his blessed Spirit, whom he pleases, however astonishing it may appear,
and however incredible to the self righteous, that any person in preference to
himself, should receive and be commanded to make known a communication of
revealed knowledge St. Paul was taught a knowledge of the Gospel by revelation,
and instructed likewise how to preach it, before he could be an apostle, and
joined to the ministry of Christ.
;

Galatians, Chap. 1.
11 But I certify to you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me is
not after man; but with God there is no distinction of high or low, rich or
poor; in his presence both are regarded alike, when just; and the Scripture
abounds with many examples, recorded on purpose for after ages to imitate.

In the same manner that a knowledge of the Gospel, and how to preach it, was
revealed to St. Paul, a knowledge of futurity, and those parts of the Scripture
I have constantly mentioned, were revealed to me.

12 For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Ephesians, Chap. iii.
2 If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me
toward you:

3 How that by revelation he made known to me the mystery, as I wrote before in
few words.

4 Whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ.

5 Which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it is now
revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit.

IN obedience to the sacred command of the Lord God, whose servant and prophet
I am, I publish this writing, that it may be translated into all languages, for
the information and benefit of all nations.

This is the last sign, and last warning, I am commanded to say, that will be
given in writing before I am revealed to the Jews, when the commands delivered
to me will be -- to order them to depart in great haste from all nations, and
go to the land of Israel: to repronounce the judgments of God, which have been
suspended hitherto for my sake, and declare them irrevocable.

Of the PROPHECY which relates to the present time of the WORLD, the present
WAR, and the approaching DISTRESS of all Nations.
The Prophet Daniel, Chap. vii.
1. In the first year of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, Daniel had a dream, and
visions in the night on his bed; then he wrote the visions, to show the
substance of what they contained.

2. Daniel spoke and said; I saw in my vision by night, and behold the four
winds of the heaven strove on the great sea.

3. And four great beasts came from the sea, different one from another.

4. The first was like a lion, and it had eagle's wings: I beheld until the
wings were plucked, when it was lifted up on the earth, and made stand on the
feet as a man; and a man's heart was given to it.

The lion means George the Third, the present king of England; plucking the
wings of the lion, means taking away the power of the king; made stand on the
feet as a man, with a man's heart, means his reduction to the condition of
other men, and possessing similar thoughts.

It is more than twenty months since I first wrote to the king, queen, and
minister of state, to inform them of many things that would come to pass; that
the time was nearly accomplished for some of the judgments of God to be made
manifest, and also that this prophecy was fulfilling: I beseeched them in the
most earnest and respectful language, not to join in the war on any account
whatever, or even encourage it; for the death of Louis the sixteenth would be
impossible to prevent, it was recorded, and could not be avoided; the
revolution in France, and its consequences, proceeded entirely from the
judgment of God to fulfill this prophecy of Daniel: therefore all attempts to
overthrow the judgment, and preserve the monarchy by force, was opposing what
was determined in the Scripture of Truth should most certainly take place.

The aspect of the war was delusive, the encouragements of success that it held
out to princes were deceitful; but those encouragements of delusion were
permitted, to bring many nations under the judgment of God, and punish them for
the heavy guilt of opposing his decrees.

If many had no more to sight against than a few men alone, or nations but one
divided nation to subdue, then it might with reason be expected that the
greatest number would soon overcome the least, and that many strong nations
would soon conquer a weak one: but it is many men fighting against the Spirit
of God, and strong nations laboring in vain with their blood and treasure to
overthrow his judgment.

The Lord God permits this opposition for three years and a half, to fulfill the
determined part of this prophecy on all that oppose it; that done, his
judgments will take place, to punish man and lay waste kingdoms.

St. John the Apostle, in the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation, alludes to
the present time of the world, and means the same things, though differently
described, as the Prophet Daniel does in the seventh chapter; for which I am
commanded to insert a part, that all princes and governments may be publicly
warned, that they may know the consequences of this war, from the judgment of
God, will be -- death to millions, and everlasting distress to all nations.

10. And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said to me, see thou do it
not; I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of
Jesus; worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

11. And I saw heaven opened; and behold a white horse; and he that sat on him
was called Faithful and True: and in righteousness he does judge and make war.

12. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he
had a name written that no man knew but he himself.

13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is
called, The word of God.

14. And the armies which were in heaven followed him on white horses, clothed
in fine linen, white and clean.

The armies are an allusion to the powerful judgments of God, under what -- or
how many different forms their visitation of death is made on the world.

15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
nations: and he will rule them with a rod of iron; and he treads the wine press
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16 And he has on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of kings,
and Lord of lords.

17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he ^ried with a loud voice,
(meaning thunder, which is explained in the first book of Revealed Knowledge)
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, come and gather
yourselves together to the supper of the Great God.

18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them; and
the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.

19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered
together, to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.

20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat on the horse,
which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with
their flesh.

Chap. vii. continued. 5. And behold, another beast; a second, like a bear: and
it raised itself up on one side, with three ribs in its mouth between its
teeth; and they said thus to it, Arise, devour much flesh.

This verse means the present Empress of Russia: She is according to the
judgment of God in this prophecy, decreed to suffer death: and by revelation I
am informed it will be done by the hands of man.

6. After this, I beheld, and lo, another like a leopard: which had on its back
four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads, and dominion was given to
it.

The leopard, means Louis the sixteenth king of France: the wings of a fowl on
its back, is, like the eagle's on the lion, an allusion to the king's great
moveable power.

The fall of this monarch from a throne, and afterward suffering death, to
fulfill the judgment of God by his prophet Daniel, was impossible for all the
armies of Europe to prevent; equally so as the decreed death of Charles the
first, king of England, which is mentioned by St. John in the thirteenth
chapter and third verse of the Revelation: the deadly wound being healed, in
the same verse; means the recovery of monarchy by the restoration of Charles
the second.

7. After this I saw in the night visions a fourth beast; and behold, it was
dreadful, and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it
devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue (meaning the electors)
with its feet; it was different from all the beasts that were seen before, and
it had ten horns.

This great beast, so different from the others, means the present Emperor of
Germany; the ten horns, mean the electors, or princes of the empire.

In one part of this chapter the horns are denominated kings; the reason is,
they raise armies, go to war, and govern with absolute power, like them; but
notwithstanding, they all acknowledge the Emperor as their chief, and under
that acknowledgment of subjection are solemnly engaged to defend his empire
when called on. For which, to conceal the meaning of the prophesy, until the
fullness of time comes and the appointed person for it to be revealed to, the
vision represents the German princes as horns of defense belonging to the
Emperor's head.

It devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue with its feet --
means the entire destruction of the German electors; and the possession of
their territories by the Emperor: he will destroy them, and also spread his
dominion over Italy; threatening at the same time all Europe, and despising its
kings with their feeble efforts to oppose him. Rome will fall under his power,
and so will Venice likewise; the former will be retaken by the French republic,
but the latter will be plundered and almost destroyed. After this, to fulfill
the prophecy and the judgment of God, he will suffer death from the hands of
man.

The orders of the Emperor, in the Netherlands are, that if the Austrian army
should be defeated, and it most surely will, for I am commanded to repeat, as
an example and warning, what the prophet Jeremiah was commanded to say to the
messengers of Zedekiah, king of Judah.

Chap. xxxvii. 9. Thus says the Lord; Deceive not yourselves, saying, the
Chaldeans will surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.

10. For though he had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight
against you, and there remained but wounded men, yet they should rise up, every
man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.

By the same example, if the French army was to be defeated, even again, and
again it should recover and conquer likewise; (that all the judgments of God,
in the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, may take their course, and be
fulfilled,) to acknowledge the French republic, and make an immediate peace on
the best terms that can be obtained, the interests of other nations will not be
much consulted: time, the threats of a victorious enemy, and the perilous
condition of the German army, will not admit the least delay.

The English will sharply remonstrate against this conduct; for which their
army, however incredible it may appear to the Government now, will be
surrounded, disarmed, and commanded to depart: but their General will be
detained by the Austrian; and by revelation from the Lord God to me, he falls
to the ground.

The Emperor being exhausted of money by the war, but having a large army at
his command, determines, now he has made peace with the French, and quarrelled
with the English, to execute the plan he has for some time conceived the hopes
of being one day able to accomplish -- his father and uncle, strange as it may
appear, yet it is most certainly true, for I am informed, by revelation,
conceived the same design, and believed the attempt easily practicable when the
opportunity offered, which is -- the reduction of all Germany, under the sole
government of himself.

He begins with seizing on the electorate of Hanover, and plundering it quite
bare: after this success, his ambition for more extensive dominion will rise;
it will now lead him boldly forward to subject and devour them all. For God, to
fulfill his judgments, and this prophecy of Daniel, in chapter vii. will deliver
him over, to be governed by the secret, but powerful workings of an evil
spirit; because his inclinations are bad: according to all that I informed the
King and Queen of in May and June 1792; as he did Ahab, king of Israel, to
accomplish his fall, and the entire destruction of his family.

First of Kings, Chap. xxii.
4. And he said to Jehoshaphat, will thou go with me to the battle to Ramoth
Gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am the same as thou, my
people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.

5. And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, from the
word of the Lord to day.

6. Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred
men, and said to them, Shall I go against Ramoth Gilead to battle; or shall I
forbear? and they said, Go up; for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of
the king.

7. And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that
we might enquire of him?

8. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, There is one man yet, Micaiah,
the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him, for he
does not prophecy good of me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king
say so.

11. And Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, made horns of iron; and he said, Thus
says the Lord, with these thou shall push the Syrians, until thou consume them.

12. And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and
prosper: for the Lord will deliver it into the king's hand.

13. And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah, spoke to him, saying,
Behold now, the words of the prophets are as one mouth, declaring good to the
king: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak
that which is good also.

14. And Micaiah said, As the Lord lives, what the Lord says to me, that will I
speak:

17. And he said, I saw all Israel scattered on the hills as sheep which have
not a shepherd: and the Lord said, these have no master; let them return, every
man to his house in peace.

18. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee, that he
would prophecy no good for me, but evil?

19. And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord
sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him, on his right
hand and on his left

20. And the Lord said, who will persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at
Ramoth Gilead; and one said in this manner, and another said in that manner.

21. And there came forth a Spirit, and he stood before the Lord, and said, I
will persuade him.

22. And the Lord said to him, In what manner? and he said, I will go forth,
and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said,
Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also: Go forth, and do so.

23. Now, therefore, behold, the Lord God has put a lying spirit in the mouth
of all these thy prophets, and the Lord has spoken of evil concerning thee.

The Emperor's council will be filled with the same delusive evil spirit, that
they may concur with him, and possess the same violent inclination for war and
human destruction as himself. At this time a fresh decree will be issued from
Vienna, commanding all Germany, and all the people under his government, as he
conquers them by fire and sword, to offer solemn prayers up to the Lord God,
for the further success of his imperial majesty's arms, the entire destruction
of his enemies, and the preservation of himself; styling him, in blasphemy
against God, then most gracious, just, and merciful sovereign Lord.

The other nations of Europe, afraid and trembling, will as solemnly implore
the same Lord God for peace and safety, against such a cruel enemy, forgetting,
that it was but a little time before, they were praying in the same strain of
blasphemy as himself -- to destroy their enemies, and give success to their
arms; to that very gracious a^ compassionate God, who sealed the redemption of
man with his own blood, and strictly commanded all nations, as his children and
people, to live in peace and brotherly love.

Opposition is in vain; he goes through the principalities like a flood, and
collects in his progress a mighty army. The course of the prophecy is, That he
shall conquer and destroy all before him: therefore he certainly will; and take
away the treasure of many wealthy cities likewise.

After this, to finish oppression, and fulfill the decreed judgment of God, the
French republic will be raised against him; his army will be entirely
overthrown in Italy, and himself will be compelled to seek shelter among the
very people whose relations he destroyed, whose towns he plundered and burnt
but a little time before. This is Francis, the present reigning Emperor of
Germany, who is described, in chap. vii. ver. 7. of the prophecy of Daniel, as
great, strong, and terrible; stamping under his feet with contempt, and
destroying all the princes round him. His ambition will increase with his
dominion, and his conquests will be so wonderful, for a short time, as to make
all Europe tremble; his end is miserable; and as he treated others without
mercy, no mercy will be shown to him. His death, by the hands of man is
certain, because decreed; and his punishment everlasting, because recorded. To
be related to him now, will be considered hereafter as a capital crime.

Chap. vii. continued. 8. I considered the horns, and behold there came up
among them another little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns
plucked up by the roots; and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of
man, and a mouth speaking great things.

This little horn, that grows great, and becomes so ambitious as to pluck up
three of the other horns, to extend his own dominion, is the present king of
Prussia. He is one of the imperial electors, and to fulfill exactly what the
visions of God describe him to be, he confidently calls himself, in great
words, -- The preponderating member of the Germanic body.

The king of Prussia will acknowledge the French republic, and also make peace
with it: he will oppose the Emperor, and likewise follow his example; by which
his dominions, to fulfill the prophecy, will be enlarged (comparatively for a
moment only) by the addition of three electorates, when the Bear, (meaning
Russia,) watching for the opportunity, will rise and devour Prussia at one
side, while the Emperor destroys him at the other. His armies will be defeated,
and his capitol set on fire by the Bear: his life will be taken away from the
earth, and his monarchy, to fulfill the everlasting decrees of the Lord God, in
the prophecy of Daniel, will be destroyed; never, never, to be restored any
more.

Russia will assist the Emperor in the beginning to promote her favorite
design of destroying the Turkish empire; she will also quarrel with the Poles,
and devour great numbers of them; Warsaw will be set on fire, and the
government entirely changed. At this time the Russian army, (or Bear,) as if
impatient for its food, to rise and devour much flesh, will enter Turkey, and
comparatively run over the land; treading down, and devouring with great fury,
all opposition in its way. At the capitol it stops; here are its decreed
bounds; no farther it must go. Here the Russian general divides the spoils of
many cities with his army, and the rich provinces of Turkey between his
officers. Here he despises the oath of fidelity, and throws away the submission
of a subject -- proclaiming himself Emperor of Greece.

After this the Swedes will enter Russia, and destroy with great fury; even the
ships of war and capitol will not escape. The Russian empire will be convulsed
in many parts by its general and governors, each rising up in his place, and
claiming an authority to command the other: they will fight until great
multitudes are destroyed, and the country made desolate. The imperial family
will all be cut off, and no successor will for ever after arise; the
government, at the same time, will be broke to pieces, and utterly dissolved;
never, never, to be restored any more.

The Spanish Monarchy will cease by this war, and the Stadholdership of Holland
will be cut off close to the ground; according to the visions of God to me, in
1792, and which I communicated at that time by his sacred command to the king
and queen of England.

The king of Sardinia will be dethroned, and the Popedom destroyed for ever!
according to the revelation of God to me, and which I communicated to the
English prime minister before the war with France was entered into; concluding
what I wrote to him with these words -- It is not all the navy of England, nor
the armies of Europe united, can prevent the king of Sardinia from being
dethroned.

The death of the French king, as one of the particular number mentioned in the
seventh chapter of Daniel, decreed to die, took place, to fulfill the
pre-determined judgment of God by this prophet; the monarchy of France is
likewise by the same judgment, abolished for ever, and the present form of
government established. Therefore marvel no more that it cannot be conquered by
all the armies without, nor destroyed by all the commotions within; if it
could, by human power, the Horn (meaning the king of Prussia) would be the
alloted man to accomplish it: for the meaning of the prophecy is, that he shall
prevail against France for three years and a half, but not to conquer the
whole: he would have faithfully kept with his army in France the promises he
made with his mouth on entering it; which were, to deliver over the towns for
plunder, and the people for death, if he was opposed. It is for this that he is
described by Daniel, to have a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies. All
this would have been permitted, because recorded, to fulfill the prophecy; to
hasten his own destruction, and the general fall of European monarchy.

The Dutch will acknowledge the French republic, and also make a hasty peace
with it; the Portuguese will do the same.

To the KING and PARLIAMENT of GREAT BRITAIN.
Hear what the Lord God additionally says to me by revelation, and commands me
to write -- France seeing England left alone, deserted by all her allies, will
require, as the conditions of peace, an acknowledgment of the republic, a
restoration of the colonies, and the ships taken away from Toulon. For a short
time he will permit England, as he will Russia and Germany, to succeed in the
acquisition of delusive conquest, but it is the better -- the more effectual,
and more imperceptible to human foresight, to accomplish his judgment on her,
according to the prophecy of Daniel and revelation of St. John; after that
short time is expired, which is nearly so now, new enemies will rise up, some
warring against her openly, others privately; all will prevail, until she that
sits now, as a queen among the nations, is, according to the vision of God, in
my first book, without a covering on her head, worn threadbare, and rent in
many places.

Will England continue this war any longer against a people that has the
judgment of God in their favor? Will she, by a continuance of the present war
against France, enter into another for the safety of Hanover, against the
Emperor of Germany, who will be rendered invincible for a time, as a scourge,
to fulfill the recorded judgments of God? Will she continue this war and longer
for her destruction, that she may enter into a fresh one with America to hasten
it? Is the king of England so regardless of his own life, and the preservation
of his family, as to involve them with himself in certain misery and death, by
^ longer continuance of this war? Is the government, the parliament, the clergy
and people, so insensible to the blessings of peace, and the happiness of
fortune, as to prefer the absolute certainty of losing all they possess, and
being destroyed themselves, to support a war which, in its consequences, to
fulfill the judgment of God, is designed shall throw down for ever, the English
monarchy; and from the confusion it will make, throughout the country, involve
almost every family of wealth in beggary and death?

Are you, William Pit, to whom I wrote in May and June, 1792, informing you of
the consequences of this war to your country, when the war was not intended, so
insensible to your own preservation and the benefit of your brother, as to
continue any longer a war that will involve both you and him in certain death?
What I acquainted you with in 1792, and often since, was made known to me by
visions and revelations from the Lord God. The death of Louis XVI. and the
removal of the English crown from the king's head, to a level with the ground,
according to the seventh chapter of Daniel; the fall of the queen's palace, and
the destruction of the tower; your own removal from administration, and
afterward death, was among the things which I informed you of, would most
certainly come to pass as the evil consequences of this delusive war. My
account to you then, of futurity, concluded with these words -- "The visions
are established, and the things mentioned most certain and true."

When I informed you that England would enter into this war, and the
consequences which would, in despite of all your efforts, flow from it, you
despised me; for, at that time, the war was not intended; and to tell of evils
that would most certainly ensue from a thing, when the thing they were to
proceed from was not designed, were to you the effects of folly and deceit.

My knowledge of future things is given me from God; therefore what I wrote was
true: A little time longer, and England will be so much entangled as not to be
able to go forward without feeling the pains of that colonial conquest which is
to be the cause of her death; nor to retire, without falling under that foreign
blow, which will break the empires in pieces, and throw herself down on the
ground; from whence she is never to rise up any more.

Neither evil can be prevented, and both will take place, to fulfill the
judgment of God, according to the prophecy of Daniel and revelation of St.
John; unless what I write is believed to be tru^ and the advice I give is
strictly followed. Fleets and armies are great things to talk of, because
terrible to destroy mankind; but, when opposed by the power of Heaven, they
become weak, they lose their force and terror; for most of those in Europe are
destined for the rocks and the flames* They are permitted to conquer a little
for a short time now; but it is, like Russia and Germany, to hasten that
dreadful fall of human government which will soon take place in the world: for
they ever have been, in the hand of God, the very instruments to effect what
princes designed to prevent.

On the 12th of the month called May, 1792, I wrote to the king, minister of
state, and speaker of the commons, that no person should be able to say,
hereafter, my conduct was irregular, or in the least disrespectful, to inform
them that I was commanded by the Lord God, to go to the Parliament House on the
17th following, and acquaint the members, for their own personal safety, and
the general benefit of the country -- That the time of the world was come to
fulfill the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, and some of the judgments
of God in the Revelation; that the death of Louis the XVI. and the revolution
in France, for the perpetual destruction of its monarchy, was decreed in the
Scripture of Truth; and would, against all human opposition, most surely take
place: To inform them that the war, just going to be commenced by Prussia and
Austria, against France, was the very war alluded to by St. John, in the
Revelation, chap. xix. which God called a war against himself; because it went
to oppose his decrees, and because it would be an effort of kings to overthrow
his unalterable judgment. I was commanded to advise them, as I was the king and
minister of state, not to join in the war, or even encourage it on any account
whatever: To inform them of the approaching fall of monarchy in Europe, the
great distress this war would be productive of to all nations, but particularly
to those that engaged in it: and likewise to inform them of their own sudden
fall in the jaws of the earth by a pre-determined earthquake, according to the
judgment of God, in chap. xvi. ver. 16, 17, 18 and 19, of the Revelation; and,
lastly, to entreat them to acknowledge this gracious communication from God,
for their length of life and blessing, by an obedience to his good advice.

When at the door, on the 17th, I informed the Speaker, by a letter, that I
waited, and was ready to communicate all that I was commanded. In a few minutes
after a messenger returned, with my own letter, who treated me, in such a
public place particularly, with unfeeling contempt and incivility. The Lord God
spoke to me instantly, on being ordered to go about my business, and said --
Get away, get away from this place; be under no concern, it was not you that
was despised and ordered away, but me, in your person, that sent you.

Soon after my return home I was in a vision, and saw a large measuring rod
move through the streets in great haste, and strike many of the houses as it
passed, marking them for their approaching fall. After this I was made to look
toward the Treasury, while the Lord God pronounced at the same time -- All
that side shall fall. In an instant, the whole place was covered with thick
darkness; it seemed to be everlasting darkness; darkness that should never be
removed: And, again, he pronounced, in quick words, as if displeased -- The
whole shall fall.

The information, as will be plainly seen by the date, which I gave to the king
and minister of state, with what I was commanded to offer to the parliament,
was not only before the present war with France was entered into, but also some
length of time before it was ever intended: therefore no person can say, with
justice, that either my conduct in obeying the positive commands of God, or my
endeavors to preserve this country from the many evils it has now to encounter
with according to the determined judgment of unerring prophecy; originated from
weak ideas or political motives. No, my knowledge is given from God; I see all
things now as they truly are; and know their consequences, to change them to
what they really will be hereafter.

I am commanded to keep no company, and live retired; that I may avoid the
temptation of political discussion, or any other argument, that would create
animosity and strife.

The two parts of the REVELATION, to be fulfilled in LONDON and the ENGLISH
PARLIAMENT, according to the Judgment of God; but are immediately suspended for
my entreaty.
Chap. xi. 3. And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall
prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackloth.

4. There are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks, standing before
the God of the earth.

The two witnesses, the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks, mean the
same two parts of the everlasting Gospel of Salvation, as they are wrote by St.
Matthew and St. John; which are the two apostles and proper witnesses of Christ.

This explanation alone, which has never been discovered to any before, is
sufficient to strike every man with conviction, that studies the Scripture, and
believes in the spirit of God, the as this part is true, the others I have, and
shall constantly mention, are equally so; and that aknowledge of the whole
comes directly to me from the Divine Being.

As the eyes of the blind cannot be opened, nor the sick healed, but by the
immediate power of God; so neither can the prophecies be truly explained, but
by regular instruction from the same Almighty Being.

Read diligently what follows, and by the information contemplate on the mighty
goodness of God, for revealing a true knowledge of his prophecies in sufficient
time to implore for mercy, and save a city, with multitudes of people, recorded
to be destroyed.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit will make war against them, and will overcome them,
and kill them.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, which is
spiritually called Sodom in Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

This great city, mentioned here, means London: her streets are full of
prostitutes, and many of her houses are full of crimes. It is for such
exceeding great wickedness, that St. John spiritually calls London, in this
chapter, by the name of Sodom; and infers, from the toleration of so much evil,
that the two witnesses of Christ, that the two apostles, St. Matthew and St
John, spiritually represented by the two parts of the Gospel, which they wrote,
that their two bodies lie dead -- thrown out in the street -- trampled under
the foot of vice.

11. And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell on all that saw them.

The three days and a half, means three years and a half; and the present is
the time of the world alluded to by St. John: for until the present war, of
time, times, and the dividing of time, which is three years and a half,
according to the 7th chapter of Daniel, also is expired, the two parts of the
blessed Gospel will lie dead in London, and over Europe likewise: after which,
a prophet (myself) will be revealed to the world, with signs and the mighty
power of fire from God; the two parts of the Gospel of Salvation will then be
revived. (For my designation is, and the commands of God to me are, that I
shall walk through the great thorough fare street of the city, to re-pronounce
his judgments, and declare them irrevocable. As a testimony from God that they
have been suspended for my sake, but are now commanded to be fulfilled, because
his offers of mercy have been despised, and his messenger treated as false. I
am to take the rod, which he ordered me to cut in 1792, and throw it on the
ground, when it will be changed into a serpent; to take it in my hand again,
when it will be re-changed to a rod.) The people of London will then tremble,
and all nations will be greatly afraid, when they hear the dreadful
consequences for neglecting them so long.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, (meaning thunder) saying to
them, come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their
enemies beheld them.

13. And the same hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
city fell; and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the
remainder were affrighted, and gave glory (meaning honor) to the God of heaven.

The recorded judgment of God, according to this last verse, is, that London,
for indeed it is the city meant, shall be visited by an earthquake, and a tenth
part of it destroyed; in that tenth part, about seven thousand persons will be
killed. When the people see this, they will be convinced that it proceeds from
the great anger of God, for despising his offered mercy, and treating his
messenger ill; then they will all be frightened, and will all believe: Then the
city will honor him by instant reformation, and all the people will implore
him for pity.

Lot was laughed at, and the danger despised by his sons-in-law, when he said
to them, "Up, get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this city."
Sodom was burnt, and they perished.

The king of Nineveh, although a professed idolater, and immersed in
wickedness, believed the judgment of God by his prophet when he heard it,
without the additional testimony of Scriptural evidence; he immediately humbled
himself, reformed, and entreated for mercy; by doing so, the city was forgiven,
and all its people saved.

14. The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly.

This part which follows belongs to the thirteenth chapter; and is a
continuation of the account begun there, of the Rise, Progress, and Perpetual
Fall of the English government.
Chap. xvi. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of
the false prophet.

14. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth to
the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
that great day of God Almighty.

The thirteenth verse means the proclamation issued out by the king and
council, to assemble for the last time the English parliament; they are to
meet, but are never to separate, that all things in this prophecy relative to
them may be fulfilled; and in the allotted time will, according to the judgment
of God, be destroyed by a^ earthquake.

Reader, consider attentively what I write, and remember that sin is always
committed by man through the temptation of Satan, (for there is no man on earth
that does not do wrong at times, neither is there any that is not a sinner;
look at the words of Solomon in his prayer when the Temple was dedicated.) This
proclamation then being blasphemous, is in the same manner directed by his
secret and powerful influence.

16. And he (meaning the king) gathered then together into a place, called in
the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

Them, means the parliament; Armageddon their house to assemble and die in.

Armageddon was a valley to bury the dead in, and also a place of great
mourning, near Jerusalem: The Parliament House in London being the recorded
prophesied burying-place of its members, and multitudes besides, is, for its
designed similarity to the former, spiritually to the former, spiritually
called in the Hebrew tongue by the same name.

17. And the seventh angel poured out his vial in the air; and their came a
great voice (meaning loud thunder) out of the Temple of heaven, from the
Throne, saying -- "It is done."

This verse means, that when the allotted time is expired for the English
parliament to exist, the Lord God will pronounce from the throne of heaven, in
a voice of very loud thunder, the judgment of its utter destruction on a sudden.

18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great.

The judgment of God being to destroy the English Parliament, this mighty
earthquake will swallow it up at the very time of its sitting; and likewise so
much of London, as to leave but three divisions of it standing.

19. And the great city was divided into three parts; and the cities of the
nations fell: and great Babylon (meaning Rome in this chapter) came in
remembrance before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of
his wrath.

30. And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

The city mentioned here, under the name of the great city, means London; this
designed recorded earthquake will be felt in all nations under heaven as well
as in England, and its dreadful effects by most cities in the world as well as
London. The earth will be shook so violently at this time as to make it sink in
many places, and let the sea flow in where the land was: mountains will sink to
a level with valleys, and many islands will disappear in the sea. This
earthquake will spread desolation throughout all countries, and destroy great
multitudes of people.

The United States of America will declare war against England; but before they
do, France will lose all her West India islands; and after they do, Jamaica
will be the last in the possession of the English.

On the 25th of June, 1792, I wrote to the French ambassador then in London, by
command of the Lord God, acquainting him with the future loss of the French
Islands, and likewise the fall of the English. But he treated it in the same
manner as all the writings of the prophets of God ever have been, when they
sent divine information, when they spoke the truth, when they did not flatter
with pleasing words to deceive.

There will great changes take place in all nations under heaven, to fulfill
this prophecy of Daniel by visions in the seventh chapter: Nation will not only
rise against nation, but they will be likewise torn by civil wars in
themselves; kingdom will rise against kingdom, and man against man; until they
fight and fall -- to tise no more. The sword will destroy very great multitudes
of people by this war, and occasion frightful desolations over the earth.

The promise of God by the Prophet Haggai in Zerubbabel, governor of Judah,
although mentioned in the first book, I am commanded to repeat it here, means
the present time of the WORLD, and the present WAR, with its destructive
consequences; and MYSELF the man, in whom this great promise of wonderful
distinction and elevation is to be fulfilled.
Chap. ii. 20. And again the word of the Lord came to Haggai in the four and
twentieth day of the month, saying,

21. Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, and say, I will shake the heavens
and the earth.

22. And I will overthrow the thrones of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; I will overthrow their chariots, and
those that ride in them; their horses and riders shall come down, every one by
the sword of the other.

The present time of the world, and this present war in its spreading
consequences, is the time of trouble and destruction meant by the prophet: this
is also the Great War recorded (...) Daniel and St. John, that no man has a
knowledge of its progress and how it will end revealed to him but myself: this
is the war which will fill up the measure of transgression, and carry the guilt
of shedding innocent blood into all nations: the sword is drawn in heaven, and
the cup of fury held out to the earth, according to the prophecies in the
Scripture, and the visions of God shown to me, which are recorded by his sacred
command in the first book; therefore, she must drink deep from the one, that
she may feel less the bitterness of death from the other, until wasted of her
inhabitants.

23. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, my
servant, the son of Shealtiel, and will make thee as a signet; for I have
chosen thee, says the Lord of Hosts.

The promise of God to Zerubbabel, by the Prophet Haggai, in this verse, means,
that when the time of the world is come, and this prophecy fulfilling, he will
be revived in his descendant, who will be not only like himself, the visible
prince and governor (...) the Laws, but also receive the full performance of
this (...) promise; which is to be regarded by all nations as their signet of
peace and safety.

The covenant to King David, and the renewal of it to Solomon, with this
recorded promise to Zerubbabel, will be fulfilled in me; for which the Lord
God, through this writing, holds me out now as the promised signet in his hand
to all nations that believe in him, and commands me to say, That his recorded
judgments, in the Scripture, according to all that I have mentioned, according
to the prophecies of Daniel, Haggai, and St. John in the Revelation, for the
fall of cities, the fall of thrones, the fall of princes, the death of
millions, and the desolation of kingdoms, shall be suspended again, if the
nations at war will accept of life, and return to his government of peace.

But if they allow themselves to be led away by delusive temptations, if they
refuse to believe that I am commanded to offer these things, although supported
by undeniable proofs of scripture, of revealed knowledge in this book, as well
as in the first, which are unknown to any other, and which were never made
known to any man before; if they will not accept of this gracious offer of
mercy, for their length of life now, and the good of their children hereafter,
all I have mentioned, all the prophecies of Daniel, Haggai, and St. John in the
Revelation, which relate to the present time of the world and the present war,
will be fulfilled: -- the sword must go through, and earthquakes will soon
follow; thrones will be destroyed, cities levelled with the ground, millions of
people will be cut off, and kingdoms will be made desolate for ever.

The Lord God, the better to make all nations believe immediately, and the
people I live among regard me as his prophet, for their benefit in future, gave
me the true age of the world, by which he fulfils his recorded judgments, (...)
taught me, by direct instruction from himself how to write it down; the time of
showing his mercy to the Jews, by their restoration; the true meaning of the
prophecies, and time of fulfilling them, with his commands to publish the
information to the world; that when I am openly revealed to the Hebrews and
people of London, ( to the former, to order their immediate departure from
England, under my own direction; to the latter, to convince them, the loud
thunder, in January 1791, was to proclaim the judgment of God and fall of
London; but that the judgment was suspended, and the city pardoned, for my
entreaty) and ordered to re-pronounce, with the power of fire, his irrevocable
judgments, no nation may be able to say, We were not informed of any offers of
mercy from God, or of those things which would lead us to believe the age of
the world was so great, and the prophecies of desolation were fulfilling; for
the king and principal members of the English government, with nearly all the
foreign ambassadors in London, for their respective countries, have been
informed; and will all, besides, receive this additional true, but last
information in writing.

The Prophecy of Daniel, in the Seventh Chapter, continued.
9. I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did sit;
whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool; his
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

This verse alone, unassisted by any information from me, is sufficient to
explain the most necessary parts of the chapter to know; every person that
reads it must confess that it alludes to the latter time of the world, and that
the general dissolution of human grandeur, which it mentions, is but the
expected necessary preparation for the coming of Christ, to judge the world.

10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him; thousand thousands
ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the
judgment was set, and the books were opened.

The latter part of this verse corroborates the explanation that is given of
the preceding one.

11. I beheld then, because of the voice of the great words which the horn
spoke -- is the king of P^ussia -- (here the prophet Daniel returns to the
former part of the vision, and gives a further account of what was shown him).
I beheld, (...) till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame.

The death of this beast; means the death of the emperor of Germany, it is
certain; and all the armies of Europe cannot save him, nor prevent the
accomplishment of it by the hands of man. The judgment of God, according to
this prophecy, i^ also, that he shall suffer the punishment of everlasting fire.

12. As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away;
yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

13. I saw in the night visions, one like the Son of man; and behold, he came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and stood near
before him.

14. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; that all
people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away; and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

15. I, Daniel, was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the
visions I saw troubled me.

16. I came near to one of them that stood by, (an angel,) and asked him the
meaning of all these things; so he told me, and made me understand the
interpretation of them.

The prophet Daniel, in his visions, as well as St. John the Apostle in the
Revelation, had always an attending angel near, to explain the meaning of every
thing he saw that was necessary for him to be informed of.

17. These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out
of the earth.

18. But the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom and possess the
kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

The time is very nearly come for the judgments of God to be felt in all
nations, and this part of the prophecy to be fulfilled in Europe: It is a
warning to all princes and states, to honor God, and fear his judgments; to
live in peace, and govern with mercy.

19. Then I asked him the meaning of the fourth beast, which was different from
all the others, and exceeding dreadful! whose teeth were of iron, and its nails
of brass; which devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue with its
feet.

20. And of the ten horns that were in its head, and of the other which came
up, before whom three fell; even of that horn which had eyes, and a mouth that
spoke very great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows.

The beginning of this verse means the German Princes; the rest of it the king
of Prussia; he threatens and executs more, presuming on the unconquerable power
of his army, than any of his equals. His being represented in the visi^ of God
as a horn, with eyes, and a mouth speaking very great things, is an illusion to
his military strength, quick discernment, and violent incarnation to quarrel;
always disputing for territory pushing at or fighting against some nation (...)
other.

21. I beheld, and the same horn made war on the saints, and prevailed against
them.

For my entreaty the Lord God has been pleased to suspend this part of the
prophecy, the latter part of the twenty-first verse, that of allowing the king
of Prussia to prevail against the righteous, and govern them with great
oppression, under the power of his army, for three years and a half.

22. Until the Ancient of Days came, when judgment was given for the saints of
the Most High, and the time came that the saints should possess the kingdom.

23. Thus he said; The fourth beast will be the fourth kingdom on earth. (The
emperor will reduce, under his subjection, all Germany, the neighboring
states, and all Italy, to form this great kingdom,) which will be different
from all the other kingdoms; (meaning the other great kingdoms or monarchies,
shown in the vision; which are, England, Russia, and France). It will try to
devour the whole earth, tread it down, and break it in pieces.

24. And the ten horns, out of his kingdom, (meaning the German electors,
before they are destroyed by the Emperor,) are ten kings which will arise; and
another will arise after them, (meaning the king of Prussia, who is an
elector); he will be different from the first, and will subdue three kings.

When the king of Prussia opposes the Emperor, he will also at that time follow
his example, which will soon now begin to manifest itself; indeed, the interval
of time between this and then is but short; for all things are hastening fast,
and concurring in their operations, to extend the war, and give the prophecy
its full recorded course.

25. And he will speak great words against the Most High, and will wear out the
saints of the Most High; and will think to change times and laws: and they will
be given into his hand, for a time, and times, and the dividing of time.

The beginning of this verse means the king of Prussia, speaking in blasphemy
against God, threatening in great words, as if he posseded the whole power of
heaven, to conquer and destroy, with his army, all cities that do not open to
him, and all men that oppose his designs. This was exactly fulfilled by the
Horn, when he entered France in 1792; the proclamations which he issued, at
that time, are full of blasphemy against God, presumption for his great army,
and violent threats to destroy cities, and cut innocent men to pieces.

Change times and laws: the meaning of which is, that what God decrees is his
law, and this prophecy contains it; an opposition by the king of Prussia to
what God has decreed shall come to pass, is endeavoring by force of arms to
sto^ the course of the prophecy, and change the decreed time for it to be
fulfilled. The king of Prussia, by threatening, with the great strength of his
army, to build up, what God, to fulfill this prophecy, has thrown down; to
restore that monarchy in France, which God, to fulfill his recorded judgment in
this prophecy, has removed forever; -- is the meaning of -- And he will think
to change times and laws.

And they will be given into his hand, for a time and times, and the dividing
of time. The meaning of which is that the king of Prussia, although acting in
opposition to the will of God, (for every man that reads the Scripture, and
believes it to be the book of truth, possessess from that moment a knowledge of
good and evil, of right and wrong, of what is merciful, and what is cruel, of
what is pleasing to God, and what is offensive,) is permitted to wage a war of
injustice against the righteous for three years and a half; during which time,
according to the prophecy, he would conquer and destroy great multitudes of
them. But my prayers prevailed with God, even against his own recorded judgment
by Daniel, for I beseeched him to oppose the unjust designs of the king of
Prussia, before he invaded France; after he had, to suspend the prophecy, and
for my sake to turn him back The Lord God spoke to me in a vision, at night,
and said. "He shall go out of France with shame and confusion."

This promise was fulfilled in the year 1792; for, soon after the Prussian army
entered France, God led it into such difficult places as to endanger safety; he
also sent the visitation of a wasting sickness, that forced it to go away,
ashamed and highly disappointed. Although the other parts of the prophecy must
necessarily be fulfilled to accomplish the purposes of God, and the destruction
of the Prussian monarchy, the king cannot conquer as the judgment intended,
but he is permitted to oppose, sometimes defeated with shame, and sometimes
encouraged by deceitful success; until his armies become weak, and the Bear
becomes strong; until the proper time arrives for him likewise to fall.

26. But the judgment shall sit, (it ought to be, But the judgment shall take
place,) and they shall take away his dominion, ^o consume and destroy it to the
end.

The king of Prussia will have his country destroyed by fire and sword; his
power will be taken away, and also his life; the government will be changed,
and the monarchy will be abolished for ever.

In the year 1792 I sent the commands of God, as they were given to me by
revelation at night, to the king of England, for the king of Prussia, before he
invaded France, desiring him to re^ home, and have nothing to do with the
people of that country; for the change of government taking place among them
was determined; that the unalterable judgment of God, in the Scripture of
Truth, might be fulfilled: reminding him, at the same time, as a corroborating
testimony, that which I wrote was from God, of the monitor that entered his
breast, and so powerfully struggled with his inclination to keep him back from
war, that when he positively resolved on it, reproached him strongly with the
injustice.

That intelligent, internal monitor, was in truth no other than the
compassionate spirit of the living God, striving, to the last moment, to save a
falling man from the dreadful effects of his own judgment: but the king of
Prussia despised the blessed intimation, and resolved on a war; that if there
was no knowledge of God in the world, no part of human reason could find the
least colorable pretense to justify.

At the time of my writing to the king of England, relative to the king of
Prussia, I informed him, as I was commanded, of the certain failure of the
combined armies of Prussia and Austria.

And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness, (meaning the power of all
the kingdoms under the whole heaven,) will be given to the people and saints of
the Most High: his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions must
serve and obey him.

This is that real kingdom of heaven, of Christianity in practice, to believe
and obey God, which was commanded by Christ, to preserve the seal of man, and a
due knowledge of himself; preached by the apostles, and through them the
foundation of it laid in all nations; though determined from the first
transgression of Adam, and began more than seventeen hundred years ago, with
all the materials ready prepared, from the multiplied interruptions of war and
other causes, incident to human kingdoms, like the second temple at Jerusalem
-- long in building -- This mighty structure is not finished yet. This is that
stone, cut out without hands, mentioned by the prophet Daniel, in his second
chapter, 34th and 35th verses which breaks the head and the feet, the gold and
the silver, the brass, the iron, and the clay, of the great image of human
power to pieces: and this is that kingdom, mentioned by the same prophet, in
the ^4th verse following, which is to break in pieces and consume all other
kingdoms; but which is to remain itself forever. The name of this universal
kingdom is Peace; it has the blessed Gospel for its government, and the Lord
God for its king.

As I knew in the beginning of 1792, that the king of England would enter into
this war, and by doing so fall under the same judgment from God as the other
monarchs shown in the vision unless I could, by a just explanation of the
prophecies, persuade him to remain at peace; he will I trust, with the queen
and minister of sta^, do me the justice hereafter to acknowledge, that the
danger was fully communicated; and that I did not cease in my endeavors to
prevent him from joining in the confederacy against France, not only for a long
time before he intended it, but also after he had, even till the designs of
government were ready to be executed by open preparations for hostility.

If this war was like any that has preceded it, a prince might, as usual, sit
down at his leisure, and calculate, from his successes, how long to carry it
on; or, by his defeats, how soon he must leave it off: but the death of Louis
XVI. and the revolution in France, having proceeded from the recorded judgment
of God, the two things which have occasioned it, and which have rendered it so
entirely different, that its consequences are already determined, will be the
same to the monarchs engaged in it, as it happens to a man unexpectedly caught
in a large trap, on forbidden ground -- the pains of death convince him of
transgression before his eyes could warn him of the danger.

I know the judgments of God; by them I am directed; by revelation and through
his holy Spirit I write. To fulfill, then, the seventh chapter of Daniel, and
such parts of the revelation as mean the present time and the same thin (...)
the war now carrying on will involve all the nations engaged in it in great
distress, and nearly all the princes of Europe in death. As I knew all this a
considerable time before the war, I set my heart and my mind to intercede with
God, although it was against his recorded judgment to save the king, and spare
the country. I live in: I succeeded with God, and obtained an offer of mercy;
but could not with man, to believe and accept it.

I wish well to the king and queen, and likewise their family; to know all that
I have related, and more than I am permitted to tell; to know the unavoidable
death of him, and afterward the certain destruction of an amiable woman and
her children, would, I thought, be a crime to reproach for ever the feelings of
my heart, if I did not implore, when I knew the great kindness that God had for
me, and endeavor, by all the means in my power, to prevent it.

But in doing this I have subjected myself to the power of human laws, when,
indeed, I had the choice to make them subject to me; for if I had not become an
intercessor, by prayer and supplication for the people I live among, I should
have been sent away from London. Its fall would soon after take place; and then
my revelation, as the next great thing to warn the world, would immediately
succeed; but, preferring (...) safety to my own immediate advanta^^ although
informed at the time that the people would not ^lieve that I should he
despised, and made suffer* (...) obtained its pardon at the risk of my own
(...) and determined to remain in it until my time to he revealed was entirely
completed.

I find, yes, I feel by dreadful experience, that all men are insensible to the
consequences ^f those judgments, recorded in the Scripture, (...) are also
exceedingly hardened against believing their true interpretation and time to be
fulfilled. That I have suffered, by imprisonment and distress, more than is
proper now to publish fo^^^treating, when I was told that my entreaties were
contrary to the prophecies, to save the king and his family; London and its
inhabitants, from recorded destruction; God, who is more generous to give mercy
than man is grateful to believe and accept it, is by all this revealed
knowledge of his prophecies my witness now, and will, in due time, in a short
time, be additionally so, by terrible signs and mighty wonders.

I have said, in the first book, that the fulfilling of the judgments of God,
however destructive they might prove to the nations or governments, which they
are directed against, would not affect any personal safety, nor operate in the
least to my prejudice: my elevation is recorded in the Scripture, and
established by promise to myself; besides, I am not mortal to human power. But
although I am to be great, for above any prince on earth, and cannot be
destroyed by man: although the fall of governments and ruin of nations, will
not be allowed to affect my personal safety, nor operate in the least to my
prejudice, I will not provoke any, but endeavor, by a peaceable conduct,
civility, and fair words, to make all men believe.

My earnest desire and prayer to God is, that as he has given me a pre-eminence
of favor to all men, that were ever upon earth before, I may be able, although
I have been in prison, insulted and despised; although my zeal is broke, and
thy inclination altered, to save in this country one person as well as another;
the king, as well as myself; the rich, as well as the poor; all without
distinction. For which I request all men to meditate on the present times, and
consult with themselves by their knowledge of the Scripture, by comparing the
leading features of what turned other great nations unexpectedly, to what are
now as suddenly opening to human view, and what are as unexpectedly coming to
pass in the world; of the judgments and prophecies to be fulfilled, which every
man that has the spirit of conviction to believe, and an understanding to
discern, must plainly perceive that the convulsed state of Europe, as it now
presents itself, is one of their visible features; and that the sudden great
war which occasions it, multiplying sta^^ it lengthens against all forcible
endeavors, ^ceiving when least expected, and turning to prudent foresight of
the wise politician to his o^^ ruin, is either the forerunning sign of general
dissolution, or some other great and mighty thing

Some of the Prophecies which mean MYSELF, and which I am commanded to insert.
The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. iv.
1. And in that day, seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will
eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name,
to take away our reproach.

The man alluded to by the prophet is myself, and the time of the world is just
now come. Remember that the seventh chapter of Daniel, and the sixth of the
Revelation, are now fulfilling; remember, likewise, the second chapter and 24th
verse of Haggai; by all of which, thrones are to fall, nation to be turned
against nation, army against army, and man against man, until the earth is
wasted of her people. By this great destruction of the human race, millions,
millions of women will go to the grave, widows, unmarried and barren.

The war is now, compared to what it will be in^^re -- as four or five houses
on fire, is to a ^^ge city set in flames by them; which all the (...) and
invention of the world, which all the force of power and political foresight
cannot quench. It is from the great scarcity of mankind, which the war will
occasion, that the prophet represents so many women as taking hold of one
conspicuous and particular man.

2. In that day the branch of the Lord will be beautiful and glorious, and the
fruit of the earth will be excellent and comely for them which are escaped of
Israel.

3. And it shall come to pass, that he which is left in Zion, and he that
remains in Jerusalem, shall be called Holy; even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem.

4. When the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and has
purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of it, by the spirit of judgment
and by the spirit of burning.

This verse alludes to the Jews after their restoration, and to Jerusalem in
the latter time of the world, when rebuilt and inhabited; the Jews will then
acknowledge Christ for their Messiah, and through the sanctification of his
blessed Spirit they will be cleansed from sin.

5. And the Lord will create upon every dewlling place of mount Zion, and upon
her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory (meaning the people) shall be a defense.

6. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
and (...) place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.

This is a figurative representation of the peace and safety of the Jews under
the protection of God after their restoration to Jerusalem in 179^.

Apocrypha. -- II. Esdras, Chap. xi.
36. Then I heard a voice which said to me, look before thee, and consider the
thing that thou see.

37. And I beheld, and lo, as it were, a roaring lion chased out of the wood;
and I saw that he sent out a man's voice to the eagle, and said,

This roaring lion, as it were, chased out of the wood, means myself: who am
now forc^^ out of concealment by divine command to rebuke the eagle; not her
only, but the other princes likewise, if they will not believe what I write,
and try to save themselves from the judgment of God, by sparing the effusion of
human blood. This must necessarily be done to fulfill the prophecy (for it is a
true one) which is fully accomplished on my part by an explanation of the
seventh chapter of Daniel, and declared aloud to the world by the publication
of it in this book.

Peace being requested from God, and a suspension of his judgments offered
through m^ ^s earnestly request all the princes of Europe to forsake war, that
they may enjoy the substantial blessings of long life, and everlasting
happiness.

38. Hear thou, I will talk with thee, and the highest shall say to thee;

39. Art thou not it that remainest of the four beasts, whom I made to reign in
my world, that the end of their times might come through them? (Instead of the
word them, it should be, as it was in the original, Thee.)

40. And the fourth came, and overcame all the beasts, that were past; and had
power over the world with great fearfulness, and over the whole compass of the
earth with much wicked oppression: and so long time dwelt he upon the earth
with deceit.

41. For the earth have thou not judged with truth.

42. For thou have afflicted the meek, thou have hurt the peaceable, thou have
loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth fruit, and
have cast down the walls of such as did thee no harm.

43. Therefore thy wrongful dealing is come up to the Highest, and thy pride to
the Mighty.

44. The Highest also has looked upon the proud times, and behold, they are
ended, and their abominations are fulfilled.

45. And therefore appear no more, thou eagle; nor thy horrible wings, nor thy
wicked feathers, nor thy malicious heads, nor thy hurtful claw^, nor all thy
vain body:

46. That all the earth may be refreshed, and may return, being delivered from
thy violence; and that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of him that made
her.

Chap. xii. 10. And he said to me, This is (...) interpretation of the vision.

11. The eagle, who thou saw come up from the sea, is the kingdom that was seen
in the vision of thy brother Daniel.

12. But it was expounded to him, therefore now I declare it to thee.

I have inserted these verses not only as a demonstration of their truth, but
likewise to (...) the intimacy between the visions of Esdras and them of Daniel.

Moreover, when God was communicating by revelation at night a knowledge of
this prophecy to me he said, (in plain words, as one man would speak to
another; for it is in that manner all knowledge of what I write is first
revealed to me.) "I passed by this part with Daniel." It was mentioned as a
confirmed certainty to me, that the prophecy of Esdras was given from a true
vision.

31. And the lion, whom thou saw rising up out of the wood, and roaring, and
speaking to the eagle; and rebuking her for her unrighteousness; with all the
words which thou have heard:

32. This is the anointed (meaning myself, as prince of Israel) which the
Highest have kept for them, and for their wickedness to the end: he shall
reprove them, and shall upbraid them with their cruelty.

33. For he shall set them before him alive in judgment, and shall rebuke them
and correct them.

34. For the rest of my people shall he deliver with mercy, those which have
been preserved upon my borders, and he shall make them joyful until the coming
of the day of judgment, of which I have spoken to thee from the beginning.

Chap. xiii. 25. This is the meaning of the vision; whereas thou saw a man
coming up from the midst of the sea.

26. The same is he whom the Highest has kept a great season, which, by his own
self, (meaning his own person,) shall deliver his people; (meaning his people
the jews) and he shall order them that are left behind.

I am the man alluded to in this chapter; coming from the sea, in the
twenty-fifth verse, is to signify that I should, as the person meant, live on
the ocean. I have; having been in the English navy: but am now rising from it,
to fulfill this prophecy, that of Isaiah, Haggai, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel,
Malachi, and part of the Revelation to St. John likewise. For I was necessarily
engaged with the sword, to fulfill the recorded judgment on the monarch I am to
represent; and professionally a seaman, to fulfill the visions from God in his
prophecy.

27. And whereas thou saw, that out of his mouth there came, as a blast of
wind, and fire, and storm:

28. And that he had neither sword nor any instrument of war; but that the
rushing in of him destroyed the whole multitude that came to subdue him. This
is the interpretation.

29. Behold, the days come when the Most High will begin to deliver them that
are on the earth.

30. And he (this means Christ, but the next verse myself. For I am now his
prophet and messenger: the branch of his family alluded to, and the designed
signet of peace for all nations; the prince ordained to govern visibly for him
in his city, and on his throne; therefore, he being God, Lord, and King, shows
me to Esdras, as he did to St. John, spiritually representing, and spiritually
called under the name of his son, because universal dominion, as his empowered
visible representative, immediately under himself, next to himself, will be
given to me) shall come, to the astonishment of them that dwell on the earth.

31. And one shall undertake to fight against another, and one city against
another; one place against another, one people against another, one realm
against another.

32. And the time shall be when these things ^all come to pass, and the signs
shall happen which I showed thee before, and then shall my son be declared,
whom thou saw as a man ascending.

33. And when all the people hear his voice, every man shall, in his own land,
leave the battle they have one against another.

34 And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as thou saw them,
willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting.

35. But he shall stand upon the top of mount Sion.

36. And Sion shall come, and shall be showed to all men, being prepared and
builded, like as thou saw the hill graven without hands.

37. And this, my son, shall rebuke the wicked inventions of those nations,
which, for their wicked life, are fallen into the tempest;

38. And shall lay before them their evil thoughts, and the torments wherewith
they shall begin to be tormented, which are like to a flame: and he shall
destroy them without labor, by the law which is like to fire.

I recommend it to every person that reads this book, to take the Bible, and
read from the beginning of the thirteenth chapter to the thirteenth verse, as
it means myself: and likewise of the sixteenth chapter, from the eighteenth
verse to the thirty-sixth, as it corroborates the prophecy of Isaiah, Daniel,
and Haggai, relative to the immediate, and just now approaching, time of the
world.

Of the Revelation, Chap. v.
The book means the prophecies intended to be concealed until this time of the
world, which is the time they relate to: its seals, their spirit^^^ lock or
fastening.

Observe, the revelation was given to St. John a long time after the death of
Christ, not to commemorate those things which were before, which were
fulfilled, and which were known before the time of writing it; but to record
those things which are to be in future and which are to be fulfilled; according
to the words of God, declared in the fourth chapter, and first verse, which are
"Come up hither, and I will show thee the things which must be hereafter." They
were shown to him in heaven, under such wonderful, such incomprehensible
similitudes, in visions, as to seal their meaning a perfect secret, until the
time of the world alluded to came, when the designed spirutual person (for no
man can be a prophet o^ Christ, now under Christianity, and speaking through
the Holy Ghost, his spirit, without bearing some similarity to himself in
meekness and compassion; witness the apostles) would be revealed, to open the
spiritual seals, and make know the secret prophecies under them in the book.

Chap. vi. The four first seals are opened, and the covering of secrecy is
removed; the judgments which are to punish the world for transgression, by
raising nation against nation, and man against man, are gone forth, spiritually
under the similitudes expressed in this chapter, to the eighth verse, and are
begun to be fulfilled: the concealed meaning of the prophecies, which have been
carefully preserved so for me until the present time, are now declared; the
spiritual seals are opened the contents of the spiritual book, which they shut,
is known, and a revealed knowledge of it published in this visible book, for
the good of all mankind.

The Lord God commands me to acknowledge the kindness of a poor woman, that
brought me a three-penny loaf each week, every Monday morning, when I was in
prison Her name is Isabella Wake. The prison is Newgate.

A man that died the day before, of a bad fever, and from neglect, for the want
of proper nourishment, as I was told, made a vacancy in a room, with fourteen
poor men, little air, and much crowded, for me to come into his place.

The small, very small pennyworth of bread, with water only, except one day in
the week, when there are a few ounces of beef, for twenty-four hours, is barely
sufficient to keep life and body together. The prison is very close; there is
not room enough to promote health, by the necessary exercise of walking: there
are no coals allowed for fire, nor candles for light. There is no bed to lie
on, nor blanket to cover one; The poor are entirely destitute here.

When the condition of prisons, and the treatment of prisoners, is required for
public information, it is from the poor man, whose health is injured by
confinement, who has to draw his little air through a small iron-barred window,
who has but a small pennyworth of bread allowed for the whole day to live on,
that a true account is to be received; but certainly not from the officers,
keepers, and contractors, who live in plenty, whose emoluments swell in
proportion as the prisons grow crowded.

Therefore be no longer astonished that London, in one part of the Revelation
is called under the name of the great city, for she is the greatest city in
Europe, and the richest in the world; in another part she is called Sodom; and
in a third, she is, as well as Rome, spiritually called Babylon the Great.

No man, who has any knowledge of God, can justly say, that London is without
guilt, and her people are without sin; when her streets are full of vice, and
her prisons are full of oppression.

St. Matthew, Chap. xxv.
37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave the drink?

38. When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

39. Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came to thee?

40. And the King will answer, and say to them, Verily I say to you, in as much
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me.

ISABELLA WAKE, this is the recorded testimony of your everlasting life, which
I am commanded to give in this book now, and to repeat at my revelation.

Moreover, I will provide for you; and although I am now poor, without house or
servant, I shall soon have abundance, and be at the head of the greatest nation
on earth: In my palace you shall always have an apartment, and at my table you
shall always have a seat.

I am commanded to acknowledge likewise the acts of friendship I received from
captain Hanchett, of Abingdon-street, which the Lord God considers as shown
directly to himself; therefore his blessing is on you; and by his promise in
the Gospel, your reward is great. Moreover I am commanded to inform you, as
well for the benefit of your children hereafter, as yourself immediately, that
although you name is Hanchett, there is John Pit Earl of Chatham, Sir Gilbert
Elliot, and Charles Gray: you, as well as them, the whole, as well as myself,
are of the Hebrews; branches of my own family, and are descended from David
king of Israel.

All this has been told me by revelation, from the Lord God, in visions of the
night.

There are many of my family, which have heard of me, and with which the Spirit
of God has given me favor, that do not want either inclination or ability to
demonstrate their friendship; but they are deterred, from a fear of offending
government, and from a fear of incurring the imputation of guilt, by being
generous.

The pre-ordained and designed signet of peace for all nations, cannot do any
thing that will ultimately tend to injure any prince, government, or
individual: if they view his words in a contrary light, it is because they
calculate the future by the past; they know the things which were last month,
but have no knowledge of those things which are to be the next. For all he does
by writing, is to preserve the weak alive, and save the strong from falling
down.

The weapons of his writing are not weak and carnal, but mighty and spiritual:
when he is ordered to re-pronounce the judgments of God, and withdraw his eye
from pity, the great power of his words will be felt to destroy, before their
effects are seen to admonish; then, fleets, armies, princes, governments, and
nations, must implore the God of heaven for mercy, and receive it likewise, or
they will, all that remain from the sword, be cut off by the sudden and
irresistible falling of fire.

The Prophet Malachi, Chap. iv.
5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord.

6. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to their children, and the heart
of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

The Elijah, mentioned in this chapter, and the messenger, mentioned in the
first verse of the third chapter, mean two distinct persons. The one was the
immediate messenger of Christ, when he came for the salvation of mankind; the
other, his recorded prophet, to pronounce his judgments, and warn the world,
before he comes to destroy it.

This is that great prophet, alluded to in the chapter, under the name of
Elijah, and not St. John the Baptist: he will possess the Spirit of God equal
to Elijah, and have the power of his fire in the same manner. He will turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the
fathers; that is, he will suppress war and violence, which sets the old against
the young and the young against the old. He will command peace, and by the
great power given him from heaven, enforce an obedience wherever he comes.

The appointment of this prophet, being to invite first, and compel after, all
nations to come into the kingdom of peace, as a necessary preparation to meet
Christ, when he comes to visit and judge the world: St. John the Baptist, for
being appointed to prepare for Christ, preaching the same kingdom of peace, and
promising, by baptism, mercy to all that would believe, is the real and very
reason, that Christ, in the seventeenth chapter of St. Matthew, calls him Elias.

At a former time, when I was entreating God to spare London, I mentioned no
man by his title: but when I was writing an account of it for public
information, he said to me, "unless you write their titles, they themselves
wont know who you mean." It will appear strange, because I am not acquainted
with any of the distinguished persons alluded to; but I knew every one by some
particular act that caught my approbation, and made me remember them then. It
seemed as if God had done this on purpose, for he has often said to me since,
in visions and revelations at night, You must be a wall of defense and safety
to many a great man; -- yes, even to some that despise you now. At that time,
after mentioning the name of William Pit, I passed by that of his brother;
immediately after, the Lord God reminded me of it, and, in a voice of great
softness and good nature, said, There is John Pit, will not you mention him? You
don't know who he is I forgave.

In the year of 1790 the Spirit of God begun first, (although I always had a
presentiment of being sometime or other very great) to enlighten my
understanding, and teach me to distinguish right from wrong. At that time I was
an officer in the navy, and considering that voluntary swearing, which I was
obliged to comply with, every six months as a qualification to receive my pay,
was unnecessary, unjust, and wicked, I requested to be indulged with permission
to receive it without; stating at the same time, the concealed and unheeded
cruelty of the oath, with my own reasons for objecting to the form: when I was
told, in answer to my request, that there was an order of council to take the
oath, and that it was not in the power of the admiralty to dispense with it.

Soon after this I made another request, supporting my objections to voluntary
swearing, with observing, That if the order of council enforced an oath in any
manner or under any form whatever, and that the man it was directed to operate
on, swore that he was not forced, but that the oath he took was a voluntary act
-- the result of his own free will -- would it not in the sight of God in
heaven, and every man of discernment under him on earth, amount to a false oath?

These reasons with these objections, and the letter I received from the
admiralty, stating their insufficient power to dispense with the usual form of
swearing, I published at that time in the newspaper called the Public
Advertiser.

During the time of my writing officially to the admiralty, I had occasion to
write also to the president, whom I knew to be a member of the council; with
the business of swearing which led me to make an application, I remarked to
him; that as men, whether few in number, or the increased multitude of a senate
were not infallible, they must consequently be subject to error. To corroborate
more forcibly this assertion, and likewise to impress a conviction of its
justice, I mentioned among other things a decision of the privy counsel
relative to a native of Glasgow, who had his ship seized in the West Indies for
an undesigned infringement of the Navigation act.

After a legal investigation in that country, it was clearly proved and openly
acknowledged, that although the apparent defect in the register might authorize
the seizure, it could not justify a condemnation; because the commander, like
an honest man, showed it at the Custom-house, and received the approbation of
the principal officer.

An appeal was lodged against this acquittal by the seizing officer in the West
Indies, and brought before the privy council in England! -- the ship was
condemned.

To constitute a high court of equity, its members, to pronounce their judgment
agreeable to that very name their existence as a court is derived from, must be
governed more by the intention than the presumptive proof. But to constitute a
court of law, its judges must be directed by the express letter of the act of
parliament under which they officiate.

For example, two men go into a forest; while the one is fetching a blow to cut
down a tree, the axe flies from the handle and kills the other: Here is a
presumptive proof of murder, and the law very justly brings the survivor to
trial. But equity, viewing this circumstance in a proper light, declares the
innocence, and acquits accordingly.

Another, and more relevant to the seizure. A man buys a stamp, to legalise a
bond for the better security of trading with his money, or in plainer language,
lending it on interest; to be certain that this stamp is warrantably just,
according to the prescribed forms of law, he shows it at the stamp-office,
where it is acknowledged to be good and safe: after this, in consequence of
some defect, it is declared illegal, and the holder subjected to a penalty.

I believe every man on earth, that has the common faculty of distinguishing
white from black, will agree with me in saying, that it would be repugnant to
equity to fine the holder for a defe^^ that he had no knowledge of as such, and
for what was authorized by the very office of government that always issued the
stamps.

The law supposes criminality from the appearance; but equity measures it from
the design. The one is external and visible, provided many years before it may
be wanted: the one is internal and spiritual, always alive in the heart of
every judge that possesses prudence, learning, and penetration.

When I was writing of these things to the Earl of Chatham, on my knees I made
a solemn vow to the Almighty God, declaring that if he would be pleased to
enable me, I would most surely procure an indemnification for the poor man that
lost his ship. Since that time the Lord God has told me, by revelation at
night, That he would most truly enable me: for if I liked, I should be
President of the Council, and Chancellor of the Exchequer: I should have any
thing that I required. Immediately after this, I heard another voice from
heaven, say, The Lord have mercy on them, if they had not you for their friend
and counselor; for England is the Spiritual Egypt mentioned in the eleventh
chapter of the Revelation to St. John.

After making the numerous representations I have mentioned, the Earl of
Chatham, with great propriety, acknowledged their justice so far as to erase
the word Voluntary from the prescribed form of swearing: but I was then
reminded of the words of Christ in the 5th chapter, 34th verse of St. Matthew,
and strictly commanded to obey them. Soon after this, I requested from the
admiralty, and often repeated it, a dispensing order that I might receive my
pay without an oath; but they would not grant it.

If the Earl of Chatham had shown me the small favor I asked for, and
certainly it would have been but a very small one to him, he should be held up
to the world, as my friend, to be admired and regarded; he should wear such a
durable coronet as would make him the envy of princes; it should be a coronet
that no human power would ever be able to remove.

As the admiralty would not give me that reasonable indulgence I requested, as
they would not show me that kindness which, as men living by the navy, they
might have done with ease, and without prejudice to their dignity; I wanted for
a bit of bread to eat: I was besides treated so ill, as to be dragged to a work
house without any legal authority, against every remonstrance I could make, and
against every threat I could make use of to call them to a strict account for
the injustice. The admiralty knew all this; they might have prevented it, by
ordering what was due to me to be paid; but they would neither prevent the
evil, nor enable me to be liberated: they would not order the payment of what
was due, until open falsehood was made use of to say I was out of my senses. It
seemed as if they were under some private apprehension, though pleased with my
distress, of being charged one day or other in the eyes of their country with
unfeeling cruelty, and wanted some kind of colorable evidence to justify the
proceeding.

Hear, therefore, all nations, and be warned by it, what the Lord God has told
me by revelation, and now commands me to write, that the injuries I received,
because done for obeying his word in the blessed, Gospel, the remembrance of
them should never be blotted out from the throne of heaven. Moreover, he said,
likewise, that he would shake the English admiralty as a man would violently
bread in a basket, until he loosed the foundations of the earth, and shook the
place in pieces.

If I am out of my senses, in the opinion of the admiralty, for refusing, first
to take an idle oath, secondly, a false one, and thirdly, to take any: Christ,
the Savior of the world, and him that Isaiah the prophet calls Wonderful
Counselor, who prohibits by his Gospel in the strongest terms all kind of
swearing, must, by the same rule of knowledge for giving such a command, be out
of his.

As the Quakers never swear, and their objections to it are sanctioned by a
just indulgence of law; they, the king and parliament, for giving the
indulgence, must, for the same reason as I am, be out of theirs.

Christ having been abused at Jerusalem, reproached with having a devil, being
mad, and out of his senses, makes it the less astonishing for me, that am his
servant, to be reviled in the same manner: For which the Lord God commands me
to remind all men, from the testimony of his blessed Gospel, that the sin is
blasphemy against his Holy Spirit, and that the punishment is everlasting fire.

It is from visions and revelations, and through the Holy Ghost, that I write
this book for the benefit of all men: therefore, to say it is false, that I am
mad, am an imposter, have a devil, or am out of my senses, constitutes the
dangerous sin of blasphemy.

St. Matthew, Chap. xii.
31. Wherefore I say to you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
to men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

32. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven
him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

St. Matthew, Chap. v.
22. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

To insult any person, whether high or low, rich or poor, of whatever sect or
denomination, that preaches or writes through the Holy Ghost, which is indeed
the true Spirit of God, by saying that he is foolish, mad, or possessed with a
devil, constitutes the dangerous sin of blasphemy in men at this day, as well
as it did formerly in the Pharisees, when they reviled Christ.

As the good spirit may, by diligent attention, be easily known from the evil,
and the true prophet from the false, remember that no man, speaking or writing
under the direction of the Spirit of God, can revile another, encourage acts of
injustice, or disturb society, by promoting violence in any manner whatsoever.

From the Spirit of God slows all the good things which are necessary to
increase the life of man, and unite all nations under the Gospel bond of
Christianity and friendship; they consist of love, peace, civility, and
kindness; by a strict attention to observe the good spirit that encourages
these things, may be easily discerned from the evil one that opposes them.

St. Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. iv.
29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.

30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are all sealed to the
day of redemption.

31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking,
be put away from you, with all malice.

32. And be ye kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the better to prevent the commission of sin, and the
fall of man, for there is no Savior but him, begins with strictly prohibiting
the lesser but poisonous names of flattery and falsehood, that they should not,
by a frequency of use, corrupt the mind, and increase to the more dangerous
ones of blasphemy and rebellion.

First of Thessalonians, Chap. v.
19. Quench not the Spirit.

20. Despise not prophesyings,

21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless to the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Corinthians, Chap. ii.
12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is
of God; that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God.

13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the Holy Ghost teaches: comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

15. But he that is spiritual judges all things; yet he himself is judged of no
man.

Collosians, Chap. ii.
8. Beware, least any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

No man ought to advance the writings or opinion of another to assist his own,
when what he says is proved to be in opposition to the words of Christ; neither
ought he to go back to the law, which was for the Jews alone, in their own
country, to look for a precedent, to favor his delusive method of reasoning,
when the thing he wants to justify is quite contrary to the blessed Gospel of
peace and salvation.

The following are the words of St. Paul, in the fourteenth chapter to the
Corinthians, which I am commanded to insert, as justly applicable to many at
this time; when some, possessing all spiritual knowledge, as they thought,
exalted themselves against him, and doubted the spiritual truth of what he said.
Verse 37. If any man thinks himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things I write to you are the commands of the Lord.

38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. That is, if any man is
not spiritual to discern the works of the Spirit of God, let him conceal his
ignorance; let him not speak against them, because he has not the spirit to
discern, faith to believe, or knowledge to comprehend their truth.

Galatians, Chap. i.
6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
grace of Christ to another Gospel;

7. Which is not another; but there is some that trouble you, and would pervert
the Gospel of Christ.

8. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel to you than
that which we have preached to you, let him be accursed.

9. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel
to you tha^ that ye have received, let him be accursed.

Second of Thessalonians, Chap. i.
6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you;

7. And to you, who are troubled, rest with (...) ^hen the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from ^en, with his mighty angels.

8. In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

It is time to awaken all nations from their sleep of delusive security, by
informing them, that the time alluded to by St. Paul, in his Second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, is come; and that there is a great falling away from an
obedience to the blessed gospel. And likewise to inform them that Satan has
been revealed; the age of the world is great, and the time is come for it; he
is now allowed more power, because sin is increased, to influence and deceive
man than at any time ever before. I am the prophet to whom the minister of sin
was revealed; he is a spirit, and no man can see him in the open daylight,
unless sanctified by the power of the Holy Ghost, and his eyesight
strengthened for the purpose.

It is for this reason that I am the appointed witness for God, and his last
recorded prophet, to warn all nations, and desire them to obey the the blessed
Gospel of salvation.

The following are some more of the VISIONS, which God showed me, and which I
am commanded to publish here.
In the month called July, 1791, I was in a vision, and was carried away, by
the Spirit of God to the sea coast, in the English channel -- a new ridge of
unknown land was brought in an instant plain to my eyes, while the finger of a
hand wrote, in large capital letters, with great quickness, and a voice
pronounced twice from heaven, at the same time, SWEDE! SWEDE!

After this I was in a vision in the month of January 1792, and was carried
away by the Spirit of God to Sweden, when I was made look through a window in a
room; I did, and saw a man walk from the side of a great chair, leaving it
empty. I could not see his face as he went away, and although I could perceive
that he had committed any crime, I thought with myself that he had been doing
wrong. Immediately the angel that stood by me said, The chair means the chair
of state; and that man you saw will make it empty. The king of Sweden is
delivered over for death, and that is the very man that will shoot him.

The prince of Orange is closely pursued likewise, but he is not delivered over
yet.

After this I was in a vision, and saw the Prussian eagle perched on a chair of
state? soon after, on a sudden, I saw the chair, the house, and the whole city
where the chair stood, in flames. The angel that was near me, said, he is
likewise pursued now.

After this I was in a vision, and the Lord God talked with me, and said, I
give you the life of the Swede: but know this for certain, that if you prevent
his death, the man himself will not believe there was any danger of it. And
when you write hereafter of things in this country, you will be called an
imposter, a fool, and a liar: you will be imprisoned, and treated very ill.
When I see this it will make me angry; I will then begin to kill the people,
and I will surely destroy this city.

For which I gave no public information to warn the king of Sweden, and
prevented his death. Had this man lived, he would have commanded the German
army against France; his private plan was to go through Normandy, close by the
sea coast, to be supplied the easier with provisions from England, and
endeavor by all possible means, to take the harbor of Breast.

He said to himself, in his own closet, this is the plan I will pursue; It will
be giving a mortal blow to the French navy, and getting a safe harbor for our
own ships.

All this was made known to me by revelation from the Lord God; and which I
communicated to the queen and minister of state in 1792, some time before the
provinces of Brittany and Normandy, showed any open appearance of hostility
against the present government of France.

In the month of April 1793, I was in a vision, and was carried away in the
spirit of God to Russia, where I saw a bear stop to rest itself under a large
tree; soon after I beheld a man, that lay concealed among the branches drop
down softly, and with a sharp piece of iron, which he held in his hand, stab
the bear; pronouncing, as he did so, I have watched a long time for you, but
now, I have caught you at last.

I know, by revelation from the Lord God, that this vision means the present
empress of Russia; for which, being permitted, I give her this warning.

Let the death of the king of Sweden and France which is but a little time
past; the death of the king of Spain and another, which will soon take place,
for they are pursued; convince the princes and the people of Europe, that the
seventh chapter of Daniel and the second of Haggai are now fulfilling.

At a former time, when, the Lord God was instructing me in a knowledge of the
laws and other things, relative to the nation I am appointed to govern, he
said, in a vision of the night, when I bring princes and people from all
nations to bow down to you; when I begin to exalt you above kings of the earth
-- Be sober, be modest, be reasonable. And immediately after he added, you may
inform the king of England that I call you my nephew.

On the 3d of March, 1794, I was in a vision, and saw the sun in its full
strength, clear and high up in the firmament: soon after I saw another sun rise
on a sudden, equally large as the former, and stand close by it; both shone
with equal brightness, and the last as well as the first enlightened the world.

After the first division of this copy was sent to be printed, and even some of
it done, the printer was advised not to do it according to my form; for, if he
did, prosecution, imprisonment, and perhaps hanging, would be the consequence
to him. For which the Lord God commands me to keep back the additional
information that otherways would be given, and terminate the book.

I have said already that the sixth chapter of the Revelation was now
fulfilling: the four first seals are opened, and the covering, which kept the
meaning of the prophecies a profound secret until the present time, is removed:
recorded decrees are held up, and God himself commands a knowledge of their
contents to be published for the good of all nations. But if I cannot have the
commands of God, and a knowledge of his judgments, printed exactly as I write,
how is this extension of mercy to be known over Europe, and the people of
London informed of any danger that is past or any danger that is to come? All
the prophecies in the Scripture were given by men: the Ninevites were warned
through one.

How is the king to save himself from that recorded, determined, unavoidable
death, which all the powers of armies cannot prevent? How is London and the
parliament to be saved, when they are recorded in the scripture of truth to be
destroyed? How is England, Europe, and most parts of the world to be saved,
when they are recorded to be filled with blood by war, and to be made desolate
for ever by earthquakes, if the person I employ is detrered by the fears of
persecution and evil, from printing the full copy, exactly as I give it?

The king of Egypt and his people were destroyed, because they would not
believe Moses; but the king of Nineveh and his people were saved, because they
did believe Jonah and reform.

The king of England, the chancellor of the Exchequer, secretaries of state,
other members of administration, and as many members of both houses of
parliament, as my ability will allow; the bishops, judges, and all the foreign
ambassadors in London; will have a book sent to each.

On account of my being insulted, because the Jews do not believe in the first
book, by a public acknowledgment of it, the Lord God commands me to remind all
men of what is wrote in that book, and to say, that as the Jews do not believe
in Christ, it cannot he expected that they will in me; neither are they, until
I am revealed in a similar manner to Moses in Egypt, but with the additional
power of fire as his sign, to make them.

The night before I had finished this book for the press, the Lord God showed
it to me in a vision, ready printed, holding it up at the same time by one
leaf, and shaking all the others open, while he pronounced, in strong clear
words, and commanded me to writ them down exactly as he spoke, for universal
information:

There is nothing in this book that the English law can take hold of: -- So
says him that Isaiah the prophet calls Wonderful Counselor.

I request every body, in all nations, to read this book with attention, and
receive it favorably; for although the information and warning it contains is
through me, yet it is not mine, but God's.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 11th of the month called April, 1794.
Some of the Prophecies which mean myself, and which I am commanded to insert,
the appointed time being now fulfilled.
Deuteronomy, Chap. xviii.
15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet, from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken.

16. According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the
day of the assembly, saying, let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my
God; neither let me see this great sire any more, that I die not.

The time of the world alluded to by Moses, though not expressly mentioned in
this chapter, when a prophet would be raised up, to order the restoration of
the children of Israel in the latter days, (for he was fully informed of all
the calamities that would befall them, afterward their deliverance and return,
to be dispersed no more; as the thirty-second chapter sufficiently testifie^)
is the present; and myself the man -- the designed prophet, as leader of the
Jews, to fulfill a similar character, according to his own words, like unto me.

For Christ is the head of all prophecy; from him flows the Divine Spirit of
Truth: he is Lord and God; he is all that Isaiah says of him -- the Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

Moses was but a man, and to a man like himself he alludes; as the Lord himself
likewise declares in the three following verses.

17. And the Lord said to me, they have well spoken that which they have spoken;

18. I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee;
and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I
command him.

19. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken to my words,
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

The Testimony by St. Matthew the Apostle, of who Christ was, Chap. i.
22. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of the
Lord, by the prophet, saying,

23. Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Emmanuel; which, being interpreted, is God with us.

The Testimony of St. John the Apostle, Chap. i.
1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God.

2. The same was in the beginning with God.

3. All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that
was made.

4. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shone in
darkness,; and the darkness comprehended it not. There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John.

7. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men
through him might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness
of that light, that was the true light, which lights every man that comes
into the world.

10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not.

11. He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. Which were born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

14. And the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, etc

The Testimony given by St. Paul, 1 Timothy, Chap. iii.
16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; God was
manifest in the (...), justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the world and received up into glory.

The meaning of this Chapter having been always misunderstood by expounders of
the Scripture, I am commanded to insert and explain it for the benefit of all
men.
Acts, Chap. vii.
29. Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.

30. And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him, in the
wilderness of mount Sina, an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.

31. 32. Saying I am the God of thy fathers, etc.

37. This is that Moses, which said to the children of Israel, a prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me.

This is he (meaning Moses still, and not the prophet alluded to in the
preceding verse; who was not Christ neither as has always been erroneously
supposed) that was in the church, (meaning the tabernacle) in the wilderness
with the angel which spoke to him in mount Sina.

39. To whom our fathers would not obey, (meaning Moses) but thrust him from
them, (meaning Moses: often did he fast, and pray, that God might not destroy
the congregation,) and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt.

Who was the conspicuous person that the angel constantly accompanied,
manifested him to, and talked with during forty years in the wilderness,
according to the 38th verse, but Moses? Who did the angel speak to in mount
Sina from a flame of fire in a bush? St. Stephen meant no other here than Moses.

40. Saying to Aaron, make us Gods to go before us; for, as for this Moses,
which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

Expounders of the Scriptures have always supposed that St. Stephen, by
repeating in this chapter the verses I have inserted from Deuteronomy, meant
Christ to be the prophet alluded to by Moses, which is, like himself, to
collect and lead home the Jewe; but he does not; he repeats it as an historical
account, to remind the council, before which he stood for judgment, that as
their fathers had before rejected Moses in the wilderness, so did they their
children reject Christ at Jerusalem. But in no one part does he, or St. Peter
in the 3d chapter, mean that Christ is the prophet alluded to by Moses in the
eighteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, -- as the fortieth verse even sufficiently
testifies.

Revelation to St. John, Chap. xii.
St. John the Apostle in this chapter describes a woman as clothed with the
sun, the moon under her feet (meaning darkness, or the Turkish empire in Asia,)
and a crown of twelve stars on her head. The sun alluded to is not the sun in
the firmament, neither is that sun the Lord Jesus Christ, as has been always
erroneously supposed. The woman is not the church, nor yet the Blessed Virgin,
the mother of Christ, as has always been likewise erroneously supposed; but
that sun, means an entire man composed of flesh and blood like any other; and
that woman the princess of Israel. The prince is represented as a sun, because
that through him God will enlighten the world with more knowledge than ever it
had yet, and give a fresh manifestation of his mercy to prolong its duration.
The woman, as his consort, is represented as clothed with him, and also as
wearing a crown of twelve stars; because he, as her husband, is prince of the
twelve tribes.

The child, who will govern all nations immediately under and next to God,
being caught up to God and to his throne, means no more than the child going up
to Jerusalem, where the throne of God will be on earth. The woman's going into
the wilderness, means going up to Jerusalem also: the words into the wilderness
are mentioned because the city is situated far inland from the sea. The dragon
means a European prince now alive, who will pour out proclamations and
manifestoes after me, as a stood would issue from the mouth of a dragon: for
Satan will be in him.

At the time God was explaining this chapter to me, he said, when I give you
power to destroy that man from the face of the earth, you will melt into pity
and spare his life; for which all my people will universally blame you, because
he is their enemy and oppressor. Those strange names are given, and those
difficult allusions to be understood, are made by St. John on purpose to seal
the true prophecies and revelation an entire secret, according to the 5th
chapter; until the full time is accomplished, and the appointed person made
known to publish them to the world.

The prophet Ezekiel in the visions of God to him, describes the great extent,
and grandeur of Jerusalem a^ a future time; and likewise of its being governed
by a human prince.

This is the very man, the appointed of God, that is now abused, and publicly
reproached in London -- the capital of the spiritual Egypt, as is mentioned by
St. John in the 11th chapter, with being a hypocrite, and a fanatic impostor.

Remember those things, O my God; and as thy thunder on the 7th of this month
-- August was to show thy full determination to throw down cities, and dash in
pieces the counsel of evil men if they committed any violence against me, (...)
otherways I should now be lying in the common ^son -- So, O my God, execute;
for they have (...) faith to believe thy just judgments, nor charity (...) be
civil to thy messenger that declares thy gr^ offers of mercy.

First published August the 10th, 1794.
The reason why these parts of Scripture, and the other things which follow,
were not infer^ when the first edition of this book was prin^ is, the time was
not accomplished, and the Lord my God would not permit them to be published
until it was.

I am not commanded to make them publicly known for the information and benefit
of all men: In obedience to which, as his servant and prophet, I do.

Second of Samuel, Chap. xxii.
44. Thou also have delivered me from the strivings of my people, (meaning the
then children of Israel, over who David was king) They have kept me to be head
of the heathen: a people which I know not shall serve me.

This promise to king David then, meant that it should be fulfilled to him in
his descendant at a future time; a man, a human being, like any other that is
composed of flesh and blood; but not the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God; who who
always was, and always will be, the head of the heathen, and all nations. The
promise was made from God to David, to be fully accomplished in that man's
descendant, which descendant is myself; I shall, under God, rule all nations
under the government of the Gospel to fulfill that covenant to David, and the
promise of it by revelation to myself.

45. Strangers shall submit themselves to me: as soon as they hear, they shall
be obedient to me. (Meaning to be fulfilled in his descendant, as soon as they
hear of his revelation.)

46. Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid to come out of their
close places.

47. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock: and exalted be the God -- the rock
of my salvation.

48. It is God that avengeth me, and that brings down the people under me; and
that brings me forth from my enemies.

49. Thou also have lifted me up on high, above them that rise up against me:
thou have delivered me from the violent man.

50. Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the heathen, and I
will sing praises to thy name.

Here, David, who was not himself among the heathen, was praising God for his
descendant that should have this promise fulfilled to him, and who should be
among the heathen.

51. He (meaning the Lord) is a tower of salvation for his king: (meaning the
descendant of David as king, ruling over all nations under the covenant and
constant direction of God) and shows mercy to his anointed, unto David, and
to his seed for evermore.

That Christ, the Savior of the world, should be born of a virgin, and that he
should be called the Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, and the Prince of Peace, Isaiah the prophet sufficiently testifies:
that Christ was so born, St. Matthew the Apostle witnesses in the first chapter
of that part of the Gospel wrote by him. And Christ himself says in the
twenty-second chapter, when speaking to the Pharisees -- "What think ye of
Christ? Whose son is he? They say to him, The son of David. He says to them,
How then does David, in spirit call them Lord, saying, the Lord said to my
Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstood? if
David then call him Lord, how is he his son? And no man was able to answer him
a word; neither durst any man, from that day forth, ask him any more question."

The words are, "Unto David and to his seed for evermore."

It means, to continue in succession from father to son, from the one as a man,
to the other as a man, while the world lasts.

The blessed Virgin Mary, through whom Christ the ^eemer, who was God, came
into the world, was descended from king David: it is for this that Christ,
though he was the Everlasting Father and creator of all things, is alluded to
as the son of David.

Mary was first cousin to that Joseph, who was promised to be her husband when
found with child by the Holy Ghost. St. Matthew, chapter 1st. Both Mary and
Joseph were descended from one grandfather, who was Matthan; she the daughter
of one brother, and Joseph the son of the other. Told me by revelation from the
Lord God.

Zachariah, Chap. viii.
20. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, It shall yet come to pass that there shall
come people, and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, let
us go speedily to pray before the Lord and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go
also.

22. You, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts
in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.

23. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, in those days it shall come to pass, that ten
men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold
of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you; for we have
heard that God is with you.

The time of the world, meant by the prophet, when this would be fulfilled, is
at the restoration of the Jews, in the latter days; and myself the conspicuous
particular Jew, as leader of the Jews, alluded to. I shall be importuned by
many out of all nations, who revealed, comparatively taking hold of my skirt,
entreating to go with me to Jerusalem; because God, the mighty power of his
Spirit, and fire, will be with me

More of the VISIONS which God showed me, and which I am now co^anded to pu^^se.
In the month called June, 1701, at the hour of two in the afternoon, I law
(...) and, from the wrist downwards, like the hand of a n^^, with the fore
finger pointed out, appear on a sudden a little above the height of my head,
near the door, on the wall or partition of the room I was then in. After this I
was informed, by revelation, at night, from the Lord God, that at meant the
speedy end of the present king of England and his empire, like Be^azzar and
Babylon, both of, which would soon be destroyed.

In the month called May, 1792, I was in a vision, and receiving instruction
from God of future things: he showed me the queen, greatly alarmed at his
judgments, by my revelation, with the power of fire; and immediately she cried
out, the Lord have mercy on us! we shall all be destroyed! we shall all be
destroyed!

After this I was in a vision again, and the Lord God showed me the present
queen of England, coming toward me, slow, trembling, and afraid. This was
communicated, with other things, to William Pit, in the month called June,
1792. And likewise, informing him, at the same time, that it would most
certainly be fulfilled: It will; it is established with God, and will be so.

In the beginning of the month of June, 1792, I was in a vision, and was
carried away, by the Spirit of God, to the palace called St. James's, where I
saw the present king of England; he rose from his seat on seeing me, and
immediately sent me his own magnificent star, at the same time breathing on it,
and kissing, as if kissing to take a last farewell; yet not with grief and
reluctance to give, but with evident satisfaction. Why the king of England
should take his own conspicuous ornament, and send it to me, was a thing that I
was greatly astonished at; I wished to know the meaning, but could not
discover, until a loud voice pronounced, down from heaven, the Lord God
delivers his life over into your hands, and he will give you any thing to
preserve it. This vision, with others, and other things, was communicated, by
Divine command, to the king in 1792. The letter which contained it, with others
to the king, the queen, and the chancellor of the exchequer, were put into the
penny post office, to be sent by that conveyance, according to the directions I
received on that head by revelation from God.

1794. This day, called Thursday, and the 12th of the month called June, I was
in a vision, at the hour of two in the afternoon, when the Lord God spoke to me
in a ^ice of great quickness, carrying me away to the ^^nk of England at the
same time, and saying, there is one of twenty. The whole place rung and
trembled with the clear, but sharp sound of his words. It is by his sacred and
particular command I mention this vision in writing.

The 13th, i^ the morning, the Lord God said to me, among other things, in a
vision, you see those people do not believe, neither will they for all your
endeavors; why then do you continue to entreat me for them?

The 14th, in the morning, the Lord God spoke to me, and said, the judgment is
now against this nation; the thunder, just past, was to proclaim it: Pharaoh is
appointed to die, and his government to be destroyed; the priests, and all the
abominable idolatries of Egypt, shall perish, never to be found any more.

In the same manner that the Lord God (...) to the prophet Samuel, and revealed
a knowledge of his, designs, in the same manner also he speaks to me, and
reveals a knowledge of his will.
First of Samuel, Chap. iii.
1. And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli; and the word of
the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

2. And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and
his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see, and ere the lamp of God went
out in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid
down to sleep.

4. That the Lord called, Samuel; and he answered, here am I. And he ran unto
Eli, and said, here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie
down again. And he went and lay down.

6. And the Lord called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel rose, and went to Eli,
and said, here am I; for thou did call me. And he answered, I called not, my
son; lie down again.

7. Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was the word of the Lord yet
revealed to him.

8. And the Lord called Samuel again the third time. And he arose, and went to
Eli, and said, here am I; for thou did call me. And Eli perceived that the
Lord had called the child.

9. Therefore Eli said to Samuel, Go, lie down, and it shall be, if he call
thee, that thou shall say, speak, Lord; for thy servant hears. So Samuel went
and lay down in his place.

10. And the Lord came and stood, and called, as at other times, Samuel,
Samuel. Then Samuel answered, speak, Lord; for thy servant hears. And the
Lord said to Samuel, behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the
ears of every one that hears it shall tingle.

12. In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken
concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

1794. The 25th of the month called June, the Lord God said to me, in a vision
of the night, on my bed, in seven days more the judgment will be on this nation.

After this I was in a vision, and the Lord God brought close to me, that I
might hear the report of a gun that was fired, and see a man privately shoot at
another to kill him: it was so near, that I saw the flash, and smelt the
powder. Before the death of the king of Sweden I was shown, in a vision,
similar to this, that he would be delivered over from the protection of God, to
be shot.

I know, because the Lord God has explained it to me by revelation, that this
vision means, the m^n fired at to be the present king of England He will be
shot, but not killed; he will be wounded, but not mortally.

He has not believed me at any time, although I fully informed him in 1792, and
since, that it would be so; neither will he, until the very evil is visited on
him: and visited on him, to increase his distress, at a time when he is
surrounded with danger, and loaded with trouble: it most certainly will. Then
the king of England will be convinced, by woeful and feeling proofs, but it
will be very late: -- comparatively, when death knocks at the door, that he
despised the offered mercy of God in 1792, and constantly since his best
friend, among mankind, as false.

In the month called March, 1794, I was in a vision, and the Lord God showed me
a large and very tall oak tree; it stood alone; it was entirely withered, and
all its branches were cut off While I was considering the tree, its lonely
condition and nakedness, I heard a very loud voice call out of heaven, how down
that tree. Immediately the the tree was covered with a thick cloud of darkness,
and an angel descended from God, who struck the tree with so violent a blow
that it fell to the ground, and in its fall it made a great noise.

1794. First of the month called July, the Lord God said to me, among other
things, in a vision, early in the morning, for I had been earnestly praying to
him the evening before to hasten my revelation to the Jews, and inform me how
long it would be until it took place; because I was d^ly used as an impostor,
for publishing his commands, by wicked men; every one of them led on under the
influence of an evil spirit -- You must be at Constantinople, in your way to
Jerusalem, by this time next year.

The 2d of the same month, the Lord God said to me, in a vision on my bed,
early in the morning, in breaking bread you must not any longer say, to any
person, peace and friendship, but salvation only to the spiritual.

I know, by revelation, that Christopher Hove, clergyman, who was unjustly
tried, condemned, and put to death in London, in the year of 1651, had the
divine Spirit of the living God, and prophesied from it. He testified of me at
that time under different names, though all of them (...) one and the same
person; that of a Bright Star, as a Sound of Thunder in the ears of the wicked,
a Lantern to the Jews, and a Great Man.

The Lord God commands me to give this testimony, and also to say, that he will
soon send, it anger, the visitation of his judgment on London, and call her to
a strict account for shedding not only the blood of this righteous man, but
likewise all his other faithful witnesses. I know likewise, by revelation from
the Lord God, and am commanded to write it down, that John Maximilian Dau^ was
sanctified by the Divine Spirit of Truth, and prophesied, under its sacred
direction, in the year of 1709. He has also testified of me under different
names.

The Lord God commands me to inform you, John Wright, that you are of the
Hebrews, of the tribe of Levi, descended from Aaron the high priest, by
Phineas, Zadok, and Ezra; for which the covenant to your forefather, Phineas,
of an everlasting priesthood, is renewed, given to you, to be manifested in you.

Numbers, Chap. xxv.
10. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,

11. Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.

12. Wherefore say, behold I give to him my covenant of peace.

13. And he shall have it, and his seed after him; even the covenant of an
everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the children of Israel.

This is the recorded testimony which the Lord my God commands me to give; and
to say to you likewise, you are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, the Divine Spirit
of Truth.

The Lord God commands me to say to all you, professing Christianity, whom I
have, by his sacred direction, acknowledged to be of the Hebrews, descended
from Israel; for you, and your children after you, are some of his chosen
people; not to take up, in obedience to any law or any human power whatever,
warlike arms, to shed blood, or commit violence, in conseque^e of the
approaching calamities which he will most surely bring on this Egyptian land.

Neither mind the people that blaspheme God, and revile you for believing in
his testimonies: the wicked have always rose against the righteous, and this
land, like Egypt of old, has many taskmasters to abuse and oppress in it.
Therefore comfort yourselves in the knowledge of the promises of God to his
servants: For I declare, by his sacred command, that the visible Jews are but
few in number, compared to the great multitude professing Christianity, but all
descended from the former Jews in the land of Israel, the forefathers of the
present visible ones; which were, at different times, led captives into all
nations: your lives are long, their's but short; you are the holy seed, the
people and saints of the Most High; to whom, and your children for ever,
belongs the possession and government of his kingdom.

The Lord God, who was the Lord Jesus Christ, commands me now, and not until
now, to insert the following testimonies, as a warning to all blasphemers, and
as a reason to all men, that do not know, why he said to me, in the preceding
part of this book, you may inform the king of England that I call you my nephew.

The Gospel of St. Matthew, Chap. xii.
46. While he (meaning Christ) yet talked to the people, behold his mother, and
his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.

Chap. xiii. 36. Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house;
and his disciples came to him, saying, declare to us the parable of the tares
of the field.

37. He answered, and said to them, He that sows the good seed is the Son of
Man.

38. The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but
the tares are the children of the wicked one; the enemy that sowed them is the
devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

40. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so it shall be
also in the end of this world.

41. The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
father. Who has ears to hear let him hear.

47. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a not that was cast into the sea,
and gathered of every kind; which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and
sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

49. So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just. And shall cast them down into the furnace
of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

51. Jesus says to them, have ye understood all these things? They say to him,
yea, Lord.

53. And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in
their synagogue; insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence has this
man this wisdom, and these mighty works?

55. Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary? And his
brethren (meaning his brothers) James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?

56. And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this man all
these things? And they were offended at him. But Jesus said to them, a prophet
is not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house.

After the Lord Jesus Christ was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, she was
married to Joseph; by whom she had sons and daughters: they were supposed, as
the unquestionable testimony of the Gospel demonstrates, to be his brothers and
sisters.

St. Paul the apostle, and likewise St. Mark, has left on record similar
testimonies, which corroborate the preceding one.

Being, myself, descended from that James, the eldest son of Mary, by Joseph,
whom St. Paul calls the Lord's brother, is the reason that the Lord God, who
was the Lord Jesus Christ, said to me, as an expression of fondness, and to
manifest his regard, You may inform the king of England that I call you my
nephew.

St. Paul, Galatians, Chap. i.
19. But other of the apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's brother.

St. Mark, Chap. vi.
2. And when the sabbath day was come, He (meaning Christ) began to teach in
the synagogue; and many hearing him were astonished, saying, from whence has
this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given to him, that even
such mighty works are wrought by his hands?

3. Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses,
and of Juda and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us? And they were
offended at him.

The Lord God commands me to say, for the information and warning of all men,
That between this day the 25th of the present month called October, and the
beginning of the month called June, 1795, without mentioning to any person at
what particular time in that interval, my revelation to the Jews, with a sign
the same as Moses in Egypt -- and to the people of London, will take place: to
the former, to receive the commands of God through me, and to collect all their
property and depart in great haste from all nations to their own land: the
ships of England, France, Spain, and all Europe, will be obedient to the
commands of God to carry home their wealth, and all the people that choose to go
by sea: to the letter, to convince them the destruction of London in 1791,
according to the eighteenth chapter of the Revelation, would have been
fulfilled, but for my entreaty. To fulfill the iv. chapter and the 5th verse of
the Prophet Malachi, which is, behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. I myself, am the
appointed prophet to fulfill that chapter and character. Therefore I warn all
people in all nations -- that the terrible day of the Lord, alluded to, is
nigh; it is not the day of universal judgment, but the day which is to burn
like an oven, and which is to consume the wicked from the face of the earth --
like the stubble of the field. Then, according to the Prophet Daniel in the
seventh chapter, the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, will be given for an everlasting possession to the
people and saints of the Most High. Being to be revealed the same as Moses, but
in the same spirit and power as Elijah, when he destroyed the soldiers and
priests of Ahab, I am to repronounce his judgments, to execute them on all
false Christ's and false prophets; and afterward to call down fire from heaven
to consume the enemies of God.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, William Bryan, that you are of the
Hebrews, and of the tribe of Judah; and that you, with John Wright, are
appointed, and will be commmanded by him, to testify publicly to the world who
I now am, and what my future designation is.

The Lord God will influence and command numbers of his people, both men and
women, to give the same public testimonies. He will also give them, to fulfill
the prophecy of Joel in the ii. chapter, in wonderful visions, dreams, and open
signs in the heaven, a knowledge of the approaching times.

23. And it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out my Spirit upon
all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.

29. And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days, I will
pour out my spirit.

30. And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth; blood, and fire,
and pillars of smoke.

31. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.

32. And it shall come to pass, that whatsoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be delivered: for in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, And in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

The Revelation to St. John, Chap. vi. Which relates to the present war -- its
progress -- and consequences; and its destruction by the woeful, but judgment
of an offended God.
1. And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals and I heard as it were the
sound of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, come and see. And I saw, and
behold a white horse; and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given
to him; and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, come
and see. And there went out another horse that was red; and power was given to
him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill
one mother: and there was given to him a great sword.

5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, come
and see. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair
of balances in his hand. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts
say, a measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny,
and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

7. And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast say, come and see. And I looked, and behold a pale horse; and his name
that sat on him was death, and hell followed with him; and power was given to
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger,
and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

9. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.
And white robes were given to every one of them; and it was said to them, that
they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also and
their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

The fifth seal is now opened, the secret prophecy contained under it is
published for the information and benefit of all men.

The opening of the next seal, while it brings woe to the wicked, will manifest
to the Jews the great power and name of their prince with God, as recorded by
Daniel, for their deliverance and restoration.

The Prophet Daniel, Chap. xii.
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which stands for the
children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy people
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.

The time of the world alluded to, when the woeful calamities mentioned here
will take place, is just now come: Myself, who will be the revealed prince of
Israel, is the Michael and the great prince alluded to here by the angel
speaking to Daniel: but not the Lord Jesus Christ visibly, who is God, and the
king over all: neither is it the angel that is mentioned under the name of
Michael in the 10th chapter, and 13th verse.

2. And many of them that sleep in the do of the earth shall awake; some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

4. But, thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time
of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

8. And I heard, but understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the
end of these things?

9. And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed
till the time of the end.

10. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do
wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall
understand.

At this time, which is the time alluded to by the angel informing Daniel, the
earth will quake and be rent in many places: the heaven will be convulsed,
opening and shutting, and showing many fearful signs: there will be storms of
wind, sail, and showers of rain, with violent thundering and lightning: the
very beasts of the field, birds of the air, and fishes of the sea, will be
frightened: all the inhabitants of the earth will tremble for their lives,
dreading that it is the hour of their dissolution and day of universal
judgment; so fierce and terrible will the great anger of God be manifested
against a wicked world, professing Christ with their lips, but teaching
rebellion against his blessed Gospel in their public laws and forms of prayer.

Swearing oaths; the Lord's supper, or taking the sacrament to remember him and
commemorate the awful moment when he gave it to his disciples, is made a
qualification, even to the must unthinking, abandoned, and wicked, to serve in
any public office or employment whatever.

Of the public prayers. Our Father, which art in heaven; hallowed be thy name;
thy kingdom come; which is the kingdom of peace; is very good: but the next
form of prayer is beseeching God to go forth with fleets and armies: this is
very bad, because it is in direct opposition to the former; it encourages,
strife, hatred, war, and bloodshed; it is calling on God to keep back his
kingdom, and to overthrow his own gospel of peace. The worship of Christians
ought to be pure, humble, and peaceable, without any mixture of politics or
directional constraints from human law.

The bishops are called Lords Spiritual. To ordain a clergyman, be must kneel
down before a bishop, while he says, "Receive the Holy Ghost, for the office
and work of a priest in the church of God, now committed unto thee by he
imposition of our hands. Whose sins thou lost forgive, they are forgiven; and
whose sins thou do retain, they are retained.

Likewise at the consecration of a bishop, it is said, "Receive the Holy Ghost,
for the office and work of a bishop in the church of God, ^^w committed unto
the by the imposition of our b^^^ds; in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And remember that thou stir up the grace of God,
which is given thee by this imposition of our hands."

As there is in truth no Lord but God, no man ought to assume his sacred name.
No man is spiritual that has not the Holy Ghost, the Divine Spirit of T^u^h; it
is by Christ th^^ it is given and he will not give it to any that promotes the
evil of war and disobedience to his Gospel. A prince may give to a man a title,
but it is God only that can make him spiritual^ he cannot give that mighty
Spirit which he has not the power to command, and which he never received the
gift of himself. To pursue then any longer such a false form of ordination and
consecration, is not only dishonorable to the king, parliament, and people of
England, but also a reproach to the bishops to attempt to give, and to the
clergy to kneel down to receive.

Turn from such deceitful unmanly ways, and endeavor to live long; for it is
the word of God through a man that points at the crime, and warns you to
forsake, what must, if you do not, lead to certain death: for, believe me, the
day of destruction to punish disobedience to the Gospel is so very nigh, that
it will take place before the commencement of eight months from this day.

Look at your wives, your children, and all that is dear to you on earth; then
consider how great the blessing to have them, to live with, and possess them;
but how terrible the evil to separate, to be burnt with fire -- to die, and
lose them for ever.

Remember, God created man in his own image and likeness, and created the earth
for his use; that man might believe in him, and obey his commands.

He brought the children of Israel out of Egypt to conduct them to the promised
land, but when they disobeyed him in the wilderness, he destroyed thousands of
them. He burnt Sodom and Gomorrah, because the people were wicked; but he saved
Nineveh, which was also denounced, because the people repented.

The Lord God is great, merciful, and compassionate to forgive all that do
entreat and obey his commands; but be assured, he is also great, mighty, and
powerful, jealous of his sacred name and honor when given to men: and he can
do now what he did of old, they are recorded for our example and warning, that
is, overthrow cities, and destroy multitudes in an instant.

Life, blessing, and peace, is the inheritance of the servants, the saints, and
people of the Most High.

Revelation, Chap. vi. continued.
12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great
earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became
as blood: and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, even as a fig tree casts
her untimely figs when she is shaken by a mighty wind: and the heaven departed
as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were
moved out of their places.

15. And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman, hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the
mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is
come; and who shall be able to stand?

Second Book of Esdras, Chap. ii.
42. I Esdras, saw upon the Mount Zion a great multitude of people, whom I
could not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs.

43. And in the midst of them there was a young man of a high stature, taller
than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads he set crowns, and was
more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly.

44. So I asked the angel, and said, Sir, what are these? He answered and said
to me, these be they that have put off the mortal clothing, and put on the
immortal: (It means the Jews, who, when I am revealed, will acknowledge that
the Lord Christ is the Lord God: then they will put off the mortal clothing
unbelief and error, and put on the immortal clothing of faith and
righteousness) and have confessed the name, of God: now are they crowned, and
receive palms.

46. Then said I to the angel, what young person is that which crowns them, and
gives them palms in their hands. So he answered and said to me, it is the Son
of God, whom they have confessed in the world. Then I began greatly to
recommend them that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord.

The Son of God, alluded to here, is not the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, as
has been always erroneously supposed; but a human being, of flesh and blood,
like any other. It is a man, and but a man; though recorded, and honored with
being called the Son of God. It is myself, who am the man that will be made
that prince, alluded to by Ezekiel, in the xliv. xlv. xlvi. and xlviii.
chapters of this Prophecy; and in the second chapter of Haggai, when kingdoms
are convulsed with violence and war, with the fall of thrones and the
destruction of armies, as a promised, a designed signet, manifested to the
world by the great power and extended goodness of God. It is that man, whom God
has designed to be the visible prince of Israel. As a believer in God, by, and
through Christ, the divine Spirit of Truth, and an obeyer of his commands, he
is a son, an adopted son: so is every man under heaven an acknowledged son,
whether rich or poor, that does the same; and so is every woman likewise, an
adopted, an acknowledged daughter.

Remember the words of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel, where he says,
after this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. As
God then is our father, we, that acknowledge and pray to him as such, are
surely his sons and daughters.

All that believe in the testimony of God by me, which he now commands me to
make known, are his people, a part (because the visible Jews are the great
body) of that innumerable multitude, shown by the angel to Esdras, crowned, and
receiving palms.

The Lord God commands me to remind all people of the loud thunder that was on
the 7th of August last, and to say, it was a threat from him to destroy London,
sooner than suffer me to be hurt: take it for a warning, and beware of the
dreadful consequences that will most certainly ensue, if a similar injury is
intended against me: for if you, the English Government, is determined to
molest me, the Lord God is also determined to oppose you; and will visit with
death on his enemies, and with destruction on their capital. For the English
Government, both what is called civil and ecclesiastical, in its present form,
will, by the fierce anger and determined judgment of the Lord God, be removed,
annihilated, and utterly destroyed, before the expiration of ten months from
this day.

For those unhappy men, which compose it, as if the injustice of the present
war was not sufficient to provoke him, have imprudently gone on, adding evil to
evil, and now, more than before, publicly encourage blasphemy against him, and
abuse against his prophet. Why do they do so? said the Lord God to me. Why?
because you have not their mark, but my seal; you have not their authority, the
laying on the hands of their bishops, to give the Holy Ghost to prophecy by,
but my Spirit, yet those are the men that pretend to judge of spirits, to
discern the good from the evil: they suppose every man, that speaks or writes
under the power and influence of God, is a false prophet, an impostor under
delusion; because the words of truth, by him, go to contradict their mark,
their human ordinances, and political forms of prayer.

The Lord Jesus Christ says, in the fifteenth chapter of his Gospel by St.
Matthew, "but in vain they do worship me, teaching, for doctrines, the
commandments of men.

And because the annunciation of my kingdom of peace and preservation, brings
with it the sentence of death against their kingdom of war and human
destruction; therefore, hear what the Lord God says to me by revelation, and
commands me to write, that, as they have encouraged blasphemy against me, they
shall not prosper; for I will send a blast on them that will confound all their
counsels: and, as they have encouraged abuse against you, whom I sent, and who
entreated me for their good, I will deliver them over to the power of their
enemies; to be hated by every body, despised, and trod under foot like mire in
the streets.

The Lord God commands me to say, for the information of the English
government, the judges, and all men, that the prisoners, now in confinement,
and on trial for their lives, charged with the crime of High Treason against
the life of the king of England, are innocent: as such, he requires me to make
known to the king his sacred commands in writing, and to publish this for the
knowledge of all.

The Lord God commands me to inform, through this book, all that honor him --
his servants -- the peaceable and righteous in all nations, which have had
their property, whether in land or money, confiscated, for no other reason than
because the nation they belonged to declared war against the nation they lived
in, all such property, or its full value, with reasonable interest set the
time, shall most surely be restored.

And you, Peter Woulse, one of the Avignon Society, whom the Lord my God
commands me to mention here by name, as a testimony of his great regard, your
property, confiscated in France, will all be restored with interest, and much
kindness shown to you by the members of its government: they will restore the
property of every other peaceable individual likewise: by the same divine rule
of justice, Spain, England, Prussia, Germany, Holland, and all other nations in
Europe, must restore theirs. For the time of the world is just now come, and
God is firmly determined to manifest his mighty power, for the prservation of
his people and saints, by fulfilling by me his words in the eleventh chapter of
Isaiah, a part of which are -- But with righteousness he will judge the poor,
and reprove, with equity, for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the
earth with the road of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay
the wicked.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 26th of the month called October. 1794
The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. xli.
25. I have raised up one from the north, (meaning the revealed Prince of the
Hebrews at this time) and he shall come; (meaning to Jerusalem, from that
northern part of the world alluded to; England lies in the north, and it is
indeed the country meant: from the rising of the sun he shall come upon princes
as upon mortar, and as the potter treads clay.

Isaiah stood at Jerusalem when this prophecy was given, writing and recording
it by the direction of God, he looked to the northern part of the world, where
this distinguished person, which he so clearly mentions, is first to rise, and
then come to Jerusalem, calling on the name of the Lord, from the rising to the
setting of the sun; as zealous for an obedience to the Gospel, as David, his
father, was for the law: traveling in the mighty strength of the Spirit, and
armed with the divine power of fire, like Elijah Malachi, iv. 1. and 5. Isaiah,
xi. 4. 11. Esdrass, xiii. 12.
, he will subject nations, remove thrones, and burn all rebel princes.

26. Who has declared from the beginning, that we may know; and before the
time, (meaning before the prophecy is fulfilled; it being 2461 years from its
declaration then to its accomplishment, now this present year 2795,) that we
may say, He is righteous! yea there is none that shows, yea, there is none
that declares; yea, there is none that hears yout words.

The king of England, and the members of his government, the parliament,
bishops, judges, and all the ambassadors from foreign nations, in London, have
received ^he information of their fall and destruction; but they all refuse to
believe, and by so doing fulfill exactly what the prophet means, when he says,
yea, there is none that hears your words.

27. The first shall say to Zion, behold, behold them; (meaning the Jews,
crouding home to Jerusalem in great multitudes) and I will give to Jerusalem
one that brings good tidings. (It means the revealed prince, returning home
with the people, to rebuild the desolate city, and make her rejoice.)

28. For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them there was no
counselor that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

Here the Holy Ghost, the spirit of God, spoke by Isaiah, as if speaking by
myself at this very hour; for I have sent books of the judgments of God to the
king of England, and the members of his government, his parliament, his
bishops, his judges, and all the foreign ambassadors in London, for their
respective countries: but to accomplish what is so faithfully recorded by the
prophet, where he speaks spiritually as myself -- Even among them there was no
counselor that, when I sent to them, could answer a word.

29. Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing; their molten images
are wind and confusion.

Other Parts of the Revelation to St. John which are to be fulfilled, and which
the Lord God commands me now to publish.
Chap. xiii. 1. And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up
out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns; and upon his horns ten
crowns, and upon his heads the name of Blasphemy.

This beast means the English monarchy; and it is by ships and commerce that it
has rose from the sea to such astonishing grandeur and magnitude. The heads,
horns, and crowns, allude to the many departments of government, and their
splendid distinctions. The Blasphemy means the titles given to, and assumed by
the king of England; such as, Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, sacred Person,
Majesty, defender of the Faith, and supreme head of the Church; all which names
belong to God, he only can be what they express, and when they are applied to
any other, the sin is blasphemy in his sight.

2 And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him
his power, and his seat, and great authority.

The English monarchy, for being supreme head of the Church, and over the many
religious sects tolerated in the country, is the reason that it is, for their
great number, compared to a leopard full of spots.

As a bear is very strong on his feet, so is the English monarchy: and as a
lion roars with his mouth the loudest of any beast, so does the English
monarchy proclaim its greatness more than any other.

3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly
wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.

The beginning of this verse means the death of Charles the first, king of
England: and the deadly wound being healed, means the recovery of monarchy by
the restoration of Charles the second. During the interval of time between the
death and succession, all the world wondered if the English monarchy would ever
be restored again.

9. If any man have an ear let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall go
into captivity: he that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword.
Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

The leading into captivity means imprisonment and slavery: and killing with
the sword, means violence and war. The patience of the saints is, to bear
quietly with those evils, and to resist the temptations of wealth to do them:
All that have faith in God will not do such things, from a belief that they are
offensive, because he commands them not.

11. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.

This verse means the Elector of Hanover. Coming up out of the earth, is to
signify that his country or government is situated inland. The horns of a lamb,
and the voice of a dragon, means that although he is weak in power like a lamb,
yet by his voice he can threaten in great and mighty words like a dragon.

12. And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, etc.

It means the elector of Hanover's succession to the crown, place, and power of
the former king of England. To fulfill this part of the prophecy given by
revelation to St. John, the utter expulsion of the Stuart family must against
all human opposition have taken place to admit the elector of Hanover.

A great part of this chapter is taken up in describing the king and
parliament. I am commanded to inform both of the recorded judgments of God, the
dangers which threaten them, and their certainty of taking place, unless they
implore him for mercy, and obtain it.

They have individually promised, by their godfathers and godmothers, in the
sacred covenant of baptism, and acknowledge a confirmation of it by receiving
the sacrament, (for both were instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ) to believe
in him and obey his commands; yet, notwithstanding this heaviest of all
obligations which a human being can enter into, (for it is with his God,) and
on the performance of which his salvation depends, the laws they make a part of
the Thirty nine Articles, and some of the forms of prayer, used in public
worship, goes more to break the covenant of baptism, to dishonor God, and
oppose an obedience to his blessed Gospel, than was ever authorized in any
other nation.

Without submitting to the forms of law prescribed by act of parliament, which
are in direct opposition to the commands of Christ, and very sinful to do, no
man can hold any place of profit or trust, enjoy the privilege of freedom, and
comparatively to buy or sell.

17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.

18. Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is six hundred threescore
and six.

This verse means the the English parliament; and although it exceeds the
number mentioned here, yet notwithstanding, it is the real and very assembly of
men alluded to in the Revelation, by the number of 666.

Because the parliament acknowledge and address the king by the divine names
which belong only to God; such as, our most gracious Sovereign Lord, Sire,
Majesty, and honor him with equal humility in supplication, when they require
any thing, as if he really was the Lord of heaven and earth; such as, Humbly
praying that your Majesty would be most graciously pleased, etc. Therefore God,
in his great anger, being jealous of his name and honor, calls the king a
beast, and the parliament his image and number.

Chap. xiv. 1. And I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him a
hundred and forty-four thousand, having his father's name written in their
foreheads

The lamb, mentioned here, means myself as Prince of the Hebrews; and Mount
Sion, Jerusalem: the hundred and forty-four thousand with me, having the name
of my father wrote in their foreheads, means not only the visible Jews of the
twelve tribe, but likewise the invisible -- it comprehends all of Hebrew
extraction that will believe in the testimony of God by me.

6. And I saw another angel (...) in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel, to preack to them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people; saying with a loud voice, fear
God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship
him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

8. And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
that great city! because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.

9. And the third angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice, if any man
worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the
presence of the lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and
ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image,
and whosoever, receives the mark of his name.

12. Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

Chap. xvi 1. And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
angels, go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2. And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell
a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and
on them which worshipped his image. And the second angel poured out his vial
upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soul
died in the sea.

4. And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters; and they became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters say, thou
art righteous, O Lord, which art, and was, and shall be; because thou have
judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have
given them blood to to drink; for they are worthy.

10. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and
his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain; and
blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.

Chap. xxi. 6. And he said to me, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end: I will give to him that is a-thirst of the fountain of
the water of life freely. He that overcomes shall inherit all things; and I
will be his God, and he shall be my son.

8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, George the third, king of England,
that immediately on my being revealed, in London, to the Hebrews as their
prince, and to all nations as their governor, your crown must be delivered up
to me, that all your power and authority may instantly cease. On my being
revealed, the invisible power of the angel of God, which gaurds me now, will
then become visible as a flame of fire; the very same that accompanied Moses
and the children of Israel out of Egypt. I must not acknowledge any superior
but the Lord Christ, who is the Lord God: and as a man raised up, like David,
by him to be a prince, he commands me to allow no equal, but instantly to burn
out of his kingdom the rebellious and disobedient. Read the xli. chap. and
verse 25, of Isaiah.

Be advised by this, for evil is going to be let loose; when it is, the king of
England will no more believe the signs of God by me than the king of Egypt
would by Moses; therefore, desire your servants to deliver to you all letters
and messages from me; for, it is for your contempt to me that your country is
ordered to be invaded, and your power to be destroyed. The tall oak, with all
its branches cut off, mentioned in one of the visions of God, in the preceding
part of this book, means yourself and family.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, Nathaniel Brassey Halhed, that as you
are reviled and considered, by your former acquaintances, as ruined and lost,
for speaking the truth as he manifested it to you, for publishing your
testimony of me, his servant, you shall, by the expiration of three months,
from this day, have your choice of being either governor general of India, or
president of the board of control in England; that all men may be convinced,
that he that rules in heaven is able to exalt or to abase; that he is still
able, even at this late hour of a wicked world, to reward the obedient to his
blessed Spirit, and give the most eminent places on earth to whomsoever he
pleases.

The Lord God commands me to inform all men, as a prevention, in future, to
their asking unnecessary questions, that all that is proper and allowable for
me to relate from him, is published in this book.

The Copy of a letter to William Pit, Chancellor of the Exchequer, which the
Lord commands me now to publish.
In obedience to the sacred command of the Lord God, whose servant and prophet
I am, I inform the chancellor of the Exchequer, that the prisoners now in
confinement, and on trial, charged with the crime of High Treason against the
king's life, are innocent.

I am likewise commanded to inform you, because God is very merciful and
compassionate, that the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, and last
part of the sixth chapter in the Revelation to St. John, will be fulfilled
before the expiration of seven months from this day. And also my revelation to
the Hebrews, as their prince and leader, according to the twelfth chapter of
the prophecy of Daniel; to the king and people of England, and the people of
all nations, as their ruler -- for -- and immediately under God, according to
the twenty-second chapter of the second book of Samuel; to all nations, as the
promised Signet of Peace, according to the second chapter of Haggai; and as
Elijah, to the wicked, the revilers, and blasphemers against God, according to
the fourth chapter of Malachi.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
No. 57. Paddington Street, 9th of the month called November. The king and duke
of Portland, as secretary of state, were wrote to at the same time.



Revelation, Chap. xi.
15. And the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord, and of
his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

RICHARD BROTHERS,
The man that will be revealed to the Hebrews as their prince; to all nations
as their governor; according to the covenant to king David, immediately under
God.


LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 20th of the month called February, 1795.
THE END.

