The duty of giving thanks for NATIONAL BLESSINGS.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN The Parish Church of BRUTON, WILLIAMSBURG; On THURSDAY
February 19 th, 1795.

Being the day appointed to be kept as a General Thanksgiving to Almighty God
throughout the United States of AMERICA.

By JOHN BRACKEN, D. D. Rector of Bruton Parish.

RICHMOND: Printed By THOMAS NICOLSON, 1795.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALM, 107. 1, 2. O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so.


THE goodness of Almighty God is that attribute on the contemplation whereof,
our thoughts, so long as we feel how much we stand in need of it, do most
delight to dwell. To this we naturally have recourse under the apprehension of
danger, or the pressure of affliction. And thus far all is right. But the
misfortune is, blessings vouchsafed seldom make impressions proportioned to the
ardency with which they are implored. The same mouths, which, in time of
distress, can cry mightily unto God, are too often observed, upon men's
enlargement from their straits, to become unaccountably silent. They, who
perhaps have but just experienced the goodness of the Lord, want to be put in
mind to give thanks unto him for it: Even the redeemed of the Lord must be
called upon to say that his mercy endures for ever.

That beautiful psalm, which begins with the words of my text, contains great
variety of matter for praise and thanksgiving to Almighty God. On what
particular occasion it was first composed, or to what purposes it might be
afterward applied, does not certainly appear. That part of it which
immediately follows my text, besides some allusions in other parts of it, seems
most fitly to represent the case of a people brought back to their own land,
after a state of separation from it, and dispersion over the several quarters
of the earth. A case however to which we need not confine the words before us,
nor the duty therein recommended. If restoration from a captivity already felt
calls for devout joy and religious exultation, surely the preservation of those
rights and comforts, which are the great sources of human felicity, may well
inspire the redeemed of the Lord with like sentiments of gratitude. The
recovery of any good is not in itself a more real blessing than the continued
possession of it.

In the application of the words then to the business of this day, which the
piety of government has thought fit to sanctify by the appointment of a public
thanksgiving for the manifold and signal mercies bestowed upon this country, in
the peaceable establishment, and continued possession of constitutions of
government, which unite, and by their union establish liberty with order; for
the preservation of our peace foreign and domestic; for the seasonable control
which has been given to a spirit of disorder in the suppression of the late
insurrection; and generally for the prosperous course of our affairs public and
private, and all the other great and various favors, which he has been
pleased to confer upon us; I shall take occasion from thence to consider and
illustrate 1. The general ground on which the duty of thanksgiving for
national blessings is founded. 2. The particular reasonableness of the duty on
this occasion; and 3. The proper manner of expressing our gratitude for such
blessings, with the influence it ought to have on our conduct.

1. As to the first: The duty of thanksgiving for national blessings is in
general manifestly founded on these two plain suppositions:

That benefits conferred call for suitable acknowledgements to the benefactor
by the receiver; and, that the supreme benefactor, to whom nations, as well as
single persons stand indebted for the benefits conferred on them, and the
deliverances vouchsafed to them, is Almighty God. Suppositions so agreeable to
our natural notions, so generally allowed by the sober part of mankind; that
they can need very little, will hardly admit of any illustration.

The connection between favors conferred on one part, and gratitude due on the
other is so immediately visible, that it is scarcely possible by the
interposition of any other consideration to render it more evident than it is
by itself. If any person can be supposed insensible of it, after having done
the lowest office of kindness to another; we can only help his apprehension by
referring him to his own feeling on such an occasion, bidding him ask his own
heart, what his expectations were from the person he assisted, and (as we not
more usually than properly say) obliged.

And that God is the great benefactor to whom all our acknowledgments are
ultimately due, is a supposition equally certain with the other; though more
liable to be perplexed by the disputer, more apt to be overlooked by the
politician of this world. The great Governor of the universe so generally acts
by the intervention of subordinate causes, so usually brings about his own
purposes without controuling the power which he originally gave them, or
altering the tendencies, which he at first impressed upon them; that we cannot
ordinarily distinguish with exactness between the effects of his general
concurrence, and of his special direction. But then neither is it at all
necessary that we should so distinguish. Notwithstanding our inability to
explain the nature of the divine superintendance, or to point out the instances
of the interposition, devout applications for the blessings we want, and
grateful acknowledgements for those we have received, will still be our
reasonable service, so long as we are assured, that all events are in God's
hands, and that ' he works all things after the counsel of his will.'

Whatever efficiency the author of nature may have given to any part of his own
workmanship, neither scripture nor sound philosophy will permit us to suppose,
that he has put the supreme management of the whole out of his own power. No:
He, who first formed, must still continue to uphold, this great machine of the
universe. The minutest movement in it is continually subject to his direction,
and all its parts incessantly declare his glory, and fulfill his word. And as to
the moral world: He, who is the God of the spirits of all flesh; in whom they
live, and move, and have their being,' must be perfectly acquainted with their
several powers, intimately present with all their operations. ' In his hand are
the hearts of men as the rivers of water, and he turns them whithersoever he
will.' Whether by direct internal applications to them, or by disposing outward
circumstances for them, or by numberless other methods unsearchable to us; he
most easily can, and (we have reason to think) continually does, influence
their counsels, where he does not irresistably force their wills: Nay, he can
even work their jarring humors, their interfering designs, into a subserviency
to the great and good purposes of his providence. He brings forth in each
generation such persons to act, according to their own free choice, their
various parts on the theater of life, as he foresees will answer, sometimes by
their great abilities and good dispositions, sometimes by the contrary, his
holy purposes of judgment or of mercy. And the influence of this one
arrangement on the establishment of our present tranquillity may have been, and
probably has been unspeakably great. For though we should blush to be thought so
uninstructed in the nature of our addresses to Heaven as to fancy they can work
any temporary change in the dispositions of the Deity, who is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; yet we are not ashamed to maintain that God,
in the chain of causes and effects, which not only sustains each system, but
connects them all with one another, has so wonderfully contrived, that the
temporary endeavors of virtuous men shall procure good and avert evil, by
means of that pre-established harmony, which he has willed to exist betwixt
moral actions and natural events.

All events, then, not excepting those which seem to happen most agreeably to
(what we call) the natural course of things, or to depend most on the free
determinations of human choice, are in the last result to be ascribed to the
direction, or at least the permission of Almighty God. And if so, more
especially applicable must this be to those events, on which the fates of whole
kingdoms depend. If, (as we are assured by unerring wisdom) ' not a sparrow
falls to the ground without our father;' if those of his creatures, which to
us seem most inconsiderable, be yet by no means so inconsiderable as to escape
his notice, or to be left out of his protection; his condescending care, we may
be sure, interests itself with at least equal regard in those transactions, by
the issue whereof all that is valuable to large societies of men, the liberties
and lives of millions may be finally decided. This is indeed an awful subject,
and, from the narrowness of our views of things, we must often be at a loss to
account for particular appearances relating to it. But we have reason to
suppose, that states and kingdoms are the great scenes, on which the Lord of
the whole earth most usually displays the strength of his arm, and the justice
of his administration. Frequently indeed we perceive no marks of the
interposition of God in what passes But we are both inadvertent and short
sighted: Ignorant not only of the secret springs and material circumstances of
many human actions, but yet more, beyond comparison, of principal purposes in
the divine administration. Yet this however we know that he is incessantly
conducting the affairs of the present world toward a full display of his
wisdom, justice, and goodness, in the next, though often by steps invisible to
our eyes, and improbable to our imaginations. For his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

2. We should in all things, then, believe a Providence; but in many cases we
may see it, and plainly in our own case; and at the same time we must see the
reasonableness of our acknowledgments and thanksgivings for it.

Under the guidance of Providence we have been conducted to, and planted in, a
fair and fruitful country, of which we may say in the words of Moses, ' The
Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of
fountains and depths, that spring out of valleys and hills: A land of wheat and
barley, and fig trees and pomegranates, a land wherein thou shall eat bread
without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it: A land whose stones
are iron, and out of whose hills thou may dig brass.'

In this land we have continually experienced the protection of the same kind
providence, the fostering care of Heaven; so that within a short period from a
handful, we have become a great people: and from those who had no name, we have
been raised to take our rank among the nations of the world. In the scenes
which led to this successful event, we have had deliverances, little less than
miraculous, frequently vouchsafed to us, and have seen many visible
interpositions of Providence, in causing such concurrences of circumstances for
our advantage, as no human wisdom could either foresee, direct, or overruled.
Nor did God only bestow the blessing, but it is he who continues it; and every
days peace, as well as every days bread, is a new gift from him. Thus we may
again apply the words of Moses and say ' As an eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears
them on her wings, so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God
with him.' -- We have been favored with a succession of the blessings of
Heaven from above and of the earth beneath, of fruitful seasons, and a
plentiful increase; and for the better and more assured enjoyment of these
favors, it has pleased the divine Providence to bless us, at a most
seasonable conjuncture, with the peaceable establishment of a most happy
constitution of government; which, under the protection of wise and good laws,
secures to us all our private rights and just liberties, and renders this
country the honored repository of sacred freedom, an asylum from oppression,
at a time when almost all the other civilizen nations have, through force or
treachery, lost their sacred rights. When we see, in one of the fairest
countries of Europe, the most interesting and noble struggle, for native rights
and civil independence, crushed under the iron hands of unfeeling neighboring
despots; -- and, in another the most powerful and civilized, even liberty
herself, that sweetest of natures blessings, in her too eager haste, and, alas,
misguided efforts, to regain the legitimate throne from which she had been long
detruded, marking her stained footsteps deep with domestic blood.

Our exertions to curb the savage, predatory incursions of the several
neighboring Indian tribes have been crowned with a degree of success that
promises a speedy termination to all acts of hostility from that quarter: and,
by the prudent and steady conduct of those, to whom the helm of government is
entrusted, we have been preserved from foreign war, under circumstances
peculiarly difficult and embarrassing, by which the passions of numbers had
been worked up to a degree of rage and fury: 'Some, from well meant, but
mistaken zeal, thinking that how was the time to pay the debt of gratitude to
our allies, by entering ourselves parties in their cause; and others urged on
by a just resentment and indignation at those shameful and perfidious
spoliations, which, under British councils, were made on our trade. The
offending power appears now sensible and ashamed of the wrongs committed
against us. She has listened to our remonstrances of reason, truth and
justice, and is constrained to promise restitution.' Hence our prospects of
external peace begin to open before us with an unclouded horizon; and the most
inflamed among us are led to acknowledge the propriety and prudence of trying
every method of amicable negotiation, previous to that dernier resort,
calamitous and destructive war.

God, in his infinite wisdom, has indeed found it necessary, in order to
awaken our grateful attention to the blessings by him conferred upon us, to
threaten us with an interruption of them, by permitting the designs of a few
factions and ambitious men to excite an insurrection in some western counties
of a neighboring state. This however, under the providence of the same good
and gracious being who permitted it, has been speedily and happily suppressed,
and, beyond expectation, without the effusion of blood. But as this attempt, so
highly disgraceful to the American character, in its direct tendency, put to
hazard all our social rights and blessings, and is the first of its kind under
our present constitution, it may perhaps be expected of me that I should not
thus cursorily pass it over. I must therefore with a mixture of reluctance and
pleasure make some observations, which may concern us all, on the unhappy
occasion

And first let me lay before you the uncommon and complicated guilt of this
atrocious attempt; and point out to you some aggravating circumstances, with
which it was attended. It was an attempt to defeat a law, which the constituted
authorities of government (the chosen representatives of the people) in aid of
its necessities, had, on the most mature deliberation and reflection, enacted.
It was an attempt to insult, to abuse, nay even to murder those men, who were
constitutionally entrusted with the execution of the laws of their country. It
was an attempt to sow dissension throughout this country, at a time when the
blessings of a wise and free constitution had happily operated greatly to unite
the hearts of all good citizens, and when, from peculiar circumstances,
unanimity was singularly necessary. It was an attempt to frustrate those
upright and steady measures, which have raised this country to a pitch of the
most enviable prosperity; which, by the providence of God, have hitherto
preserved to us the inestimable blessings of peace, amidst the desolating
conflicts of almost every nation with whom we are in any degree connected; and
which, we have daily increasing hopes, will secure to us a continuance of those
blessings. It was in short an attempt to set every man against his brother; to
fill the land with disorder and blood, and to give us up for a prey to the
worst of enemies, anarchy and internal confusion.

The attempt having been thus shocking in its nature, let me next observe, how
much it is the duty of every man to express his detestation of this crime by
every means in his power. It is not enough that we do not actually join in such
ruinous attempts. If we encourage them by our words, we are instrumental to
their progress. To palliate guilt is to partake of it. And if we blow the dying
embers of sedition by our breath, we take the surest means of kindling it again
into flames. Even to be silent on such an occasion is a kind of connivance at
the crime. No expressions of hatred and detestation against such ruinous
wickedness can be too public or too strong. For thus alone by the united voice
of all honest men, the leading instruments of sedition can be struck dumb, and
their deluded followers convinced of the baseness and profligacy of that
attempt, in which they have been so unhappily involved.

My next observation is of a much more pleasing kind. In the quelling this
shameful Insurrection we have had the strongest proof of a general attachment
in all ranks of citizens to our most excellent constitution, notwithstanding
the loud clamours of some few factious combinations, and deluded individuals,
which have been so industriously circulated among us: and, at the same time,
the propriety and usefulness of a national militia have been unequivocally
demonstrated. There have been honest men who doubted, and dishonest men who
spread suspicions, concerning the effects of this establishment. It had been
suggested that a militia in the hour of trial, when employed against their
fellow citizens, would prove themselves either timid, or incapable or
unfaithful; that they would be more likely to aid an Insurrection than to quell
one. But in this event we have seen a clear and noble instance of their union
and ability, their integrity and courage. A mutual confidence, grounded on a
mutual knowledge of each others upright intentions, was the cement that bound
them together. ' The eye did not say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor
yet the head to the feet, I have no need of you. But God so tempered the body
together, that there was no schism therein* but the members had the same care
one of another'. But above all let me remark, that we may attribute the
suppression of this dangerous attempt, without bloodshed, to the unanimity, the
conduct, the integrity, the generous forbearance, and distinguished humanity,
which was displayed on this unhappy occasion, and which evinces not only a
general spirit of patriotism, but also the excellence of a law, which fixes the
national defense on its most natural and sure foundation, by teaching every man
not to rely on the precarious and dangerous assistance of a mercenary standing
force, but in turn to become his own, and his country's defender.

If we turn from government to religion, we have the same reason to adore the
gracious majesty of Heaven, still working for his holy name, that is, for the
general good of mankind. For though it would be vanity to boast in this case, as
in the other, that true religion, like civil liberty, is scarcely to be found,
except in these states, when we behold the Protestant faith professed in the
purity of the Gospel, in so many kindred churches in Europe; yet this we cannot
but declare, and should always acknowledge with gratitude, that, whilst so many
in other countries, and under governments who call themselves Christian, have
been deprived of that inestimable liberty, we are protected in the free
exercise of this most pure religion, and by law secured in a full liberty of
worshipping God according to the dictates of conscience, and of disciplining
and improving our minds in the practice of all virtue, unembarrassed by legal
clogs or penalties, in an extent unknown in any other part of the civilized
world.

If these be things, which are the proper subjects of praise and thanksgiving,
and call for the heartiest expressions of our gratitude to him, ' who redeemeth
our life from destruction, and crowns us with mercy and loving kindness;'
undoubtedly there is no nation under the sun that has more reason this day
than we to say, ' What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits that
he has done unto me? I will offer to him the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and
will call upon the name of the Lord.' And this leads me to consider

3. The proper method of expressing our thankfulness; and the influence it
ought to have on our future conduct.

And here, that the expressions of our gratitude should be as public and
national, as the benefits that call for them, is a point which I need not
insist on. The present solemnity proceeds upon this supposition, and your
attendance in this holy place implies your assent to it. Nor will I doubt but
that the sincerity of your religious acknowledgments has borne some proportion
to the reality and greatness of the blessings you have been acknowledging. But
supposing that: outward acknowldgments singly are downright pageantry and
mockery. Nay inward sense of obligation along with them, if it bring not forth
suitable and lasting obedience, is imperfect, inefficacious, delusive homage,
which our Maker cannot accept. ' Herein is my father glorified, faith our
blessed Savior, that ye bear much fruit.' And thus we are to understand that
awful denunciation; ' If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart,
to give glory unto my name, faith the Lord of hosts, I will send a curse upon
you, and I will even curse your blessings.'

If, then, the providence of God has planted us in a fruitful country, and his
goodness successively crowns our years with a perpetual increase, let us
express our thankfulness by temperance and sobriety, by works of mercy and
charity, by taking care to prevent luxury and debauchery, pride and vanity,
sloth and forgetfulness of God; which are the vices too apt to spring up out of
prosperity and plenty. ' When thou have eaten and art full, said Moses in his
last exhortation to the Israelites, then thou shall bless the Lord thy God for
the good land which he has given thee. Beware that thou forget not the Lord
thy God, in not keeping his commandments and his judgments, and his statutes,
which I command thee this day, lest when thou have eaten and art full, and have
built goodly houses and dwelt therein, -- and thy silver and thy gold, and all
that thou have, is multiplied; -- then thine heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God.'

If God has preserved unto us our lawful liberties and properties under a mild
and well constituted government, when almost all other nations upon earth are
subject to arbitrary and illegal dominion; which is that form of government,
wherewith God threatened to punish the Israelites, when he declared unto them
the manner of the king who should reign over them: -- Our thankfulness for this
blessing can by no other way be so properly expressed, as by making it our
chief care to use that liberty, which we so justly boast of, and which we have
thought worth defending with so much blood and treasure, so as not to abuse it
to licentiousness and wantonness; to use our liberty so as not to break through
the obligations of regular government, and legal restraints; to use it so that
we ourselves contribute nothing to the diminution of it.

In the most popular governments some authority there must be, and somewhere
placed. And wheresoever authority is placed, it must, if it has any meaning,
create a proportionable obligation to obedience, (in other words, a
proportionable restraint upon the freedom of action) in those who are subject
to it. For after all our speculations, the obligations lying on the members of
any community as such, must be measured by the laws of that community. These
are at once the standards of the magistrate's authority, and of the liberty of
the subject. These are the declared will of the whole society, and must
determine that of every member of it. A liberty to oppose his own private will
to that of the public, and to resist those persons, who are entrusted with the
execution of it, is no part of that liberty, which any society can allow its
members. Nor can it be taken by any subject without a violation of the duty he
owes to the government that protects him; to himself, as greatly interested in
its peace and good order; and especially to that Being, whose providence in the
accounts of right reason, as well as those of revelation, ' rules in the
kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.'

Legal liberty, then, is all that can be demanded by members of society, and
more than this cannot be confidently desired by any, who are willing to enjoy
the benefits of government. It Is true we may think ourselves aggrieved by some
of the laws in being; or we may dislike some thing in the form of government we
live under: Or perhaps something in the conduct of persons entrusted with the
administration thereof is not as it should be.' In all these cases, or any
other of real or apprehended grievances, we have legal, constitutional,
peaceable means for redressing them, with uncontrouled liberty to use those
means, if we will. And suppose they operate not so speedily, or so effectually,
as we may wish; yet if force may be used instead of them, upon every failure or
delay, especially when caused merely by difference of opinions amongst
ourselves, no society can subsist. Taking unwarrantable steps in opposition to
such as we may think, whether too hastily or not, bad men and bad measures, is
only introducing additional wickedness of our own, and giving others a pretense
for continuing and even increasing theirs. If we are too corrupt to expect any
good from mutual persuasion; much less can we expect it from mutual violence.
The beginning of strife, especially between public parties, is as when one
lets out water; and it is impossible to say, where the breach may end, or the
inundation be stopped. I am willing to believe, no considerable number of those
persons, who first engaged in the measures we have been recollecting, had any
thoughts of taking those steps, into which they soon permitted themselves to be
hurried. But, alas! when respect for well settled constitutions, and the
restraints of law, are once unadvisedly broken in upon; when men's passions are
heated, and their jealousies set to work; no man can foresee how far those
about him, or even himself may afterward be carried. The gradation hinted at
by St. Paul is generally found too easy and natural; from backbiting and
calumniating the actions of those in authority, to whisperings and secret
cabals against them; from whisperings to swellings and menaces, from swellings
to tumults and riotous assemblings; thence the transition becomes almost
unavoidable to open insurrection and rebellion.

Too much have the people of these United States been unhappily divided by
party distinctions and names of reproach; which often fatally hinder men from
being of one mind in a house, and separate those, whom both duty and interest
call upon to be chief friends. In this imperfect state of human affairs and
human passions, it cannot indeed be, but that offenses of this kind will come.
But the present seems as promising a season as can well be expected, if not for
wholly extirpating this baneful root of bitterness, at least for checking the
growth of it. The general attachment lately shown to our present established
constitution of government was confessedly of the utmost importance to us all.
And though some diversity of sentiments about the methods of promoting our
countries interest, will ever subsist among such creatures as men, and will
generally appear in a free country: Yet surely, unless men are unreasonably
fond of their own opinions, mere diversity need not degenerate into strife, nor
zeal work itself up into rage and fury.

If, however, inconveniences in this respect should not always be prevented: If
some will still be more solicitous for the prevalence of their own schemes,
than about the promotion of the general good: If they will go on groundlessly
suspecting, and thence needlessly disgusting their well disposed neighbors:
If, in short, warm zealots will unnecessarily kindle a tire, and compass
themselves about with sparks: Let each of us at least ' keep his own heart with
all diligence,' guarding against the first motions toward all such vehemence
in himself, and avoiding as much as possible the contagion of it in others;
being well assured that nothing in this world can recompense the loss of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is not only a present ornament and blessing to every
one that retains it, but a necessary preparative for that peaceful region,
where the harsh voice of party shall not be heard: Where enmity and discord
shall have no being. If God has given peace in our borders and continues to us
the blessing; among other expressions of our gratitude for so comprehensive a
blessing, let us remember to root out of our own breasts those lusts from
whence, as from their original source, come wars and fightings among us; and
let us, in their stead, cultivate those heaven born affections, which are at
once the glory and happiness of brethren dwelling together in unity. And as it
is a blessing of inestimable value in society, let us with resolution and
watchfulness guard against every practice that may openly or secretly endanger
it; nor hazard its destruction by delusive attempts, by listening to those 'who
in quest of ideal perfection, are never satisfied with any established form of
government, but whose unquiet minds, ever in pursuit of visionary theories,
neglect the more important objects of peace, industry and stability of
government, which are the only circumstances that can give greatness or
prosperity to a nation.'

Lastly, If God has bestowed upon us the inestinable gift of religious
liberty; of worshipping him according to the dictates of conscience; and
vouchsafed to us the glorious light of the Gospel, and the knowledge of his son
Jesus Christ; whilst many other nations are deprived of this liberty; and
several too lie yet in the darkness of Heathenism, and have not the knowledge
of the law of God: -- The best and most acceptable method of returning our
thanks for so inestinable a blessing is, that we endeavor to propagate the
Christian knowledge with simplicity to others, and that, animated with the love
thereof, we take care above all things to obey the truth ourselves in all its
purity; that we steadfastly take more and more heed, without regard to any human
authority whatsoever, and without calling any man father or master upon earth,
to adhere to the divine authority of the Scriptures only, throwing off ' the
sin which may so easily beset us,' that of too great eagerness and unchristian
contention, about those secondary and incidental differences of opinion, which
seem to divide us into various sects; while we all rejoice in one common day,
which the glorious light of the Gospel has spread over these extensive states.
As therefore we all profess to be under the same Shepherd, we should not surely
make one another uneasy, because we lodge in different folds; seeing we all
hold that a time will come, when all shall hear his voice, and there shall be
one fold under one Shepherd.

To conclude. The constitution we live under is, in every respect, so happily
balanced, as to partake of the beneficial influences of a just authority and a
sober liberty, and to avoid the extremes of tyranny on one hand, and
licentiousness on the other: A constitution under which we may be as secure, as
any thing human can secure us, in our persons and our properties, in our lives
and our consciences: A constitution, by a due improvement of the advantages
whereof, we may be easy in this world, and happy in a far better. Let us then
at once show ourselves worthy of these blessings, and secure the continuance of
them, by rendering unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto GOD the
things that are GOD'S: Expressing our affection for our country by praying for
its peace, and by contributing our honest industry, in our several stations,
toward its prosperity; and our zeal for our holy religion, by a constant and
devout attendance on its worship and its ordinances, and by adorning it with
all the virtues and graces of a truly christian life. -- In one word, our first
duty is to fear God, our next, and in subordination thereto, to honor and obey
those who are lawfully invested with authority: -- Join therefore these two
together by means of wisdom and a sound understanding, with fervent prayers for
a blessing on our endeavors; -- and then though the rain should descend, -- and
the floods come, -- and the winds blow, and beat upon our house, -- yet our
political edifice will not fail; -- FOR IT IS FOUNDED ON A ROCK.


