CONSTITUTION OF THE Associated Mechanics OF THE Town of BOSTON.
PREAMBLE.
THE combination of the Mechanic Powers has proved the source of those useful
Arts and Sciences, which have amelioraated the condition of Man, and given to
Society its wealth and respectability: -- It may, therefore, rationally be
inferred, that the Association of those who profess those Arts, will appreciate
their condition, both as Mechanics and Men: For experience has too frequently
taught them the disadvantages their disconnected state in the town of BOSTON
has been, in discouraging industry, cramping ingenuity, and retarding the
benefits of mutual good offices and fellowship -- To make an experiment in the
former, and to remedy the evils of the latter, is the object of this
Association: -- And the subscribers, desirous to effect that object, placing a
friendly confidence in each other, agree to be governed by the following
Regulations, viz.

ARTICLE I. OF THE SOCIETY.
Sect. 1. THIS Society shall be denominated the "ASSOCIATION OF THE MECHANICS
OF BOSTON."

Sect. 2. The primary objects of this Association are -- To promote the
happiness of the Associates, as mechanics and as men: -- To encourage the
Mechanic Arts of every country: -- To increase the Mechanic Interest in this
town, and in the United States: -- To raise funds to assist poor and ingenious
Mechanics in prosecuting the discovery and invention of new and useful
machines, tools and instruments; -- to grant premiums therefore: -- And to
assist poor and decayed Mechanics, their Widows, and Orphans.

ARTICLE II. OF MEMBERS.
Sect. 1. THE Society shall be composed of none but Mechanics.

Sect. 2. Until the sixth day of April, next ensuing, every Master-Workman who
served an Apprenticeship at a mechanical profession; who has lived in the town
of Boston one year; who is a person of good moral character; who signs these
Regulations, and pays to the person who shall be regularly authorized to
receive the same, a sum, not less than One Dollar, shall be considered as a
Member.

Sect. 3. After the sixth day of April, aforesaid, it shall be requisite to
admission as a Member, that the Candidate stand proposed as such, at least one
month, either before the Board of Trustees, or the Association, at a regular
meeting -- that he obtain the votes of two thirds of the Members present --
sign these Regulations, and pay a sum, not less than One Dollar.

Sect. 4. After the expiration of seven years from the adoption of these
Regulations, it shall also be requisite to admission as a Member, in addition
to the requisites in the preceding article, that the Candidate proposed,
produce his Indentures, and a Certificate signed by the person he served his
Apprenticeship with, (if residing within this Commonwealth) or by two
creditable Citizens of the town wherein he lived, that he has served a regular
Apprenticeship to some mechanic business, and that he be a person of good moral
character.

Sect. 5. No person shall become a Member of this Society until he has attained
the age of twenty-one years.

ARTICLE III. OF OFFICERS.
Sect. 1. THE Officers of this Association shall be, a President,
Vice President, Treasurer, Secretary, and nine Trustees, who shall constitute a
Board of Trustees. The four first shall be voted for singly, the other nine may
be voted for on one list; but all by written votes; seven of whom shall
constitute a quorum.

Sect. 2. The duty of the President shall be, to preside at all meetings of the
Society, and Board of Trustees. He shall call special meetings of the Society,
when a quorum of the Trustees shall deem it necessary; or when application
shall be made therefore, in writing, by fifteen Members of the Society -- each
applicant signing his name: He shall also have power to appoint the place of
meetings of the Society, and the special meetings of the Board of Trustees.

Sect. 3. The duty of the Vice President, in the absence or demise of the
President, shall be the same as that of the President: In the absence or demise
of the President and Vice President, a President shall be chosen from the
Trustees, at every meeting until the choice of Officers.

Sect. 4. The duties of the Secretary shall be to keep a fair and accurate
Journal of the proceedings, correspondence, and other business of the
Association -- to publish such communications or proceedings, as the
Association, or Board of Trustees, may direct -- to collect all moneys, and to
pay the same to the Treasurer, taking his receipt therefore.

The compensation to the Secretary for his services shall be voted at the
annual meeting of the Association.

Sect. 5. The duty of the Treasurer shall be to receive all moneys from the
Secretary -- to pay them out, on a warrant signed by the President, and two, at
least, of the board of Trustees, and to keep accurate accounts of all the
fiscal concerns of the Association. He shall give bonds to the satisfaction of
the Trustees, for the faithful discharge of his trust; and when the moneys in
his hands shall amount to Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars, he shall acquaint the
Trustees thereof.

The Treasurer shall not be eligible to that office, more than three years
successively.

Sect. 6. The Board of Trustees shall superintend the prudential concerns of
the Association -- They, or a part of them, not less than three, shall form a
Court of Equity, to hear and settle any differences between Members of this
Association, and between Members and their Apprentices. The Board shall have
power to grant moneys and warrants therefore, for the purpose of the
Institution; and when the Treasurer shall inform them that he has in his
possession Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars, they shall invest Two Hundred Dollars
thereof, in the name of the Society, in the public Funds. -- They shall keep a
regular and accurate account of all their transactions, which shall be laid
before the Society at every regular meeting, for the inspection of the Members,
which transactions shall be read aloud by the Secretary. They may correspond
with any Society of Mechanics in the United States; but they shall lay such
correspondence before the Society, at the next quarterly meeting. They shall
meet once in each month, at each others' houses, for the benefit of the
Association, the expenses of which meetings shall not be chargeable to the
Society.

ARTICLE IV. GENERAL RULES.
Sect. 1. EACH Member of this Association, shall at every quarterly meeting,
pay to the Secretary One Quarter of a Dollar, the principal of which, together
with the moneys paid at the entrance and admission of Members, and all fines
accruing to the Society, shall forever remain a fund to effect the purposes of
the Association.

Sect. 2. The Meetings of this Society shall be four times a year, viz. -- On
the second Thursday in December, March, June and September. The time and place
of each meeting, shall be notified in one or more of the newspapers, by the
Secretary, at least one week before each meeting.

Sect. 3. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be on the second Thursday
in December, when the Officers shall be chosen.

Sect. 4. The Trustees, at their monthly meeting next preceding the second
Thursday of December, shall settle the Treasurer's accounts, and lay an
accurate statement of them before the Association, at the Annual Meeting.

At the Quarterly Meeting next preceding the Annual one, the question shall be
taken, Whether the Society, at said Annual Meeting, will have a Public Festival?

Sect. 5. Every Member shall stand when he addresses the President, and no
Member shall interrupt another, while speaking, unless to call him to order, or
to set him right. No member shall speak more than twice to the same question,
unless to explain himself, without leave from the Society; and it shall be the
duty of Members, on all occasions of rude or disorderly behavior, to assist
the President in effectually suppressing the same.

Sect. 6. No Member of this Association shall take any lad of fourteen years of
age, or upwards, as an Apprentice, without having him bound by legal
Indentures, within twelve months, under penalty of paying Ten Dollars; which
sum shall be paid annually, so long as the Apprentice remains unbound, which
fine shall be added to the stock of the Society.

Sect. 7. Any Member who shall entertain, or employ, any bound Apprentice, who
shall have left the person he was bound to, without said person's consent,
shall forfeit Thirty Dollars monthly, so long as he continues to entertain or
employ such Apprentice.

Sect. 8. After the expiration of seven years from the said sixth day of April,
any Member of this Society, who shall employ any Journeyman, who has not served
a regular Apprenticeship to the Trade he professes; which shall be evidenced by
his Indentures, or a Certificate, signed by the person with whom he served his
Apprenticeship, or by two creditable citizens of the town wherein he lived
(except such Journeyman be a foreigner) shall forfeit and pay to the Society,
Ten Dollars, for every month he shall so employ such Journeyman. Provided
nevertheless, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any
Member from hiring and employing Laborers.

Sect. 9. In case any dispute should arise between a Member of this Association
and his Apprentice or Apprentices, it shall be the duty of the Member first to
lay his case before three, or more, of the Trustees for their advice; and
should said Trustees advise him to refer his case to men, and he refuses so to
do, and applies for remedy to the laws, he shall forfeit all his privileges and
immunities as a Member of this Association. In like cases of difference between
Members of this Association, a similar mode of settlement shall be resorted to;
and in case of noncompliance to the advice given, a similar forfeiture shall
take place: Except, however, that the cases of Members shall be adjudged by a
majority of the Board of Trustees.

Sect. 10. Should any profession of Mechanics agree upon, and sign Regulations
for the government of their craft, and should any Member of this Association,
who has signed those Regulations, violate or contravene them: -- on complaint
and due proof thereof, being given the Trustees, he shall forfeit his
privileges and immunities as a Member.

Sect. 11. Should complaint be made, in writing, to the Board of Trustees, by
any Merchant, Trader, or other person, that any Member of this Society has
defrauded him, by selling him unmerchantable Wares, by not completing contracts
in a workmanlike manner, or by extravagant charges, they shall immediately
appoint a suitable Committee to examine into the facts, and use their
endeavors that justice be done to the parties, and the award of said Committee
shall be considered as binding on the Member complained of, on forfeiture of
his immunities and privileges as such* But should any Merchant, Trader, or
other person, give employment to any person, living in the town of Boston, who
does not belong to this Association, and should suffer any injury therefrom,
this Society will not hold itself obliged to interfere in the case, or give any
advice or assistance therein.

Sect. 12. Any person refusing to pay the fines and assessments, imposed by
these Regulations, after being regularly applied to therefore, shall forfeit his
immunities and privileges as a Member, unless he can make it appear to the
satisfaction of the Trustees, that he is unable to pay them.

Sect. 13. Whenever a breach of any of these Regulations shall come to the
knowledge of any Member, he shall acquaint the President or Vice President
thereof; stating the evidence he has of it, and the circumstances attending it;
and it shall be the duty of the President to lay the same before the Trustees
at their next meeting, a majority of whom shall hear and determine on the
subject, in all cases wherein provision is not made therefore in these
Regulations.

Sect. 14. Whenever it shall appear to the Board of Trustees that any Member or
Members has incurred Fines which have been regularly called for, or in any
other manner subjected himself to forfeiture of his privileges and immunities,
it shall be the duty of the Trustees to lay the same briefly before the
Association at their next Quarterly Meeting, a majority of whom shall finally
determine, so far as it respects the expelling of such Member or Members.

Sect. 15. Any Member who wishes an alteration of these Regulations, or to
introduce any new ones, shall make his proposition therefore in writing, and
shall lay the same before the Association, at a Quarterly Meeting, which the
Secretary shall enter on the Journal, for the consideration of the Association,
at their next Quarterly Meeting; when it shall be debated, and if two thirds of
the Members present, vote in favor of such alteration or addition, it shall
become a Regulation; and shall be entered as such in an Appendix to these
Regulations.

AT a Meeting of the Association of the Mechanics of Boston, held at
Concert-Hall, Thursday, April 16, 1795 -- VOTED, as a primary Regulation --
That this Society being formed for the sole purpose of promoting the Mechanic
Arts, and advancing the happiness of the Association, as Mechanics and Men,
will not, in their Associate capacity, permit in their Meetings, any Debate or
Conversation upon any Political Subject whatever, unless wherein they may be
essentially interested as Mechanics.

Members' Names and Professions.
PAUL REVERE, Goldsmith. Samuel Sellon, Farrier. Thomas Clement, Housewright.
Edward Tuckerman, Baker. Jonathan Balch, Pump and Block-Maker. Richard Faxon,
Blacksmith, Samuel Gore, Painter. Stephen Gore, Currier. Benjamin Callendar,
Tailor. Archibald McNeill, Rope Maker. Daniel Bates, Leather-Dresser. Giles
Richards, Card-Maker. Edmund Heart, Ship-Carpenter. Benjamin Russell, Printer.
John Wire, Rigger. Jonathan Hunnewell, Bricklayer. John Kettell, Baker. Henry
Purkitt, Cooper. Ebenezer Larkin, Bookbinder. Thomas Pons, Jeweller and
Watch-Finisher. Isaac Davis, jun. Rope-Maker. William Leach, Saddler and Trunk
Maker. Daniel Messinger, Hatter. William Woods, Baker. Benjamin Larkin,
Bookbinder. William Todd, Housewright. John Cornish, Tailor. Ozias Morse,
Cordwainer. Humphrey Clark, Tailor. John W. Folsom, Printer and Bookbinder.
Jonathan Kilton, Baker. John Henry Merckell, Furrier. Amos Lincoln, Carpenter.
Edward How, Rope-Maker. David West, Bookbinder. James Phillips, Rope-Maker.
Caleb Clapp, House-Carpenter. John Hayward, Cabinet-Maker. Samuel Abbot,
Cooper. Francis Green, Glazier. Caleb Champney, Glazier and Plumber. John How,
jun. Cabinet-Maker. George Weller, Tailor. Thomas How, Turner. Nathaniel
Balch, Hatter. Job Wheelwright, Cooper. Jedediah Lincoln, Housewright. Moses
Thayer, Tailor. Joshua G. Davies, Jeweller. Peter Cade, Rope-Maker. James
Eunson, Cooper. Josiah Foul, Hair-Dresser. John Stutson, Housewright. Braddock
Loring, Housewright. Samuel Bangs, Cordwainer. Moses Eager, Carpenter. Elkanah
Cushman, Hair-Dresser. William Cordwell, jun. Coppersmith. Samuel J. Tuck,
Windsor Chair-Maker. William Ellison, Housewright. John G. Scholtz, Farrier.
Elijah Loring, Carpenter. Paul Revere, jun. Goldsmith. Zechariah Hicks,
Saddler. Joshua Wetherle, Manufacturer of Card-Wire, etc. William Andrews,
Bookbinder. Ebenezer T. Andrews, Printer and Bookseller. Andrew Floyd,
Housewright. Henry Simpson, Bricklayer. Daniel Rea, jun. Painter. William T.
Clap, Bookbinder. Bela French, Housewright. John Cotton, Painter. Thomas S.
Bordman, Hatter. William Williams, Hatter. Abraham Adams, Leather-Dresser.
William Jepson, Housewright. Samuel Thwing, Baker. Ebenezer Herring, Mason.
James Kelsar, Cabinet-Maker. Nathaniel Balch, jun. Hatter. Francis Garaux,
Baker. Henry Messinger, Hatter. Samuel Hall, Printer. James McClary,
Tobacconist. William Alexander, jun, Cabinet-Maker. William Badger, Founder.
Peter McIntosh, Blacksmith. Richard Caswell, Rope-Maker. William Tyler,
Rope-Maker. Gershom Spear, Cooper. Mamay Masson, Baker. Enoch James,
Blacksmith. William Stephens, Carpenter. Solomon Cotton, Blacksmith. Thomas
Cutter, Blacksmith. Nathaniel Call, Housewright. William Heath, Sail-Maker.
Levi Hearsey, Cordwainer. Jonathan Loring, jun. Carpenter. Joseph Stodder,
Housewright. John Miller, Carpenter. William Hunneman, Coppersmith, Christian
Gullager, Painter. Ezra Parmenter, Smith. Thomas Hearsey, Housewright. Oliver
Wiswall, Housewright. Michael Homer, Mason. Josiah Snelling, Baker. Peter
Smink, Silk Dyer. Samuel Perkins, Painter. Ebenezer Pain, Housewright. William
Bond, Goldsmith and Watch Maker. John Badger, Painter. John Keith,
Hair-Dresser. William Fennymore, Hair-Dresser. John Denton, Blacksmith. William
Whall, Smith and Gunsmith. Oliver Johonnot, Tailor. Lemuel Gardner, Cooper.
John McFarlane, Watch-Maker. Joseph Clark, Tobacconist. John Deverell,
Watch-Maker. Jonathan Wheeler, Bricklayer. James Liswell, Tailor. Nathaniel
Wheeler, Smith. Griffin Barney, Rope-Maker. Henry Blany, Mason. Thomas L.
Cowley, Tailor.
THE foregoing list became Members previous to the 16th of April, 1795. -- A
considerable number are on the Secretary's Book as Candidates at the June
Meeting.

The following Gentlemen have been elected Officers for 1795.
PAUL REVERE, Esquire. President. EDWARD TUCKERMAN, Esquire. Vice President. Mr. SAMUEL
GORE, Treasurer. Deacon RICHARD FAXON, Trustees. Mr. SAMUEL BANGS, Trustees.
Mr. THOMAS CLEMENT, Trustees. Mr. STEPHEN GORE, Trustees. Capt. BENJAMIN
RUSSELL, Trustees. Mr. EDMUND HEART, Trustees. Mr. BENJAMIN CALLENDER, Trustees.
Mr. GILES RICHARDS, and Trustees. Mr. JONATHAN HUNNEWELL, Trustees. Mr. JOHN W.
FOLSOM, Secretary.
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN W. FOLSOM, No. 30, Union-Street.


