THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OR ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc. RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- AUGUST 20, 1795. --

Advertisement.
IT is intended, in the present Publication, to collect together the most
valuable Essays, Resolutions, Speeches, etc. respecting the Treaty between the
United States and Great Britain.

In the Prosecution of this Plan, the Publisher pledges himself to observe the
strictest Impartiality, and on this Observance rests his Pretensions to public
Encouragement.

CONTENTS.
SPEECH of Mr. Charles Pinckney, at Charleston, July 22d, 1795 Page 5 Speech of
Mr. J. Thompson, at Petersburg, August 1st, 1795 Page 21 Proceedings of a Town
Meeting at Wilmington, August 4th, 1795 Page 28 Speech of Mr. Casar Rodney, at
Wilmington, August 4th, 1795 Page 29 Memorial of the Citizens of Wilmington and
its Vicinity to the President of the United States Page 36 Reply of the
President to the Citizens of Wilmington Page 38 -- to the Selectmen of Boston
Page 39 Observations on the constitutional Power to form Treaties Page 40
Camillus, No. I. Page 41. -- No. II. Page 47 -- No. III. Page 53 -- No. IV.
Page 62 -- No. V. Page 68
Speech of Mr. Charles Pinckney, Late Governor of South Carolina, at a very
numerous Meeting of the Citizens of Charleston, the 22d July, 1795, to hear the
Report of their Committee on the Treaty between Great Britain and the United
States of America. Carefully collected from the Notes of Mr. Pinckney, and
afterward inspected by himself.
HE began by saying, that having been absent in the country, he was prevented
from attending their meeting on the 16th -- but, conceiving it the duty of
every friend to his country, on an occasion so interesting to their commercial
rights, he (...) permission to state some observations in support of the
op^ni^n he should give on the treaty.

In doing this, he said he should follow the advice that had just been properly
given by the Intendant, and be very moderate. In discussions of such
importance, moderation appeared to him essential to the discovery of truth.

It was somewhere very well said, that passion and intemperance never failed to
wrest the scepter from reason; and he hoped they would not, on this interesting
occasion, prevent the fair application of argument to the judgment of an
assembly so numerous and respectable as that was.

In examining the treaty, it appeared to him necessary previously to trace the
manner in which Mr. Jay, had been appointed to this trust, and the instructions
he had received; in order to determine how far it was conducted, in its
commencement and progress, upon those principles which were conformable to the
spirit and intention of that article of the constitution which respects
treaties, and to the candor and fairness which ought to govern in all
negociations where any thing like reciprocity is to be expected, and where
there was no determination, on the part of the government, or its negociator,
that unnecessary and dishonorable sacrifices were to be nature.

He said that it must here be acknowledged, that as Mr. Jay's appointment (...)
originated in a bre^ch, if not of the letter, yet most clearly of the spirit of
the constitution -- which seems, to have intended, that a judicia^y should be
e^ected in a manner that would render i^ independent of the ins^^ence of the
executive and legislature, or of those prejudices which the most distant
connection with either must necessarily produce; and that the same man should
not have it in his power to form a treaty, and afterward, as a judge,
prejudiced as he must be by being concerned in its negotiation, to decide upon
its meaning: so there had appeared, for a considerable time, a determination in
a party in our government to force a connection with Great Britain, not only at
the risk of this valuable guard to the administration of justice, by
establishing a precedent for taking the judges from the bench, while in office,
and giving them diplomatic or other appointments, but in a breach of a still
more important limitation of the constitution -- the one which respects the
power of the president to form treaties with the advice and consent of the
senate.

By referring to the proceedings of the senate on this occasion, it appears
that the president, in a short, unexplanatory message, stated to them, that,
from the communications of our minister in Great Britain, our affairs with that
court wore a serious aspect; that before we resorted to the last expedient,
which had been the scourge of so many nations, he thought negotiation
preferable, and nominated Mr. Jay as envoy extraordinary on that occasion. He
said, his confidence in our minister resident there remained undiminished; but
he still was of opinion, the measure was necessary; that such an envoy, going
from among us at this time, would have fuller information of the state of
things, and carry with him more effectually the sensibility and feelings of the
people.

On this message being sent to the senate, it was very properly supposed, by
some of the members of that body, that the president ought to have submitted to
them the whole of the business upon which Mr. Jay was to have been sent; and a
motion to that effect was brought forward, but negatived. Mr. Jay's appointment
was consented to; and, as far as he understood to be the fact, he was
absolutely sent to negociate a treaty with Great Britain, without his
instructions being submitted to the senate, or that body being acquainted with
the president's intention to enter into a negotiation, which was ultimately to
lead to the formation of a treaty of such immense consequence to every part of
the union. He had been informed, and he believed his information was correct,
that many of the members of the senate at that time were of opinion, Mr. Jay
was sent for the purpose of obtaining compensation for the depredations in the
West Indies; to demand the delivery of the posts, and the execution of the
treaty of peace; and to require a stipu^tion, that our vessels should not in
future be liable to seizure or condemnation on any pretense. He was sure that
this was the general opinion of the people in this part of the union; and, as
he had observed, he understood it to be the opinion of the senate.

If this is the fact, that Mr. Jay's instructions for forming this treaty were
not submitted to the senate, nor received their assent, he considered it as a
matter of great importance indeed, and that required the most serious attention
of the people, how far the constitution ever intended to authorize the
president to enter into any negotiation with a foreign power, without his
having first submitted his intentions and instructions to the senate and
received their advice and assent, as well with respect to the necessity of such
negotiation, as to the propriety of his instructions.

Mr. Pinckney said, his opinion clearly was, that the constitution gave no
power to the president to commence a negotiation, without previously submitting
his intentions and instructions to the senate, requiring their advice and
receiving their assent. The words "by and with the advice and consent of the
senate" admit no other explanation. He cannot be said to advise with them upon
a measure, if he forms a treaty without their knowledge, and merely leaves to
them the power of determining whether they will ratify it or not, after it has
been solemnly concluded by the minister.

The true construction of this article, and the use the people of the union
will one day require to be made of it, is, if the president thought a foreign
negotiation necessary, that he should previously consult the senate, and be
governed by their opinion, how far it would be proper, and upon what
conditions, to proceed in it; and that if the senate, without the previous
interference of the president, thought a negotiation proper, that they should
advise it, and that the president should enter upon it. Although a contrary use
had hitherto been made of this power, yet Mr. Pinckney said, that it well
deserved the attention of the public, whether any other construction ought to
be admitted; and that if a different use had been made of it, or if the article
was doubtful, or open to any other meaning, whether it was not of greater
consequence than any thing that had been agitated since the revolution, that
these doubts should be removed, and the meaning he contended for, unequivocally
given to the article. If, on the other hand, a power was to be given to the
president to enter into negociations with foreigners, without acquainting the
senate with their nature, or the connections he wishes to form, and be should
merely leave to them the power of ratifying or not, it must at once be seen,
that the agency, which the constitution intended to give the senate, in the
formation of treaties, was in a great measure destroyed; and that as it was an
unusual, and sometimes a hazardous thing, and productive of war, or other
national calamities, for nations to refuse to ratify a treaty after it had been
signed by the minister, who, it is to be supposed, was properly instructed, and
acted agreeably to the instructions and wishes of those who sent him, there
could be no doubt of improper treaties being FORCED upon the people.

If the senate were not to have a right to advise the president to a
negotiation, which they considered as proper, without his previous interference
-- if no foreign connection was to take place but of his proposing -- it then
indeed became an enquiry of the highest importance, how far the people or the
constitution of the United States ever intended to place all its foreign
connections, all the treaties they may think necessary to their peace and
security, to their general interests, or the regulation of their commerce, in
the hands of one man: a man in whom, by giving him the right to nominate, they
had already placed all the honors and offices of the government; and to which
unexampled power in any thing that had even the appearance of a free
government, an attempt, was here made to add the all-important one of
concluding treaties without the knowledge of the senate, and leaving it to them
merely to ratify: a power which, under an unwise use of it, may involve us in
wars, abridge our rights, and would, as he should attempt to show, by such
treaties as Mr. Jay's, eventually destroy our navingation and commerce, and the
right congress had to regulate them.

He would, upon a proper occasion, enter more largely into these subjects; he
had at present mentioned them with a view to prove the necessity of the
people's seriously attending to a treaty, in the commencement of which there
have been two breaches of the constitution, and which, from the manner of its
negotiation, must necessarily bring before the public a discussion of the
important subjects which on this occasion he had only time very slightly to
touch upon.

If, however, a treaty was considered as indispensible, and our trade was in so
languid a state that it could not be advantageously carried on without the
support of, or a connection with Great Britain, surely Mr. Jay was of all men
the most improper that could have been appointed; the most unlikely to obtain
those advantages which the humbled and distressed situation of that country
gave us a right to expect, -- nay, to demand; and without which it is the
universal opinion of all the real friends of their country, it was
dishonorable, not to say treacherous, to have entered into any treaty with
them. -- His dislike to the French -- his partiality for British government and
measure -- h^^ opin^^ns as secretary, and afterward as judge, in favor of
their claims, were well known. On these points the English minister was sure of
his acquiescence in every demand. If he had attempted to say a word in favor of
the claims, or even of allowances to his countrymen, his opponent had only to
show him his own opinions, and his lips must have been instantly closed.

They could not but recollect his conduct, in the attempt be made in 1785, to
barter away the rights of his country, in sacrificing the interests, and of
course dissevering the western territory from the union, by ceding to Spain,
for twenty-five years, the right to navigate the Mississippi, for which we were
to receive a treaty that would not give a single benefit we did not before
possess, and which it must always be her interest to allow. Standing,
therefore, in this situation as a public man, he was so devoted to the
interests of the British, and his opinions in favor of that country were so
well known, that it was impossible for us, through such a negociator, to form
any but a treaty destructive to our commercial rights, ungrateful and injurious
to our allies, and consequently degrading to our national character. However,
good may sometimes arise our of evil. If he had not made this public exposure
of his conduct and principles, he might one day have been brought forward,
among others, as a candidate for our highest office. -- But the general and
deserved contempt which his negociations have brought both his talents and
principles into, will, he trusted, for ever secure his fellow citizens from the
dangerous and unwise use which such a man would have made of the important
powers vested in a president.

How far, under these circumscances, and many of them must have been known to
him, it may have been prudent in the president to send a man who has shown
himself so uninformed of the commercial interests of his country, and so
miserably deficient in those talents which a negociator required -- to oppose
him singly, and at their own court, to the talents, experience, and perhaps
temptations of their ablest statesmen, -- is one of those extraordinary
occurrences in his conduct, which, considering the character, general good
sense, and unshaken integrity of the president, is difficult to be accounted
for.

Such was the negociator; and such were the circumstances under which this
treaty has been produced.

I am now, he said, to examine the treaty, -- but as the report of the
committee has just been read, it would be unnecessary, and occupy more of your
time than you could spare, to enter into a particular discussion of every
article; all that can be expected, at present, is to review its leading
features, and state how far they misstate against the true interests of our
commerce.

The first article admits the return of all persons to this country, whose
conduct has rendered them obnoxious, and whose cases have already been decided
upon by the state legislatures: a measure repugnant to the feelings of our
fellow citizens, and unnecessary in a treaty of commerce.

The second respects the posts. It is well known they are of consequence to the
interests of the states concerned in the fur trade, and essential to the peace
and security of the inhabitants bordering on the Indians in that neighborhood.
Although the treaty of peace expressly stipulated for their delivery twelve
years ago, yet they have been retained, and still are held in defiance of the
authority and remonstrances of our government and, notwithstanding they ought
to have been delivered at the time fixed by the treaty, they are now offered to
be granted a^ a douceur for surrendering important privileges, and under
ci^cumstances which either give peculiar privileges to the Briti^^ subjects, or
give a right of citizenship to those who have bee^ and may again become, from
their neighborhood to the Indians, dangerous enemies to the peace and trade of
that part (...) the union.

It may easily be seen, from the care which the British ^^nister has taken to
word the 3d article, and the easy and ra^dy concession which Mr. Jay has made
to the British of eve^ privilege they could think of inserting, that he has
very nea^ yielded to them almost every advantage that could flow to (...) from
a trade with the Indians and the western territory.

The article which respects the recovery of debts, is at ow^ as unnecessary as
dishonorably burdensome to our governmen^ It was a point upon which the
creditors had long since m^^ up their minds, and one which a very little
firmness on (...) stituents, would have induced them to relinquish; by far
(...) greater number of cases had been settled by suit or compromi^^ and it
seems to be calculated merely for the purpose of opera^^ a dangerous and
extensive door to claims on the treasury the union; claims which, long since,
have been laid aside, a^ many of which, particularly that part which respects
the p^^ (...), have originated in the most manifest injusti^ But on this
subject Mr. Jay had pledged himself. Although he knew it would operate to the
ruin almost entirely of that class which have been the greatest sufferers by
the revolution, be meant the former merchants of America, such has been his
constant and unremitted attention to the support of the British claims, that,
as secretary for foreign affairs, as judge, and now as envoy, he has
unceasingly and with marked industry and perseverance upon all occasions
supported them, against the interests of his fellow citizens, the feelings of
humanity, and the honor and gratitude of his country. It also creates a mode of
adjudication unusual and unknown to the laws of this country; and leaves it to
be determined by chance, whether the majority of the commissioners to be
appointed may not be British subjects, and load our funds, at pleasure, with a
very heavy debt.

The next point respects the depredations on our commerce in the West Indies,
and the compensation it proposes. This was the subject which gave rise to Mr.
Jay's mission; for, he said, he believed that had no depredations existed, no
such appointment would have been made. -- How far he has succeeded in his
attempt to obtain compensation, or whether the mode he has adopted, will prove
effectual, time alone can discover; at present it appears to be very doubtful,
and to depend entirely upon chance. Each party are to appoint two
commissioners, whose opinions will be previously well known, and who will carry
with them into their adjudications all the passions and prejudices of those who
appoint them -- it will then depend entirely upon the fifth, who is to be
chosen by lot, in whose favor the decision will be: whereas these depredations
being notorious breaches of the law of nations, and insulting infringements of
our neutrality, the demand should have been spirited and positive, the remedy
speedy and complete; no alternative should have been offered; he should have
required immediate satisfaction; if they had refused, he should have quitted
their court, and left it to his country to have determined what other measures
were necessary to pursue. But, instead of this, he has accepted a remote,
expensive, and uncertain remedy; and, in return for their refusal of justice,
in the most condescending manner has stipulated that all prizes brought in by
our allies, and which are said to have been captured by privateers illegally
equipped, or taken within our limits, shall be paid for upon certain and fixed
principles.

As to the 12th article, which the senate have rejected, there appears but one
sentiment throughout the union; there can be but one in the beast of every man
of serfs, spirit or honest in every part of the world; that it is an infamous
and degrading surrender of the rights and character of this country, and a mean
and ungenerous desertion of the interest of our friends, the French, to whose
supplies, at least in the articles they consider as of necessity in their
present noble and unexampled struggle for freedom, we are bound by every tie of
gratitude and honor to attend. To examine this article fully, state its
inequalities, the restrictions it imposes, and the evils that must arise from
it, are not within the limits of these observations; nor is it necessary, from
the general detestation in which it is hold by foreigners as well as citizens.
That for the paltry allowance of being permitted to send vessels of 70 tons to
the British West Indies, we are to give up the right to export West India
produce, and even the cotton of American growth, to Europe, in our own vessels,
is such a glaring and insolent attempt to abridge our rights and gratify the
wishes of the British nation in checking our commerce, that, instead of
carrying with him the feelings and sensibility of his countrymen, which were
certainly sufficiently awake to the conduct of Great Britain, he must have
entirely forgot their temper and firmness; he could not have remembered, that,
however mild and obedient they generally were to laws founded in equality and a
regard to their rights, yet that they loved their country, were attentive to
its interests, and impatient of any insult on its government; and that sooner
than submit to such ignominious shackles as those he had attempted to impose,
however they might wish upon all honorable occasions to avoid them, they would
rather risk the dangers and inconveniences of a war.

He has, however, endeavored immediately to follow this submissive and
dishonorable article with one which he supposes, by having the appearance of a
favor, will in some measure atone for its disgraceful concessions; this is the
one which respects the trade with their East India settlements. To those who
are unacquainted with it, this may at first have the appearance of a favor; but
upon examination it will appear to be delusive. Our vessels are to be
hospitably received in their ports, and allowed to trade in such articles the
importation and exportation of which are not prohibited. It is well known that
the commerce of Great Britain with her colonies and establishments in the East
Indies, is entirely founded in a monopoly of all their valuable exports and
productions; of course our vessels are prohibited from touching them, and c^^
meet with l^^e of (...) ^uence to induce them to g^ there; they can much more
advanta^^outly trade with the Chinese, who have for ages had so much wisdom as
to give particular privileges to NO nations, but to open their ports equally to
all, and keep the regulation and management of their commerce in their own
hands. Besides, there are different opinions on the nature and consequences of
our trade to the East Indies; and it has frequently been represented by men of,
considerable knowledge and talents, that, situated as we are at present, and
must be for many years, an extensive trade to the East Indies, is an inju^ious
one; because, at an immense expense, we import from them nothing but articles
of mere luxury, most of which, except tea, we could do very well without, or
procure elsewhere, in exchange for our productions; and they take from us in
payment scarcely any thing but specie.

As to those parts of the treaty which declare what articles are contraband of
war, and which recognize a right to seize and detain our vessels by refusing to
adhere to a maxim which we ought never to depart from, that free bottoms make
free goods; they are injurious in some degree to every part of the union, but
particularly so to this state, whose principal exports are provisions. It was
indispensible to our interests that the right of searching our vessels on any
pretense should have been given up, except in attempts to enter places which
were considered as blockaded according to the law of nations. -- Unless this is
done, we must continually be involved in every war that takes place among the
maritime powers of Europe.

We must give up becoming, as neutrals, their carriers, or supplying them, in
time of scarcity, with provisions. If we are to consent to their having the
right to search our vessels, or de^ain them on any condition, except the one
abovementioned, here is an end of any advantages we are ever to expect from
being neutral, and our commerce is prostrated at the feet of ^aritime powers:
principles which will justify all the deprelations committed, or authorize
similar, are at once established; and we have but one resource left, which is,
to endeavor by every means we have in our power, to obtain such a navy ^s will
give protection to our commerce, and weight to the de^ands of our government.

He said he had always been of opinion, and the experience of the present war
confirmed it, that the growing commerce ^f the union required the establishment
of a naval force; ten ^r twelve sail of the line, and a few frigates, would be
sufficient to answer all our purposes. Our neighborhood to the West Indies,
the convenience of our ports, and the weight ^re could add to any scale, would
always prevent any of the ^elligerent powers from invading our commerce or
interfering with its rights. Our Mediterranean trade would likewise besecured,
and the advantages which would soon accrue to our citizens from having their
commerce protected, as well in time of war as peace, would, in a few years,
amply repay the expenses of the equipment.

Among the many improper parts of the treaty, he considered this as the most
important, and the most seriously injurious to our commerce: and while they
continued to insist upon the right to search and detain our vessels, if there
had been no other objection, Mr. Jay should have refused to sign the treaty.

As to the 15th, which is a very important article of the treaty, he had
endeavored upon that to obtain the best mercantile information he could; the
result is this: --

The first clause places the vessels of America on the same footing with those
of other foreign nations. This perhaps is as much as we could expect,
consistent with their obligations to other nations; but it ought to be
understood, that by this rule, American vessels going to their European ports,
pay from 15 to 20 l. on a vessel of 150 to 200 tons, more than a British
vessel. To counteract this well became the government of this country;
accordingly, the first congress under the new constitution, imposed a duty on
the tonnage of all foreign ships, of 25 cents per ton.

The duty imposed on American ships in England was under the denomination of
double light money, etc. and the debates in congress show the object of laying
the 25 cents per ton, to be what is here mentioned. The next session of
Congress, it being discovered that Great Britain had no inclination to treat
with us on subjects of commerce, See the president's message, February 14, 1790.
a further duty was imposed on foreign tonnage, equal in the whole to 50 cents
per ton. It was at the same time discovered, that American ships were fully
adequate to the carrying all the foreign goods, West Indian, European, and
Asiatic, necessary to the consumption of the country: Congress, therefore,
passed a law, that on all foreign goods, imported in American ships from Europe
or the West Indies, there should be a deduction of ten per cent on the amount
of duties prescribed by law. They have since made the goods imported in
American ships pay the whole duty, and foreign ships ten per cent. in addition.

It being clearly ascertained, that America could carry on its own India trade,
the difference of duty on foreign ships, was in all India commodities as
fifteen to ten, making, in effect, a total prohibition against foreigners in
this trade.

Under these discriminating regulations, American commerce and navigation
flourished beyond all former example, and almost to exceed belief. Any one, of
common observation, may remark the difference in this town. By whose capital
and influence, and under what flag, was the commerce of Charleston carried on,
prior to 1789? At that time, there was hardly an American house in extensive
trade; and there were not six ships under the American flag trading out of
Charleston: now American merchants carry on all the trade, and they own more
than sixty vessels of large size, and a much greater proportion of smaller
vessels in the West India trade.

Our fellow citizens at the northward too, have had exclusively the India
trade, by which, besides supplying our own citizens with Asiatic goods at one
fourth the price they were before the revolution, they have exported them to
the West Indies, and even to Europe, making thereby the balance of trade more
favorable to the United States. These restrictions, favorable to American
navigation and commerce, did not produce from any European power counter
restrictions. The privy council of Great Britain charged a committee of lords,
on the subject of trade, generally to report their opinion on these measures:
they took the advice of merchants in the cities of London, Bristol, Liverpool,
and Glasgow, and the result was, that in their opinion the trade with America
was so important, that it ought not to be hazarded by harsh measures, and they
recommended an acquiescence in the present restrictions, rather than to
endeavor a removal of them by retaliation. Thus, then, the matter stood when
Mr. Jay arrived in England; except that, owing to a contingency, America had so
increased her navigation as, beyond all dispute, to be fully adequate to the
carrying of the produce of the United States.

At this moment Mr. Jay concedes, in the second section of the 15th article,
"But the British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe, a tonnage duty
equal to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of
America, and also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of
duty now payable on the importation of European and ASIATIC goods, when
imported into the United States, in British or American vessels."

In the last part of the 3d section of the same article it says, "It is agreed
that the United States will not impose any new or additional tonnage duty on
British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting difference between the duties
payable on the importation of any articles in British or American vessels." The
operation of this article will be, that as British goods are generally shipped
to America on credit, the condition of the credit will be, that then our
(British) ships shall have the freight; and it is not an extravagant idea to
presume, that the wealth of the British East India Company may be employed to
crush the American merchants now in this trade, that they afterward may enjoy
the monopoly of it.

By treaties now existing with other nations, they are to be used, "as the most
favored;" and having of right the same privileges of counteracting these
discriminating duties, they will of course exercise it. The extent of these
injurious consequences need not be predicted to an intelligent man; every one,
even of the meanest capacity, must see in them the speedy and total destruction
of American navigation, and of course our independent commerce.

There are other parts of the treaty, by which a number of articles are
declared to be contraband, that we never consented to consider as such in any
other treaties; and attempts are made to make even provisions come under this
description.

By these means almost every article of exportation is declared contraband; and
whenever there is a war between the maritime powers, the danger of seizure and
condemnation to us will be as great as if we were actually at war ourselves.

He said he would only add, that the 23d, 24th, and 25th articles seem to carry
with them very strongly the spirit of the 12th. In them the negociator has
endeavored to render this country as unfriendly as he could to the French, to
destroy the tranquillity and order of our seaports, and to brand our councils
with ingratitude. In them he has displayed all his resentment to the only truly
useful and valuable ally we have ever had -- a nation which wishes to treat
with us upon the equality which ought, and indeed must be the basis of every
lasting treaty; for without equality few treaties can last.

Vattel, whose authority will not be doubted, says, that "Nations not being
less obliged than individuals to have a regard to equity, they ought, as much
as possible, to preserve equality in their treaties. When, therefore, the
parties are in such a state as to obtain the same reciprocal advantages, the
law of nature requires their treaties should be equal, at least if there is
not some particular reason to deviate from that equality; such, for instance,
would be gratitude for a former benefit, in the hope of becoming unavoidably
attached to a nation."

This is the language of the law of nations on the subject of the equality of
treaties; and comparing the situation of the two countries, at present, it will
not be said we were not in a state to obtain reciprocal advantages. We were
certainly not bound, by gratitude for former benefits, to make sacrifices in
their favor; nor has it ever appeared to be the disposition of our citizens to
be so inviolably attached to Great Britain, as to grant them favors which they
have never yielded to the more friendly powers of Europe, nor even to those to
whom they are highly indebted for the establishment of their freedom. There
must then be some other reasons for those uncommon surrenders, upon which the
public are not yet sufficiently informed.

These are the outlines of the treaty on which you are to decide. The shortness
of the time allowed for deliberations, and the necessity of dispatch,
prevented, he said, his going as fully into its consequences as he would wish,
or as he may hereafter do, should it ever come before our legislature. Indeed
it is much to be lamented, that the legislatures of the different states were
not in session at this important time, as the sentiments of the people,
expressed through them, would come with more weight. But the president, to whom
the address is to be made, will recollect, that by his postponing the
consideration of the treaty from January to June, when none of the state
legislatures were in session, the people have been forced to express their
sentiments in this way, or to be silent on a subject which has been shown to be
of the greatest consequence, and to now rest entirely with him. How awful must
he feel his situation! The character, honor, and future commercial consequence
of his country, depending entirely on his determination. If he refuses the
treaty, he will be for ever entitled to the thanks and gratitude of his
country, for having again saved it from the attempts of an experienced and
ambitious rival. If he ratifies it, such will ever be the love of his country
for his past services, they will always lament that a name, which has hitherto
been so distinguished, should, at the close of its career, be voluntarily fixed
to so injurious and degrading a measure.

As this is the first attempt which has been made by an unequal and improper
treaty, to abridge our rights, and control the power of congress in regulating
our commerce, it becomes the duty of the friends of their country to express
their sentiments, and to endeavor by every legal means to oppose its
consequences, by stating its defects, and preventing, if possible, its
adoption. -- We should recollect, that treaties, when ratified; have higher
authority than laws, because they are declared to be the supreme law of the
land, and are irrevocable but by the consent of all the parties to them. That,
however destructive or injurious they may prove to be in their operation, they
are without the sphere of legislative redress or interference: that while the
right of regulating commerce remains unimpaired in both houses of congress,
there can be no doubt of its being properly used. This the unexampled increase
of our commerce for some years, clearly proves, and shows the impropriety of
fettering it by treaties. Our policy was to have pursued the same measures; and
in all cases where any nation invaded our rights and refused to do us justice,
to have endeavored by restrictions, or, if necessary, retaliations, to obtain
them.

But if, instead of leaving the regulation of commerce to congress, from whose
use of it so many benefits have arisen, there should appear a disposition to
interfere, by the means of treaties, which may hereafter operate to lessen our
shipping, place us more in the power of foreigners, and destroy that
competition which is so necessary to our obtaining a proper price for our
staples; to all the states, particularly to those which are agricultural, it
becomes a matter of the most serious concern. To no state can it be more so,
than to South Carolina. We are entirely agricultural; and while our commerce is
unfettered, and the present competition for our productions encouraged and
protected by law -- while we are sure of having American shipping in sufficient
numbers to support our commercial rights -- our planters will grow rich, the
trade of our merchants become every day more extensive and respectable, and our
country will be happy. But let it be once known, that, by the interference of
an unfortunate and ruinous treaty, a foundation is laid for the diminution of
our shipping; that we are not to enjoy the rights of neutrality or an
independent commerce; that our vessels are to be liable to seizure, and we are
again to look to other nations for the means of transportation, it will at once
damp the hopes of our planters and merchants, and injure the value of their
estates, check their enterprizing views, and lessen the general happiness. In
all enlightened countries, some portion of the happiness of the inhabitants
must depend upon the ease with which they can acquire property, and the
protection which their government is able to afford it. It is the general
pursuit of mankind; and few people can be happy in any country, which either
does not or cannot protect them, abroad as well as at home, in their privileges
and property. The experience of the last six years has clearly proved that we
possess the means of national happiness and prosperity within ourselves; and it
will depend upon the event of this treaty how far we are to cherish or part
with them.

He said his opinion always had been, that countries possessing within
themselves the means of a growing and extensive commerce, particularly where
they consisted of articles of the first necessity, such as provisions and raw
materials necessary to the support and manufact^res of other nations, ought
not, except in very particular cases, to form treaties of commerce. A nation
with these advantages always may, by proper laws and restrictions, render its
commerce more advantageous to its own citizens than foreigners. By being
unfettered with treaties, it continually has it in its power to avail itself of
any advantage the imprudence or situation of other countries may offer; and to
always keep the staff of its commerce in its own hands. It is the opinion of
those who are best informed on this subject, and in which every enlightened man
must concur, that thus situated, commerce, excepting the conventions which
regard the law of nations, ought not to be the object of negotiation. -- That
every power, in this regard, should depend only on itself. After having made
such regulations as it judges best, calculated for its situation, the nature of
its riches and the industry of its inhabitants, let it, like England, have
courage and constancy enough never to derogate from them in favor of strangers:
all its policy should consist in a resolution never to think of forming
treaties of commerce, until it finds itself in some happy circumstance, which
may authorize it to demand prerogatives of foreign powers, without purchasing
them even with equivalents.

These are principles which apply to all countries in similar situations; but
to none more forcibly than to our own, particularly as it respects Great
Britain.

Our commerce, as has been confessed by their committee of trade, is of the
highest importance to Britain. From her European dominions we take her
manufactures, and in return send her provisions and raw materials. The balance,
which is generally against us, we pay in specie. So lucrative and important
must this commerce be to her, that it certainly will always be her interest to
continue and extend it without a treaty. From her West India islands, we
receive what it is always in our power to obtain from the islands of the other
powers; but in time of searcity, which frequently occurs, they are unable to
obtain provisions and lumber but from America. They are therefore more
dependent on us than we are upon them, and our situation will soon force from
them a much more advantageous trade than the treaty proposes.

Upon the whole of this business, it will be found that the treaty deserves the
censure of every friend to his country, and every man else, who wishes to see
its commerce extensive and flourishing. Even the most partial of Mr. Jay's
friends confess it is a bad treaty, and they do not wish it ratified; but only
contend that it is not just so infamous as it is generally supposed to be --
But it may here be asked, has he accomplished a single object for which he was
sent? Has he obtained complete satisfaction for the depredations in the West
Indies, the delivering of the posts, compensation for their detention, and
payment for the negroes carried away? Have they, in short, agreed to do any
thing toward executing the treaty of peace, without receiving from us in
return a surrender of important commercial rights? Instead of stipulating to
make our commerce free, as other nations have done, to whom it is by no means
so beneficial, they have expressly reserved to themselves the right of
searching and carrying off vessels into then ports; while in return, we have
granted them every thing they asked, and more than they could have expected,
even if they had given us an advantageous treaty.

From what could this extraordinary surrender of our rights have sprung? Was it
from ignorance? Was it from design? For the honor of our public councils he
hoped not from the latter. Some of his friends have supposed it to arise from a
want of perfect knowledge of our exports -- That he did not know that in the
United States cotton grew, or that they were ever in the habit of exporting
West India produce to Europe. From whatever cause it may have arisen, he was
sure it could not be conformable to his instructions. The president was too
well acquainted with the interests of his country; he must have recollected
that her dignity and his own character were too intimately connected: that he
could not sacrifice the one without tarnishing the other. He certainly could
never have given such instructions. We know we can trust him; and he wished
that the event had proved that we could have trusted Mr. Jay as well.

He concluded with declaring his opinion of the treaty to be, that it was
injurious to the commercial rights, and degrading to the character of his
country; ungrateful to our allies; and that it was our duty by a respectful,
but forcible address, to state our opinion, and request the president not to
ratify it.

J. THOMPSON'S SPEECH. Speech of Mr. J. Thompson, At a Meeting of the Citizens
of Petershurg, convened August 1, 1795, to debate on the pending Treaty with
Britain.
THE magnitude of the present subject, and the danger of the present crisis,
render this meeting peculiarly proper. We are called upon to examine a treaty,
which involves the most precious rights, the most valuable interests, the
commerce, the peace, and the honor of America. A concise historical detail will
unfold the peculiar circumstances in which America stood prior to the embassy
which produced this treaty. The king of Great Britain, who has sworn eternal
enmity to republics, acceded at an early period to that combination, which has
convulsed Europe, in attempting to stifle the liberty of France. Under the
obnoxious pretext of attempting to starve thirty millions of men, he issued
orders for intercepting the correspondence, and plundering the commerce of
neutral nations. He had long viewed with indignant sorrow, the rapid progress
which the Americans made, in spite of all the obstacles he could impose by
commercial restrictions, or by flagrant violations of the treaty of 1783. The
destruction of our rising commerce, the annihilation of our growing navigation,
were the objects contemplated by these nefarious orders. They were executed
with all the diligence, and all the oppression which rapacity can practice. A
patriotic phalanx in congress proposed every expedient which wisdom could
dictate, to obtain compensation for these injuries: but our illustrious
president, animated by paternal solicitude for the welfare of America, gently
insinuated to congress, that the subject was out of their jurisdiction, and
appointed our chief justice to perform the honorable duty of declaring the
indignation, and demanding the rights of an injured people. If stern
aristocracy had not steeled his bosom against the generous sensations of
patriotism -- if gratitude, sensibility, and honor, had not been enveloped in
the sable gloom of political prejudice, he must have been animated by a
magnanimity worthy of his country. In the presence of venal pride and courtly
profligacy, even at the footstool of the throne, he would have preserved the
attitude of dignity, and spoken the language of truth. But basely apostatizing
from republican principles, he stooped to offer the incense of flattery to a
tyrant, the scourge of his country, the foe of mankind. After a long
negotiation, in which he happily practiced the arts of diplomatic flattery, he
has presented this treaty to his expecting country. It has received, in every
article but one, the sanction of the senate. The conduct of that assembly has,
indeed, been uniform. Since the establishment of the federal government, it has
never deigned to adopt the sentiments of the people, or to communicate in own,
except in the dignified form of laws and treaties. The majesty of that assembly
has never been polluted by the vile feet of the swinish multitude. The
existence of an aristocracy in this country is too often regarded as the
chimera of some distempered enthusiast, or the fiction of some dangerous
dem^gogue I will appeal to the understandings of this audience, if the funding
system has not organized a great aristocracy, which has usurped the dominion of
the senate, which h^^ often preponderated in the house of representatives,
which proclaims itself in servile addresses to our supreme executive, i^
dangerous appointments, in monstrous accumulations of de^^^ in violation of the
constitution, in proscriptions of democra^^ and, to complete the climax of
political infamy, in this treaty I will ask, if the senate does not discover
abject servility, i^ proposing the ratification of a treaty in which the sine
expre^sions of friendship are prostituted by being used to a king I will ask,
if it was delicate, virtuous, or republican, to lo^^ upon the struggle of a
great people for liberty, with cold i^ difference, to preserve a sullen
neutrality, between freemen an^ despots, and to grant important privileges in
peace and i^ war, to a government tottering under its own abuses, and s^^bly
warring against liberty?

I will now consider each article of the treaty -- I will co^^ pare it with the
French treaty, and demonstrate to this meeting the necessity of expressing our
detestation.

Prior to a discussion of this treaty, it may be proper to observe, that the
sequestration proposed in congress, was prefe^ble to the system of negotiation
adapted by the executive The compensation obtained, would have been
instantaneo^^ and adequate, the punishment inflicted, severe and just, the
measure adopted, energetic and republican. This expedie^ was opposed, as
leading to a war, by a party who conce^^ aristocracy under the gentle form of
moderation. Whil^^ declare the triumh of this party, I blush for my country Yes
-- we hesitated to offend a proud king, who had capture our vessels, enslaved
our fellow-citizens, ruined our merchan^^ invaded our territory, and trampled
on our sovereignty. Shri^^ing from this measure, we prostrated ourselves before
him smiled in his face, flattered, and obtained this treaty.

The objections I shall make to it are, first, on account of the articles it
does not contain; and, secondly, on account of the articles it does contain. It
ought to have been expressly stipulated, that the king of Great Britain should
interpose for us his good offices with the piratical states, or at least that
he should not negociate a peace between Portugal and Algiers, which should
again render those plunderers the tyrants of the ocean. His recent conduct in
that quarter had very materially injured us -- but no provision against a
repetition of it, has been made by our minister. By the French treaty,
concluded in the year 1778, in the tumultuous moments which attend the crisis
of liberty, by a government so much despised for imbecility, this protection
from Algerine corsairs, was expressly given by a king, from whom we had nothing
to demand, and every thing to sue, and to whom we granted privileges much less
important, than those we now grant.

A stipulation ought to have been insisted on for ample compensation for the
detention of the western posts -- a detention which has defrauded America of
the immense profits of the fur trade, and which has produced a long, bloody,
and disastrous Indian war.

A stipulation ought to have been made that British ships of war should protect
American ships at sea. Although the artieles relative to armed ships appear to
be mutual; yet, since we have no armed ships, we receive no consideration for
the privileges we grant theirs. Here another advantage is given to us by the
French treaty, which this denies.

As I have been forced to anticipate the comparison between the two treaties, I
will now continue it, and then state my objections to the articles contained in
the treaty. The French are by treaty to pay no higher duties than the most
favored nations pay. In the year 1778, we refused to admit even those generous
allies into our ports upon the same terms with citizens. By this treaty the
British are to be admitted on the same terms with American merchants. But the
French, the Dutch, and the Spaniards, are entitled to pay no higher duties than
the most favored nations. If this treaty is ratified, they will be obliged to
pay no higher duties than American merchants. This treaty then almost
annihilates the distinction between foreigners and natives; which we refused to
relinquish in favor of our allies and protectors in the epoch of danger and
infancy -- Let this prove with what abject humility we prostrate before the
British king.

By the 2d article of the French treaty, it is provided, that enemies' property
shall not be taken out of American vessels -- the French cannot take out of
American vessels British property. By this treaty it is provided, that enemies'
property may be taken out of American vessels. The British may take out of
American vessels French property. The object of this article was, to give the
sanction of America to those atrocious robberies, which have wrested from the
wretched West Indian exile, the last pittance of despairing poverty. By the
French treaty, the carrying trade of enemies' property, not only from neutral
ports to enemies' ports, but from enemies' ports to enemies' ports, is given us
-- By this treaty, that valuable source of wealth is denied us. By the French
treaty it is declared that they shall not intercept American vessels bound with
provisions to the ports of their enemies -- By this treaty it is declared, that
the British may intercept American vessels bound with provisions to the ports
of their enemies. The French then cannot intercept American vessels bound with
provisions to the ports of Great Britain; but the British can intercept
American vessels bound with provisions to the ports of the French republic. The
object of this article was to render America accessory to the nefarious scheme
of exciting, by the agency of famine, insurrection and disorder, which may
either exterminate or enslave the French. The object of this article was to
render America a cowardly confederate, concealing, under the venerable form of
friendship, the vilest malice. And shall this treaty dissolve the compact made
by nature between the two republics, secured by seelings generous and
inexpressible, guaranteed by all the soft sensibilities of the human heart?
Shall this treaty force the Americans, the first people who sacrificed at the
altar of liberty, to join the ruthless despots, who march to desolate France,
to restore the altars of a barbarous superstition, and to extinguish the
celestial light which has burst upon the human mind? O! my countrymen, when you
are capable of such monstrous baseness, even the patriot will invoke upon you
the contempt of ages.

The man who can hesitate, after this comparison, to pronounce that our
ambassador, and the majority of our senate, prefer British principles and
British connections, to French principles and French connections, must be timid
in thought, and servile in sentiment. Yes, they prefer that mouldering, Gothic
edifice, the British constitution, to the elegant temple of liberty, which
philosophy has just erected in France.

The second article of this treaty permits the British subjects, settled in the
western posts, to elect to remain British subjects at those posts, even after
they are ceded. This article not only ^iolates the sacred principles of the
common law, which declares that aliens cannot hold landed property, but
operates as an indirect repeal of the late law of congress with respect to
naturalization. If the president and senate have the power of repealing
indirectly, or contravening even remotely, the laws, we are slaves! If they
have not this power, a ratification will be an usurpation. Men, situated within
the territory of the United States, and holding immense landed property, will,
in case of a rupture with Great Britain, be bound to attack our defenseless
fellow citizens situated near them, to join the hostile Indians, and raise the
war whoop of savage cruelty. By this article, the western posts are ceded by
America to Great Britain, until June, 1796. The power of ceding territory can
only be exercised by congress. If this treaty is ratified, the president and
senate will usurp it. I contend that the cession of those posts for one single
day, was as unconstitutional as the cession of them for ten thousand years.
Previous arrangements are to be made. What arrangements? Will not the British
government propose some unreasonable arrangement, and then justify a further
detention of the posts by our refusal to make it?

The third article, like every other, wants that reciprocity which should
pervade the whole treaty. In return for the important privilege of trading to
all our ports, subject to no higher duties than our own citizens, of bringing
to our ports, in vessels of any description, the produce of any country on the
face of the globe, we have the poor privilege of carrying to the ports of Great
Britain the produce of our own country only, and of trading to the West Indies
in fishing boats for two years, provided we covenant not to export any produce
imported from those islands. This article is a regulation of commerce. The
constitution gives the power of regulating commerce to congress. A ratification
will be an usurpation of this power. This objection embraces almost the whole
treaty. Boldly assuming the name of a compact concerning commerce, it disdains
to render the constitution even the homage of hypocrisy. Here the absurdity of
giving to the president and senate the power of making treaties becomes
apparent. All treaties either regulate commerce, or cede territory, or conclude
a war, by leaving things in statu quo. Treaties of the first and second kind
cannot be constitutionally made by the president and senate -- Treaties of the
third kind hardly ever occur. Besides, our constitution absurdly gives to one
body the power of making war, and to another the power of finishing it.

By the sixth article, the American government is to assume the payment of
British debts. This assumption is unconstitutional. All the power of the
federal government with respect to debts, is given, by a concise article of the
constitution, which declares that congress shall pay the debts of America. It
is evident, that no stipulations with respect to debts, can constitutionally be
made by the president and senate. This article manifests the aristocratical
spirit, of which I have accused our late ambassador and the majority of the
senate, by being unconstitutional, by accusing the state legislatures which
emancipated America, of atrocious injustice, and by increasing that debt which
has already created an influence independent of the people. It increases the
ignominious tribute which we now pay to British speculators.

What article of the constitution authorizes the president and senate to
establish a judiciary colossus, which is to s^and with one foot on America and
with the other on Britain, and drag the reluctant governments of those
countries to the altar of justice? What liberal article provides that the
American government shall guara^^ec to all foreigners the payment of debts due
from its citizens? Are Portuguese, and Dutch, and Spanish, and French
merchants, to come in, liquidate their accounts, and obtain payment from the
government? Or are our new friends, the British, to be preferred for their
justice and generosity? Either the American government is to have remedy
against the American citizens owing these debts, or not -- If it is, then
American citizens are to be ultimately bound by the awards of a tribunal
composed partly of foreigners, partly sa^rized by a foreign potentate, erected
neither by the constitution nor the legislature, invested with those
discretionary powers, often tyrannically exercised, under the name of equity,
proceeding without juries, by process, peculiar and anomalous governed by no
established rules, and elevated above appeal. -- But if the government is not
to have remedy, then the de^^^ of solvent American citizens are to be
discharged by general taxation, whilst they remain in splendid impunity.

By the seventh article, the claims of American merchant arising from the
spoliations, are to be liquidated by an arbi^^ty tribunal, and to be ratified,
not by being paid, but by being funded. This will interweave in some measure
the interests (...) the American commerce with the British government. British
influence, already enormous, will be extended. A strong p^^ty of Americans will
inculcate the most pusillanimous sub^^sion to that haughty government, and will
view with malig^^^ sorrow, the progress of that stream of opinion, which, in
sp^^^ of learned sophistry, and powerful oppression, is destined (...) sweep
its way.

The ninth article invades the rights of this commonwealth, by contemplating
the case of Denny Fairfax.

The tenth article deprives congress of the power of sequestration; and if the
president and senate can deprive it of this power, they can deprive it of all
powers.

Since the senate have had the modesty to reject the twelfth article, a
discussion of that is unnecessary, except to show that the servile
condescension of our ambassador startled even them.

The twenty-first article attacks the sacred rights of expatriation. By this
article, an American citizen who abjures his country, becomes a citizen of the
French republic, and resides there twenty years, may be punished as a pirate,
if he accepts a French commission. This article defines piracy. The power of
defining piracy is given by the constitution to congress. If the treaty is
ratified, the president and senate will usurp this power too.

The twenty-third and twenty-fourth articles are incompatible with the 17th of
the French treaty. It is true, that a sweeping clause declares, that
stipulations contained in this treaty, shall not affect treaties existing with
other nations. But the king of Great Britain denies that the French are a
nation. Besides, since the clause expresses nothing more than the law of
nations implies, it is mere surplusage. It must be rejected, and then the
repugnancy of the two treaties becomes manifest.

I will now recapitulate the usurpations which the president and senate will
make if the treaty is ratified. They will usurp the power of making rules with
respect to aliens, of ceding territory, of regulating commerce, of paying
debts, of regulating duties, of establishing courts, and of defining piracies.
The house of representatives will be degraded to a house of commons; summoned
to answer an address, to regulate a few subjects of internal policy, and to
vote money. But this treaty will not be ratified. The illustrious president,
who administers our government, will not abandon, in his venerable old age, the
generous maxims, the nice honor, the pure virtue, and the ardent patriotism,
which have elevated him to save his country. He will view with indignation, the
gigantic wickedness, which seeks, through the medium of a perfidious treaty, to
render him an apostate, and to destroy at one blow, the commerce, the
constitution, and the honor of his country.

Wilmington Town Meeting.
August 4th, 1795.
THIS afternoon, at 4 o'clock, agreeable to public notice, previously given,
the citizens of this borough and its vicinity assembled together at the upper
market house, to take into their consideration the treaty lately concluded by
John Jay, between the United States and Britain.

We were much pleased to see so many of our aged and respectable citizens turn
out on this all important occasion, with a number of our old patriots who had
retired from public scenes, some of them from a considerable distance. The
oldest people say, they never recollect to have seen such an universal
convention of the inhabitants of this place, there being upwards of 500 people.

About 5 o'clock, they chose Dr. James Tilton for their chairman, and then
adjourned to the Presbyterian meeting house, near the academy, which was so
crowded that a great number had to remain outside.

Robert Coram was unanimously chosen their secretary.

Caefar Rodney opened the business of the meeting, by moving the following
resolution:

"Resolved, that it is the constitutional right of freemen, peaceably to
assemble together, and express their opinions of public measures."

He observed, that it would be unnecessary, he believed, to say any thing on
the present occasion, in vindication of this resolution; he had no doubt but
that all those who surrounded him, were well convinced that this assembly
emanated from the constitution; and in his opinion it was one of the purest
streams that flowed from that great fountain. "Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of
the people peaceably to ^ssemble, an^ to petition the government for a redress
of grievances." Article III, of the amendments to the federal constitution,
proposed by congress, and ratified by the legislatures of (...) several states,
pursuant to the fifth article of the original constitution.
Every reflecting man must be deeply impressed with this important truth, that
it was the unalienable right of the people to assemble and express their
sentiments; but at this time it was not only their right, but their bounden
duty, when their all was at stake.

The chairman having put the question, the resolution was unanimously adopted.

It was then moved, that the treaty should be read, and a public discussion of
its merits take place.

But it was observed by some, that the reading of it would take up too much
time; that every body must be supposed now to be acquainted with its contents;
and that there were many persons present, who had to return home some distance
in the country.

A great number, however, declared that it was essentially necessary, to
prevent any reflections being thrown on their proceedings, to have the treaty
read, and to permit a free discussion on this occasion. The meeting at New York
had been highly criminated on this very account; and they hoped, therefore,
that the present assembly would have more prudence than to lay themselves open
to the same aspersions which had been cast upon others.

The gentlemen having withdrawn their opposition, the motion was unanimously
agreed to.

Whereupon the treaty was read by the secretary.

Mr. Rodney said he was not so anxious to express his own sentiments on this
occasion, as he was to hear the opinion of a venerable patriot in that house,
whose head had grown gray in the faithful discharge of his duties in the
legislative, judicial, and executive departments of government.

John Dickinson then rose, and observed, that he had felt it his duty to appear
on this momentous occasion, and publicly avow his sentiments concerning this
treaty; but as the hand of age and infirmity was upon him, he hoped that some
younger citizen than himself would take the laboring oar, and break the way,
in order that the elder might the more easily follow. When that was done, the
duty he owed to himself and his country, be said, would compel him to express
his feeling on the present occasion.

Mr. RODNEY said, that as it was the wish of the gentleman who had just sat
down, that some younger person than himself should lead the way to this
discussion, he would offer a sew general observations on the treaty, which they
had now fully and fairly before them, for their consideration. He did not
intend to go through with it article by article; he only meant to touch
slightly on some of the principal objections, and leave the rest to a more able
hand; indeed it would be in vain to attempt to notice every objection, for the
subject of objection appeared to him to be exhaustless.

Before he proceeded to the immediate discussion of the treaty itself, he
requested permission to make a sew candid remarks upon what he thought (and
surely, said he, in a free country, every man has a right to think, and a right
to express his opinions, too) the extraordinary manner in which this treaty had
been brought about. In the first place, at the very moment when the
representatives of the people were deliberating on the best mode of obtaining
redress and satisfaction for the injuries and insults we had sustained, and the
grievances under which we then labored; at that moment their proceedings were
unfortunately arrested.

In the next place, the chief justice of the United States was appointed
(without a resignation) to the important office of minister plenipotentiary and
envoy extraordinary to the court of Britain; if these measures were not against
the letter, they were surely against the spirit of the constitution. Besides,
was it ever heard of by any one, that Mr. Jay was dispatched for the purpose of
making a treaty with Britain? Was such a thing even whispered within the senate
itself? My confidence in our minister plenipotentiary in London, continues
undiminished; but a mission like this, while it corresponds with the solemnity
of the occasion, will announce to the world a solicitude for a friendly
adjustment of our complaints, and a reluctance to hostility." Extract from the
president's message.
Then, unless the terms advice and consent in the constitution, can be
construed to mean one and the same thing, the senate were simply called to give
their consent to this treaty. What was the construction given to this part of
the constitution, on a former occasion, when the minister of the French
republic wished to form a new treaty between his nation and ours, on terms of
generous reciprocity? Was he not informed by the secretary of state, that the
constitution of the United States rendered the advice of the senate essentially
necessary on such an occasion; that they were not then in session; and that,
therefore, he could enter into no neg^ciations on that subject? Mr. Genet, soon
after his arrival, communicated the decree of the national convention, of
February 15th, 1793, authorizing their executive to propose a treaty with us,
upon liberal principles, such as might strengthen the bond: of good will, which
unite the two nations; and informed us in a letter of May 23d, that be was
authorized to treat accordingly. THE SENATE BEING THEN IN RECESS, AND NOT TO
MEET AGAIN TILL THE TALL, I APPRIZED MR. GENET, THAT THE PARTICIPATION IN
MATTERS OF TREATY, GIVEN BY THE CONSTITUTION TO THAT BRANCH OF OUR GOVERNMENT,
WOULD, OF COURSE, DELAY ANY DEFINITIVE ANSWER TO HIS FRIENDLY PROPOSALS. As he
was sensible of this circumstance, the matter has been understood to lie over
till the meeting of the senate." Extract from Mr. Jefferson's letter to Mr.
Morris, August 23d, 1793. It may be useful to inform the people of America,
what those liberal principles mentioned by Mr. Jefferson, were, in the treaty
proposed by France, by inserting here the terms themselves.

National Convention, February 19, 1793. Decrees as follows.

1. "That all the ports of the French colonies be open to vessels of the United
States of America. 2. "That all produce exported or imported in American
vessels, on going out or entering in the colonies, or in France, pay the same
as that borne by French vessels."
National Convention, March 26, 1793.

"The national convention, willing to obviate the difficulties which might
arise relative to the execution of its decree of the 19th February last,
concerning the United States of America; to grant new favors to that nation;
and to treat it in its commercial concerns with the French colonies, in the
same manner as the vessels of the republic, decrees as follows:

1. "From the day of the publication of the present decree in the French
colonies of America, the vessels of the United States of sixty to^s burden or
under, laden with flour and provisions, as also with the articles of supplies
specified in the 2d article of the arret of the 30th of August, 1784, and with
bacon, butter, salt salmon, and caudles, shall be admitted into the harbors of
the said colonies ^^emft from all duties."




He had two general objections to the treaty itself. He was one of those who
thought it would be for the real interest of America to have no treaty at all
with Britain; five years out of seven she had the sword unsheathed, and the
temple of Janus open. As our object ought to be (said he) and I hope ever will
be, peace, we should carefully shun all connection with such a nation, for fear
of being involved in her quarrels: But at this time, when she was at war with
the French republic, our generous and brave ally, who assisted us when
struggling in the same cause, and when the flag of freedom drooped under the
iron rod of oppression, it was the height of folly to form such a treaty with
her: For even supposing France and Britain were equally indifferent to us (and
who is there that hears me, whose bosom is so frozen with ingratitude, as to
view them with equal indifference) a treaty so pointedly levelled at the French
as this appears to be throughout, and which gives up to Britain privileges
which will put it in her power so materially to injure them, might by the law
of nations be construed a breach of that neutrality which we seen one and all
to be so anxious to preserve.

Mr. Chairman (he proceeded) the omissions in this treaty are numerous and
important. If the message of the president is to be taken as the groundwork of
the envoy's instructions, and I think it ought, he was sent to procure a
friendly adjustment of our complaints; See extract from the president's message
in note 2.
and amongst those complaints, what were the first? and which stared us
foremost in the face? Our western posts had been detained from us ever since
the peace, contrary to treaty; in consequence of which we had been exposed to a
ruinous Indian war; property to an immense amount had been taken off by the
British, in contravention of the same treaty; our sailors had been cruelly and
unjustly pressed from on board our vessels, so that they were unable, for want
of hands, to return, if liberty had been given them to depart. Are any damages
obtained for the detention of the posts these thirteen years? No! Are any
obtained for the blood of our fellow citizens lavished, and the treasures of
the people spent in the Indian war? Or for the innocent women and children who
have fallen a sacrifice to savage cruelty, and the murdering tomahawk and
scalping knife? No! Is the property unjustly carried off by the British,
stipulated to be paid for? No! Has any (...) been made to secure our helpless
seamen from being dragged from on board our merchant ships? No! After all the
losses the (...) interest has sustained on this very account, they have been
still left to the mercy of a merciless nation.

The third article, giving the British the benefit of all our Atlantic ports
and inland navigation, and entirely excluding us, on their part, from both,
requires no comment; it will not, for I am sure it cannot, be contended that
there is any reciprocity here.

That article should never have been admitted, which puts the stale claims of
British creditors on a footing with our plain demands for the plunder of our
merchants; on a footing, did I say? on a far better footing; for while in the
one case, by a summary mode of procedure, our citizens are robbed of that
constitutional right, a trial by jury, "In suits at common law, where the value
in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be
preserved; and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any
court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law."
Article IX of amendments to the federal constitution, etc.
deprived of which security, I would not take away the life of a sparrow, or
even draw a single feather from its wing, and are compelled to appear before
judges, a majority of whom may be British; in the other case, they are obliged
to go through the tedious and expensive labyrinth of the law, in British courts
of admiralty.

Mr. Chairman (added he) the great object, if I am not mistaken, of our
government, has been to continue neutral during the war which at present
convulses the greater part of Europe; and yet while we are struggling to
preserve this happy situation, in order that the blessings of peace and plenty
may pour in upon us, we find in this treaty all the rights of neutrality
abandoned, and the axe laid to the root of the very tree from which we expected
to gather such abundant fruit. The great principle of neutrality, so
essentially necessary to the very existence of commerce, that free bottoms
shall make free goods, is here given up; a principle, since the year 1780,
established as the law of nations. I know, previous to that year, the arbitrary
and superior power of Britain had ruled it otherwise; but then the empress of
Russia, in conjunction with Sweden and Denmark, established the armed
neutrality, the very second article of which recognized this principle, and in
support of which Russia refers to her treaty with Britain in 1734, in which
this principle is indisputably established. To these principles the commercial
nations of Europe fully acceded -- Agreeably to these principles, Britain
afterward uniformly conducted herself during the American war; and to these
principles we have rigidly adhered in every treaty hitherto made, and the
British themselves in their treaty with France in 1786. Articles of the armed
neutrality. I. "Neutral bottoms shall enjoy a free navigation, even from port
to port, and on the coasts of the belligerent powers. II. "All effects
belonging to the subjects of the belligerent powers, shall be looked upon as
free on board such neutral ships, excepting only such goods as are stipulated
contraband." III. In support of this article, Russia refers to her treaty with
Brita^^, in 1734, in which it is declared,
"The subjects of either party may freely pass, repass, and trade in all
countries which now are, or her^after may be, at enmity with the other of the
said parties, places actually blocked up or besieged only excepted; provided
they do not carry any warlike stores or ammunition to the enemy: as for all
other effects, their ships, passengers and goods, shall be free and unmolested."

Indeed the British carried their ideas of free commerce, A. D. 1739, much
farther. The following resolution then passed both houses of parliament, and
was approved of by the king!

"Resolved, that the subjects of Great Britain have an evident and inviolable
right to navigate in the American seas, as well in going to as in returning
from any part of the dominions of his majesty; and that it is a manifest
violation of this right, to visit such vessels at open sea, under pretext that
they are freighted with contraband or prohibited merchandises."

By the treaty between England and France, A. D. 1786, article XX, "It is
stipulated, that every thing shall be deemed free, which shall be found on
board the ships, belonging to the subjects of the respective kingdoms, although
the whole lading, or part thereof, should belong to the enemies of their
majesty's."




A great number of articles, in all our other treaties, declared not to be
contraband, are here expressly declared to be contraband. Nay, our very
provisions, the only freight almost that we have for our vessels, are not
excepted; in consequence of which, the British are at this moment seizing all
our provisions bound to France, and will no doubt pay us a very reasonable
mercantile profit for them. In short, there is nothing but unwrought iron and
fir plank we can carry with safety. By the treaty between Britain and France,
in 1786, article XXIII, "tin, iron, lead, copper, brass; all kinds of
provisions which serve for sustenance and food to mankind, cordage, cables,
sails, sail cloth, hemp, tallow, pitch, tar, rosin, anchors, ship masts planks,
^imber of all kinds of trees, and all other things proper for building or
repairing ships," are declared not to be contraband The same specification of
articles, not contraband, is made in our treaties with Holland, France, etc.
But by Mr. Jay's treaty, article XVIII, "timber for ship building, tar or
rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp, and cordage, and generally what may serve
to the equipment of vessels," are declared expressly to be contraband; and
provisions are left in jeopardy.


The constitution of the United States declares, that congress shall have the
power of defining and punishing piracies; Federal constitution, article I.
section 1. "All legis^^^^ powers herein granted, shall be vested in a congress
of the United States, which shall consist of a senate and house of
representation" Section 8. "The congress shall have power to define and punish
piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law
of nations."
but by this treaty, they are defined and punished without their consent; and
although our treaty with France has the same clause in it, let it be
remembered, that the old congress formed that treaty, and that their powers
were competent to it. Under this article, while our defenseless sailors are
dragged from on board our ships, which are left with the merchant's all, to
perish on the ocean, and chained down in British vessels to fight against their
friends; those Americans, who, from gratitude, or a love of liberty, engage in
the cause of our ally on board their ships, if taken, are to be ignominiously
hung!

He said, he had now touched on a few of the leading objections to the treaty;
but, as he had before observed, it would be idle to attempt even to glance at
them all; he should exhaust himself, and exhaust the audience too. These were
his candid sentiments on the treaty at present; he was still however open to
conviction, and called on the friends of the treaty, if any such there were
within the walls, to come forward and support it, and point out its advantages;
he declared he would, and he was sure that respectable meeting would likewise
give them, a fair, patient and candid hearing, for he wished the treaty to
receive a full and impartial trial. He hoped, that at all events, others would
rise and express their opinions on a treaty, which, like the sword of Damocles,
was hanging over their heads, suspended but by a hair; a treaty in which the
lives, the liberties, and the fortunes of them all were deeply interested; a
treaty fraught with more evils than Pandora's box, and which, if not written in
the blood, would assuredly be written in the tears, of those innocent men who
under it would be robbed of their property.

Mr. Dickiuson then rose, and in a dignified, eloquent, and patriotic address,
of near two hours in duration, discussed the subject of the treaty, the dangers
and want of reciprocity whereof, he fully evinced.

After a short silence, the question was then put, "Does the treaty meet the
approbation of this meeting?" It was unanimously determined in the negative.

On motion of Jacob Broom,

Resolved, That a committee of nine be appointed to draw up a memorial to the
president of the United States, expressive of disapprobation of the said
treaty, and requesting him to withold his ratisication therefrom.

THE COMMITTEE.
John Dickinson, James Tilton, Caesar Rodney, Robert Coram, Jacob Broom,
Archibald Alexander, John James, Joseph Warner, Isaac Scarr, sen.
The citizens then adjourned, to meet again, at the same place, on Saturday the
8th inst. at five o'clock P. M. to receive and consider the report of their
committee.

AUGUST 8.

The citizens of the borough of Wilmington, and its vicinity, assembled
pursuant to adjournment, John Dickinson, of the committee, then read the
report, in the following words, viz.

To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States, The Memorial of the
Citizens of Wilmington, and its Vicinity, is the State of Delaware,
Respectfully shows,
THAT your memorialists, gratefully recollecting your eminent services to these
states, deeply impressed with esteem for the integrity uniformly evidenced by
your conduct, and fully convinced of your sincere affection for your country,
are persuaded, that it cannot be disagreeable to you, as know the sentiments of
your fellow citizens, on question which they believe to be of vast importance
to them and their posterity, when, to withhold such information, might imply
their assent to measures which they not only disapprove, but contemplate with
distressing aversion, anxiety, and apprehension, and when the information being
brought forward, may possibly, by the wisdom of government, be improved for the
advancement of the commonwealth --

That, revering constitutional authority as the basis of peace and prosperity,
and holding themselves in duty bound to support its decisions, even though they
may have opposed their being made, they trust, that on the present occasion,
they shall not be exposed to controversies respecting the legitimate exercise
of that authority, nor be obliged, in supporting its decisions, to feel an
adherence to duty almost as afflicting as a departure from it --

That for this deliverance, they confidently recur to that portion of
neutrality, with which, by the constitution, you are invested, and in which
they are so greatly, inseparably, and sacredly interested; and, encouraged by a
retrospect to those actions whose tenor designates your character, while they
submit to your consideration the following objections against the treaty,
lately negociated between Great Britain and these states, they ardently hope,
your mind, moved by reasons itself suggests, or observations of others, will be
satisfied, that in refusing to ratify it, you will promote the happiness of
your constituents --

First. It unnecessarily draws into litigation the boundaries of these states,
and establishes a mode of proceeding, by which they may be contracted, without
the consent of the nation.

Second. It contains stipulations that ought not to be made without legislative
authority.

Third. It fixes terms of commerce and navigation unreasonably advantageous to
Great Britain, and highly injurious to these states.

Fourth. It subjects these states to an unjust and oppressive responsibility.

Fifth. It surrenders, on the part of these states, powers essential to
national independence.

Sixth. It prejudicially changes the condition of these states, in reference to
other nations.

Seventh. It abandons principles concerning the rights of neutrality, which, if
duly regarded, must have an auspicious influence on the welfare of these
states, and of mankind in general.

Eighth. It alters the position of these states relative to the belligerent
powers, in favor of Great Britain, and to the detriment of France; thus
relinquishing a declared impartiality, and hazarding the immunities belonging
to such a situation.

Ninth. It is in collision with articles of the treaty between France and the
United States of America.

Tenth. It exhibits these states to the world as not attentive to the
obligations of friendship, gratitude, and public faith.

Eleventh. It is not founded on principles of real reciprocity.

Twelfth. It does not, with sufficient clearness, certainty, and security,
provide for the surrender of "all the posts and places" mentioned in the second
article, and hitherto detained in contravention, of the treaty of peace.

Thirteenth. It does not require satisfaction for "the property of the American
inhabitants carried away," at the close of the late war, in manifest violation
of that treaty.

Fourteenth. It does not adequately obtain redress for the notorious vexations
and spoliations recently committed on the vessels and commerce of these states,
nor guard against the like in future.

Fifteenth. It does not in any manner provide for the protection of American
seamen against the flagrant aggressions constantly practiced by the British
government, in pressing them to serve on board its ships of war.

The memorial was then read by the secretary, and afterward read and agreed to
by paragraphs; and upon the main question, "Does this report meet the
approbation of the meeting?" It was unanimously determined in the affirmative.

On motion, Resolved, unanimously, that the said memorial, reported by the
committee, be signed by them, and transmitted to the president of the United
States.

Extract from the minutes, ROBERT CORAM, secretary.

REPLY OF THE PRESIDENT.
United States, 14th August, 1795. John Dickinson, James Tilton, Caesar Rodney,
Robert Coram, Jacob Broom, Archibald Alexander, John James, Joseph Warner, and
Isaac Starr, Esquires.
GENTLEMEN,
THE proceedings of a meeting in Wilmington, as contained in a memorial signed
by you, and dated the 8th instant, I have received.

As the answer, which I have given, on a similar occasion, to the selectmen of
Boston, is applicable to that memorial, I think it proper to transmit a copy
thereof to you.

With due respect, I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient, Go. WASHINGTON.

Ezekiel Price, Thomas Walley, William Bordman, Ebenczer Seaver, Thomas Crafts,
Thomas Edwards, William Lettle, William Scollay, and Jesse Putnam, Esquires --
Selectmen of the town of Boston.
GENTLEMEN,
IN every act of my administration, I have sought the happiness of my fellow
citizens. My system, for the attainment of this object, has uniformly been, to
overlook all personal, local, and partial considerations; to contemplate the
United States as one great whole; to confide, that sudden impressions, when
erroneous, would yield to candid reflection; and to consult only the
substantial and permanent interests of our country.

Nor have I departed from this line of conduct, on the occasion which has
produced the resolutions contained in your letter of the 13th inst.

Without a predilection for my own judgment, I have weighed with attention,
every argument which has, at any time, been brought into view. But the
constitution is the guide which I never can abandon. It has assigned to the
president the power of making treaties, with the advice and consent of the
senate. It was doubtless supposed that these two branches of government would
combine, without passion, and with the best means of information, those facts
and principles upon which the success of our foreign relations will always
depend; that they ought not to substitute for their own conviction the opinions
of others; or to seek truth through any channel but that of a temperate and
well informed investigation.

Under this persuasion, I have resolved on the manner of executing the duty
before me. To the high responsibility attached to it, I freely submit: and you,
gentlemen, are at liberty to make these sentiments known as the grounds of my
procedure. While I feel the most lively gratitude for the many instances of
approbation from my country, I can no otherwise deserve it, than by obeying the
dictates of my conscience.

With due respect, I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient, Go. WASHINGTON.
United States, 28th July, 1795.
OBSERVATIONS On the constitutional Power to form Treaties.
Extract from one of the Federal Farmer's Letters, dated January 10, 1788.
ON a fair construction of the constitution, I think the legislature has a
proper control over the president and senate, in settling commercial treaties.
-- By one article, "the legislature shall have power to regulate commerce with
foreign nations," etc. and by another article, "the president, with the advice
and consent of two-thirds of the senate, shall have power to make treaties."
These clauses must be considered together; and we ought never to make one part
of the same instrument contradict another, if it can be avoided by any
reasonable construction. By the first recited clause, the legislature has the
power, that is, as I understand it, the sole power, to regulate commerce with
foreign nations, or to make all the rules and regulations respecting trade and
commerce, between our citizens and foreigners. By the second recited clause,
the president and senate have power generally to make treaties. -- There are
several kinds of treaties, as treaties of commerce, of peace, of alliance, etc.
I think the words "to make treaties," may be consistently constru^^^ and yet so
as it shall be left to the legislature to confirm commercial treaties. They
are, in their nature and operation, ^^y distinct from treaties of peace and of
alliance. The latter generally require secrecy; it is but very seldom they
interfere wi^^ the laws and internal police of the country: to make them, (...)
properly the exercise of executive powers: and the constitution authorizes the
president and senate to make treaties, and gi^^ the legislature no power
directly or indirectly respecting th^^^ treaties of peace and alliance. As to
treaties of comme^^^ they do not generally require secrecy; they almost always
involve in them legislative powers; interfere with the laws and internal police
of the country; and operate immediately (...) persons or property, especially
in commercial towns: (T^^ have in Great Britain usually been confirmed by
parliament:) They consist of rules and regulations respecting commerce; and
(...) regulate commerce, or to make regulations respecting commerce, the
federal legislature, by the constitution, has the power. I do not see that any
commercial regulations can be made in treaties, that will not infringe upon
this power in the legislature. Therefore I infer, that the true construction
is, th^^ the president and senate shall make treaties; but all commercia^^
treaties shall be subject to be confirmed by the Legislature This construction
will render the clauses consistent, and make the powers of the president and
senate, respecting treaties, much less exceptionable.

Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
No. I.
IT was to have been foreseen, that the treaty which mr. Jay was charged to
negociate with Great Britain, whenever it should appear, would have to contend
with many perverse dispositions, and some honest prejudices; that there was no
measure in which the government could engage, so little likely to be viewed
according to its intrinsic merits -- so very likely to encounter misconception,
jealousy, and unreasonable dislike. For this, many reasons may be assigned.

It is only to know the vanity and vindictiveness of human nature, to be
convinced, that while this generation lasts, there will always exist among us,
men irreconcilable to our present national constitution; embittered in their
animosity in proportion to the success of its operations, and the
disappointment of their inauspicious predictions. It is a material inference
from this, that such men will watch, with lynx's eyes, for opportunities of
discrediting the proceedings of the government, and will display a hostile and
malignant zeal upon every occasion, where they think there are any
prepossessions of the community to favor their enterprises. A treaty with
Great Britain was too fruitful an occasion not to call forth all their activity.

It is only to consult the history of nations, to perceive, that every country,
at all times, is cursed by the existence of men, who, actuated by an irregular
ambition, scruple nothing which they imagine will contribute to their own
advancement and importance: in monarchies, supple courtiers; in republics,
fawning or turbulent demagogues, worshipping still the idol, power, wherever
placed, whether in the hands of a prince or of the people, and trafficing in
the weaknesses, vices, frailties, or prejudices of the one or the other. It was
to have been expected, that such men, counting more on the passions than on the
reason of their fellow citizens, and anticipating that the treaty would have to
struggle with prejudices, would be disposed to make an alliance with popular
discontent, to nourish it, and to press it into the service of their particular
views.

It was not to have been doubted, that there would be one or more foreign
powers, indisposed to a measure which accommodated our differences with
Great Britain, and laid the foundation of future good understanding, merely
because it had that effect.

Nations are never content to confine their rivalships and enmities to
themselves. It is their usual policy, to disseminate them as widely as they
can, regardless how far it may interfere with the tranquillity or happiness of
the nations which they are able to influence. -- Whatever pretensions may be
made, the world is yet remote from the spectacle of that just and generous
policy, whether in the cabinets of republies or of king which would dispose one
nation, in its intercourses with another -- satisfied with a due proportion of
privileges and benefits to see that other pursue freely, its true interest with
rega^^ to a third; though at the expense of no engagement, not i^^ violation of
any rule of friendly or fair procedure. It was n^tural, that the contrary
spirit should produce efforts of foreign counteraction to the treaty; and it
was certain that the p^^tizans of the counteracting power would second its
efforts (...) all the means which they thought calculated to answer the end.

It was known, that the resentment produced by our re^^lution war with
Great Britain, had never been entirely extinguished, and that recent injuries
had re-kindled the flame wi^^ additional violence. It was a natural consequence
of this, (...) many should be disinclined to any amicable arrangement wi^^
Great Britain, and that many others should be prepared to ^^quiesce only in a
treaty which should present advantages of (...) striking and preponderant a
kind, as it was not reasonable to expect could be obtained, unless the United
States were i^^ a condition to give the law to Great Britain, and as, if
obtained under the coercion of such a situation, could only have be^^ the
short-lived prelude of a speedy rupture to get rid of the^

Unfortunately, too, the supposition of that situation b^^ served to foster
exaggerated expectations; and the absurd ^^^lusion to this moment prevails,
notwithstanding the plain ^^^dence to the contrary, which is deducible from the
high (...) haughty ground still maintained by Great Britain against ^i^torious
France.

It was not to be mistaken, that an enthusiasm for France and her revolution,
throughout all its wonderful vicissitudes, has continued to possess the minds
of the great body of the people of this country; and it was to be inferred,
that this sentiment would predispose to a jealousy of any agreement or treaty
with her most persevering competitor -- a jealousy so excessive, as would give
the fullest scope to insidious arts to perplex and mislead the public opinion.
It was well understood, that a numerous party among us, though disavowing the
design, because the avowal would defeat it, have been steadily endeavoring to
make the United States a party in the present European war, by advocating all
those measures which would widen the breach betweeen us and Great Britain, and
by resisting all those which would tend to close it; and it was morally
certain, that this party would eagerly improve every circumstance which could
serve to render the treaty odious, and to frustrate it, as the most effectual
road to their favorite goal.

It was also known beforehand, that personal and party rivalships, of the most
active kind, would assail whatever treaty might be made, to disgrace, if
possible, its organ.

There are three persons prominent in the public eye, as the successor of the
actual president of the United States, in the event of his retreat from the
station, mr. Adams, mr. Jay, and mr. Jefferson.

No one has forgotten the systematic pains which have been taken to impair the
well-earned popularity of the first gentleman. Mr. Jay, too, has been
repeatedly the object of attacks with the same view. His friends, as well as
his enemies, anticipated that he could make no treaty which would not furnish
weapons against him: and it were to have been ignorant of the indefatigable
malice of his adversaries, to have doubted that they would be seized with
eagerness and wielded with dexterity.

The peculiar circumstances which have attended the two last elections for
governor of this state New York.
, have been of a nature to give the utmost keenness to party animosity. It was
impossible that mr. Jay should be forgiven for his double, and, in the last
instance, triumphant success; or that any promising opportunity of detaching
from him the public confidence, should pass unimproved.

Trivial facts frequently throw light upon important designs. It is remarkable,
that in the toasts given on the 4th of July, wherever there appears a direct or
indirect censure of the treaty, it is pretty uniformly coupled with compliments
to mr. Jefferson, and to our late governor, mr. Clinton, with an evident design
to place those gentlemen in contrast with mr. Jay, and, decrying him, to
elevate them. No one can be blind to the singer of party spirit, visible in
these and similar transactions. It indicates to us clearly, one powerful source
of opposition to the treaty.

No man is without his personal enemies. Pre-eminence even in talents and
virtue is a cause of envy and hatred of its possessor. Bad men are the natural
enemies of virtuous men. Good men sometimes mistake and dislike each other.

Upon such an occassion as the treaty, how could it happen otherwise, than that
personal enmity would be unusually busy, enterprising, and malignant?

From the combined operation of these different causes, it would have been a
vain expectation that the treaty would be generally contemplated with candor
and moderation, or that reason would regulate the first impressions concerning
it. It was certain, on the contrary, that however unexceptionable its true
character might be, it would have to sight its way through a mass of
unreasonable opposition; and that time, examination, and reflection, would be
requisite to six the public opinion on a true basis. It was certain that it
would become the instrument of a systematic effort against the national
government and its administration; a decided engine of party to advance its own
views at the hazard of the public peace and prosperity.

The events which have already taken place, are a full comment on these
positions. If the good sense of the people does not speedily discountenance the
projects which are on foot, more melancholy proofs may succeed.

Before the treaty was known, attempts were made to propossess the public mind
against it. It was absurdly asserted, that it was not expected by the people,
that mr. Jay was to make any treaty; as if he had been sent, not to accommodate
differences by negotiation and agreement, but to dictate to Great Britain the
terms of an unconditional submission.

Before it was published at large, a sketch, calculated to produce false
impressions, was handed out to the public, through a medium noted for hostility
to the administration of the government. -- E^^^ssaries flew through the
country, spreading alarm and discontent: the leaders of clubs were every where
active to seize the passions of the people, and pre-occupy their judgments
against the treaty.

At Boston it was published one day, and the next a townmeeting was convened to
condemn it, without ever being read; without any serious discussion, sentence
was pronounced against it.

Will any man seriously believe, that in so short a time, an instrument of this
nature could have been tolerably understood by the greater part of those who
were thus induced to a condemnation of it? Can the result be considered as any
thing more than a sudden ebullition of popular passion, excited by the
artifices of a party, which had adroitly seized a favorable moment to furorize
the public opinion; this spirit of precipitation and the intemperance which
accompanied it, prevented the body of the merchants and the greater part of the
most considerate citizens, from attending the meeting, and left those who met
wholly under the guidance of a set of men, who, with two or three exceptions,
have been the uniform opposers of the government.

The intelligence of this event had no sooner reached New York, than the
leaders of the clubs were seen haranguing in every corner of the city, to stir
up our citizens into an imitation of the example of the meeting at Boston. An
invitation to meet at the city-hall quickly followed, not to consider or
discuss the merits of the treaty, but to unite with the meeting at Boston to
address the president against its ratification.

This was immediately succeeded by a hand bill, full of invectives against the
treaty, as absurd as they were inflammatory, and manifestly designed to induce
the citizens to surrender their reason to the empire of their passions.

In vain did a respectable meeting of the merchants endeavor, by their advice,
to moderate the violence of these views, and to promote a spirit favorable to
a fair discussion of the treaty; in vain did a respectable majority of the
citizens of every description attend for that purpose. The leaders of the clubs
resisted all discussion, and their followers, by their clamors and
vociferations, rendered it impracticable, notwithstanding the wish of a
manifest majority of the citizens convened upon the occasion.

Can we believe, that the leaders were really sincere in the objections they
made to a discussion, or that the great and mixed mass of citizens then
assembled, had so thoroughly mastered the merits of the treaty as that they
might not have been enlightened by such a discussion.

It cannot be doubled that the real motive to the opposition, was the fear of a
discussion; the desire of excluding light; the adherence to a plan of surprise
and deception. Nor need we desire any fuller proof of the spirit of party which
has stimulated the opposition to the treaty, than is to be found in the
circumstances of that opposition.

To every man who is not an enemy to the national government, who is not a
prejudiced partizan, who is capable of comprehending the argument, and
dispassionate enough to attend to it with impartiality, I flatter myself I
shall be able to demonstrate satisfactorily in the course of some succeeding
papers. --

1. That the treaty adjusts, in a reasonable manner, the points in controversy
between the United States and Great Britain, as well those depending on the
inexecution of the treaty of peace, as those growing out of the present
European war. 2. That it makes no improper concessions to Great Britain, no
sacrifices on the part of the United States. 3. That it secures to the United
States equivalents for what they grant. 4. That it lays upon them no
restrictions which are incompatible with their honor or their interest. 5. That
in the articles which respect war, it conforms to the laws of nations. 6. That
it violates no treaty with, nor duty toward any foreign power. 7. That
compared with our other commercial treaties, it is, upon the whole, entitled to
a preference. 8. That it contains concessions of advantages by Great Britain to
the United States, which no other nation has obtained from the same power. 9.
That it gives to her no superiority of advantages over other nations with whom
we have treaties. 10. That interests of primary importance to our general
welfare, are promoted by it. 11. That the too-probable result of a refusal to
ratify, is war, or what would be still worse, a disgraceful passiveness under
violations of our rights, unredressed and unadjusted: and consequently that it
is the true interest of the United States, that the treaty should go into
effect.
It will be understood, that I speak of the treaty as advised to be ratified by
the senate -- for this is the true question before the public.

CAMILLUS.

No. II.
PREVIOUS to a more particular discussion of the merits of the treaty, it may
be useful to advert to a suggestion which has been thrown out, namely, That it
was foreseen by many, that the mission to Great Britain would produce no good
result, and that the event has corresponded with the anticipation.

The reverse of this position is manifestly true.

All must remember the very critical posture of this country, at the time that
mission was resolved upon. A recent violation of our rights, too flagrant and
too injurious to be submitted to, had filled every American breast with
indignation, and every prudent man with alarm and disquietude. A few hoped, and
the great body of the community feared, that war was inevitable.

In this crisis, two sets of opinions prevailed, one looked to measures which
were to have a compulsory effect upon Great Britain, the sequestration of
British debts, and the cutting off intercourse wholly or partially between the
two countries: the other to vigorous preparations for war, and one more effort
of negotiation, under the solemnity of an extraordinary mission, to avert it.

That the latter was the best opinion, no truly sensible man can doubt; and it
may be boldly affirmed, that the event has entirely justified it.

If measures of coercion and reprisal had taken place, war, in all human
probability, would have followed.

National pride is generally a very untractable thing. In the councils of no
country does it act with greater force, than in those of Great Britain.
Whatever it might have been in her power to yield to negotiation, she could
have yielded nothing to compulsion, without self-degradation, and without the
sacrifice of that political consequence, which, at all times very important to
a nation, was peculiarly so to her at the juncture in question. It should be
remembered, too, that from the relations in which the two countries have stood
to each other, it must have cost more to the pride of Great Britain to have
received the law from us than from any other power.

When one nation has cause of complaint against another, the course marked out
by practice, the opinion of writers, and the principles of humanity, the object
being to avoid war, is to precede reprisals of any kind, by a demand of
reparation. To begin with reprisals is to meet on the ground of war, and puts
the other party in a condition not to be able to recede without humiliation.

Had this course been pursued by us, it would not only have rendered war
morally certain, but it would have united the British nation in the vigorous
support of their government, in the prosecution of it: while, on our part, we
should have been quickly distracted and divided. The calamities of war would
have brought the most ardent to their senses, and placed them among the first
in reproaching the government with precipitation, rashness, and folly, for not
having taken every chance, by pacific means, to avoid so great an evil.

The example of Denmark and Sweden is cited in support of the coercive plan.
Those powers, it is asserted, by arming and acting with vigor, brought
Great Britain to terms.

But who is able to tell us the precise course of this transaction, or the
terms gained by it? Has it appeared that either Denmark or Sweden has obtained
as much as we have done -- a stipulation of reparation for the violation of our
property, contrary to the laws of war?

Besides, what did Denmark and Sweden do? They armed, and they negociated. They
did not begin by retaliations and reprisals. The United States also armed and
negociated, and, like Denmark and Sweden, prudently forbore reprisals. The
conduct of the three countries agreed in principle, equally steering clear of a
precipitate resort to reprisals, and contradicting the doctrines and advice of
our war party.

The course pursued by our government was then in coincidence with the example
of Denmark and Sweden -- and, it may be added, was in every view the wisest.

Few nations can have stronger inducements than the United-States to cultivate
peace. Their infant state in general -- their want of a marine in particular,
to protect their commerce, would render war, in an extreme degree, a calamity.
It would not only arrest our present rapid progress to strength and prosperity,
but would probably throw us back into a state of debility and impoverishment,
from which it would require years to emerge.

Our trade, navigation, and mercantile capital, would be essentially destroyed.
Spain being an associate with Great Britain, a general Indian war might be
expected to desolate the whole extent of our frontier -- our exports
obstructed, agriculture would of course languish; all other branches of
industry would proportionably suffer; our public debt instead of a gradual
diminution, would sustain a great augmentation, and draw with it a large
increase of taxes and burdens on the people.

But these evils, however great, were, perhaps, not the worst to be
apprehended. It was to be feared, that the war would be conducted in a spirit
which would render it more than ordinarily calamitous. There are too many
proofs, that a considerable party among us is deeply infected with those horrid
principles of jacobinism, which, proceeding from one excess to another, have
made France a theater of blood, and which, notwithstanding the most vigorous
efforts of the national representation to suppress it, keeps the destinies of
France, to this moment, suspended by a thread. It was too probable, that the
direction of the war, if commenced, would have fallen into the hands of men of
this description. The consequence of this, even in imagination, are such as to
make any virtuous man shudder.

It was, therefore, in a peculiar manner, the duty of the government to take
all possible chances for avoiding war. The plan adopted was the only one which
could claim this advantage.

To precipitate nothing, to gain time by negotiation, was to leave the country
in a situation to profit by any events which might turn up, tending to restrain
a spirit of hostility in Great Britain, and to dispose her to reasonable
accommodation.

The successes of France, which opportunely occurred, allowing them to have had
an influence upon the issue, so far from disparaging the merit of the plan that
was pursued, serve to illustrate its wisdom. This was one of the chances which
procrastination gave, and one which it was natural to take into the calculation.

Had the reverse been the case, the posture of negotiation was still preferable
to that of retaliation and reprisal; for in this case, the triumphs of
Great Britain, the gauntlet having been thrown by us, would have stimulated her
to take i^ up without hesitation.

By taking the ground of negotiation in the attitude of preparation for war, we
at the same time carried the appeal (...) the prudence of the British cabinet,
without wounding its pride, and to the justice and interest of the British
nation^ without exciting feelings of resentment.

This conduct was calculated to range the public opinion of that country on our
side, to oppose it to the indulgence of hostile views in the cabinet, and, in
case of war, to lay the foundation of schism and dissatisfaction.

But one of the most important advantages to be expected from the course
pursued, was the securing of unanimity among ourselves, if, after all the pains
taken to avoid a war, it had been forced upon us.

As on the one hand, it was certain that dissension and discontent would have
embarrassed and enfe^bled our exertion^ in a war produced by any circumstances
of intemperance i^ our public councils, or not endeavored to be prevented by
all the milder expedients usual in similar cases: So, on the other, it was
equally certain, that our having ineffectually ^^hausted those expedients,
would cement us in a firm (...) keep us steady and persevering amidst whatever
vicissit^^^ might happen, and never our efforts to the utmost extent (...) our
resources.

This union among ourselves, and disunion among our ^^^mies, were inestimable
effects of the moderate plan, if it (...) promised no other advantage.

But to gain time was of vast moment to us in other sens^. Not a seaport of
the United States was fortified, so as to protected against the insults of a
single frigate. -- Our ma^^zines were, in every respect, too scantily supplied.
It was hightly desirable to obviate these deficiencies before matters ca^^^ to
extremity.

Moreover, the longer we kept out of war, if obliged to (...) into it at last,
the shorter would be the duration of the ca^^mities incident to it.

The circumstances of the injury of which we more immediately complain,
afforded an additional reason for precedi^^ reprisals by negotiation. The order
of the 6th of November, directed neutral vessels to be bro't in for
adjudication. This was an equivocal phrase; and though there was too much ca^^
to suspect that it was intended to operate as it did, yet th^^ was a
possibility of misconstruction; and that possibility was a reason, in the
nature of the thing, for giving to the English government an opportunity of
explaining before retaliations not place.

To all this it may be added, that one of the substitutes for the plan pursued,
the sequestration of debts, was a measure no less dishonest than impolitic; as
will be shown in the remarks which will be applied to the 10th article of the
treaty.

But is it unimportant to the real friends of republican government, that the
plan pursued was congenial to the pacific character which is ascribed to it?
Would it have been more desirable that the government of our nation,
outstripping the war-maxims of Europe, should, without a previous demand of
reparation, have rushed into reprisals, and consequently into a war?

However this may be, it is a well ascertained fact, that our country never
appeared so august and respectable as in the position which it assumed upon
this occasion. -- Europe was struck with the dignified moderation of our
conduct; and the character of our government and nation acquired a new
elevation.

It cannot escape an attentive observer, that the language, which, in the first
instance, condemned the mission of an envoy extraordinary to Great Britain, and
which now condemns the treaty negociated by him, seems to consider the United
States as among the first rate powers of the world in point of strength and
resources, and proposes to them a conduct predicated from that condition.

To under-rate our just importance, would be a degrading error. To over-rate
it, may lead to dangerous mistakes.

A very powerful state may frequently hazard a high and haughty tone with good
policy; but a weak state can scarcely ever do it without imprudence. The last
is yet our character; though we are the embryo of a great empire. It is,
therefore, better suited to our situation to measure each step with the utmost
caution; to hazard as little as possible, in the cases in which we are injured;
to blend moderation with firmeness; and to brandish the weapons of hostility
only when it is apparent that the use of them is unavoidable.

It is not to be inferred from this, that we are to crouch to any power on
earth, or tamely to suffer our rights to be violated. A nation which is capable
of this meanness, will quickly have no rights to protect, or honor to defend.

But the true inference is, that we ought not lightly to feet or provoke a
resort to arms; that, in the differences between us and other nations, we ought
carefully to avoid measures which tend to widen the breach; and that we should
scr^^^lously abstain from whatever may be construed into reprisals, till after
the employment of all amicable means has reduced it to a certainty that there
is no alternative.

If we can avoid a war for ten or twelve years more, we shall then have
acquired a maturity, which will make it no more than a common calamity, and
will authorize us, in our national discussions, to take a higher and more
imposing to^^.

This is a consideration of the greatest weight to determine us to exert all
our prudence and address to keep out of we as long as it shall be possible; to
defer, to a state of manhood a struggle to which infancy is ill adapted. This
is the (...) effectual way to disappoint the enemies of our welfare; (...)
pursue a contrary conduct may be to play into their hands, and to gratify their
wishes. If there be a foreign power which (...) with envy or ill will our
growing prosperity, that power (...) discern that our infancy is the time for
clipping our win^^ We ought to be wise enough to see, that this is not a ti^^
for trying our strength.

Should we be able to escape the storm which at this j^^^ture agitates Europe,
our disputes with Great Britain ^^^minated, we may hope to postpone war to a
distant peri^^ This, at least, will greatly diminish the chances of it. For the
there will remain only one power with whom we have (...) embarrassing
discussions. I allude to Spain, and the quest^^^ of the Mississippi; and there
is reason to hope, that this question by the natural progress of things, and
perseverance is an amicable course, will finally be arranged to our
satisfaction without the necessity of the dernier resort.

The allusion to this case suggests one or two importance (...) ^^flections.
How unwise would it have been to invite or fa^^tate a quarrel with
Great Britain, at a moment when she (...) Spain were engaged in a common cause,
both of them hav^^^ besides, controverted points with the United States. How
(...) will it be to adjust our differences with the most formidable (...) these
two powers, and to have only to contest with o^^^ them!

The allusion to this case suggests one or two importance (...) ^^flections.
How unwise would it have been to invite or fa^^tate a quarrel with
Great Britain, at a moment when she (...) Spain were engaged in a common cause,
both of them hav^^^ besides, controverted points with the United States. How
(...) will it be to adjust our differences with the most formidable (...) these
two powers, and to have only to contest with o^^^ them!

This policy is so obvious, that it requires an extraordinary degree of
infatuation not to be sensible of it, and not to vi^^^ with favor any measure
which tends to so important a resul^

This cursory view of the motives which may be supposed to have governed our
public councils in the mission to Great Britain, serves not only to vindicate
the measures then pursued, but warns us against a prejudiced judgment of the
result, which may, in the end, defeat the salutary purposes of those measures.

I proceed now to observe summarily, that the objects of the mission, contrary
to what has been asserted, have been substantially obtained. What were these?
They were principally, 1. To adjust the matters of controversy concerning the
inexecution of the treaty of peace, and especially to obtain restitution of our
western posts. 2. To obtain reparation for the captures and spoliations of our
property in the course of the existing war.


Both these objects have been provided for; and it will be shown, when we come
to comment upon the articles which make the provisions in each case, that it is
a reasonable one, as good a one as ought to have been expected; as good a one
as there is any prospect of obtaining hereafter; one which it is consistent
with our honor to accept, and which our interest bids us to close with.

The provisions with regard to commerce, were incidental and auxiliary. The
reasons which may be conceived to have led to the including of the subject in
the mission, will be discussed in some proper place.

CAMILLUS.

No. III.
THE opposers of the treaty seem to have put invention on the rack, to
accumulate charges against it, in a great number of cases, without regard even
to plausibility. If we suppose them sincere, we must often pity their
ignorance; if insincere, we must abhor the spirit of deception which it
betrays. Of the preposterous nature of some of their charges, specimens will be
given, in the course of these remarks; though, while nothing, which is
colorable, will remain unattended to, it were endless to attempt a distinct
refutation of all the wild and absurd things which are and will be said. It is
vain to combat the vagaries of diseased imaginations. The monsters they
engender, are no sooner destroyed, than new legions supply their places. Upon
this, as upon all former occasions, the good sense of the people must be relied
upon; and it must be taken for granted, that it will be sufficient for their
conviction, to give solid answers to all such objections as have the semblance
of reason; that now, as heretofore, they will maintain their character abroad
and at home, for deliberation and reflection, and disappoint those who are in
the habit of making experiments upon their credulity, who, treating them as
children, fancy that sugar-plumbs and toys will suffice to gain their
confidence and attachment, and to lead them blindfold, whither soever it is
desired.

In considering the treaty, it presents itself under two principal heads; the
permanent articles, which are the first ten, and which, with some supplementary
provisions, adjust the controverted points between the two countries; and the
temporary articles, which are all the remaining ones, and which establish the
principles of mutual intercourse as to GENERAL navigation and commerce. The
manner of the discussion will correspond with this natural division of the
subject.

An objection meets the treaty at the threshold. It is said that our envoy
abandoned the ground which our government had uniformly held, and with it our
rights and interests as a nation, by acceding, in the preamble of the treaty,
to the ide^ of terminating the differences between the two countries, "it such
a manner, as, without reference to the merits of their respeciti^^ complaints
and pretensions, may be best calculated to produce mutual satisfaction and good
understanding."

It is observed, in support of this, that our government ha^ constantly charged
the first breaches of the treaty upon Great Britain, in the two particulars of
carrying away the negroes, and detaining the posts; that while the evacuation
of New York was going on, a demand of the surrender of the negroes was made by
congress, through our commander in chief, which not being complied with,
commissioners were sent, (...) ascertain the number carried away, with a view
to a claim of compensation; that early and repeated applications were also.
made for the surrender of the Western Posts, which not only was not done, but
it is proved by the circumstances, that orders were not given for it, according
to the true intent of the treaty, and that there was, from the beginning, a
design to infract, and a virtual infraction of the article with respect ^s this
object. All this, it is alleged, has been the uniform language of our
government, and has been demonstrated by ^^r. Jefferson to be true, in his
letter to mr. Hammond, of the 29th of May, 1792; and it is asserted, that the
ground ought not to have been given up by mr. Jay, because it was the standard
of the mutual rights and duties of the parties, as to the points unexecuted of
the treaty of peace.

A proper examination of these matters is therefore called for, not only by the
specific objection which is made to the principle which is contained in the
preamble, but by the influence which a right solution is calculated to have, in
giving a favorable or unfavourable complexion to the whole plan of the
adjustment.

It is true, as suggested, that our government has constantly charged as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain, the two particulars which have been
stated; but it is believed to be not true, that it has uniformly charged them
as FIRST breaches of the treaty. Individuals may have entertained this idea.
The state of Virginia seems to have proceeded upon it in some public acts; but
as far as is recollected, that ground was never formally or explicitly taken by
the government of the United States in the abovementioned letter from mr.
Jefferson to mr. Hammond, when, for the first time, an attempt was made to
vindicate or excuse the whole conduct of this country, in regard to the treaty
of peace, contrary, I will venture to say, to the general sense of
well-informed men.

The most solemn act of our government on this head, is an address of congress
to the different states, of the 13th of April, 1787.

This address admits contraventions of the treaty on our part; and instead of
deriving either justification or extenuation of them from prior infractions by
Great Britain, urges the different states to a repeal of all contravening laws.

But if the fact, in this respect, were admitted to be, as stated by the
adversaries of the treaty, it would not authorize their conclusion.

It would not follow, that, because the ground had been taken by the
government, it ought to have been pertinaciously kept, if, upon fair
examination, it had appeared to be not solid, or if an adherence to it would
have obstructed a reasonable adjustment of differences.

Nations, no more than individuals, ought to persist in error, especially at
the sacrifice of their peace and prosperity -- besides, nothing is more common,
in disputes between nations, than each side to charge the other with being the
aggressor or delinquent. This mutual crimination, either from the nature of
circumstances, or from the illusions of the passions, is sometimes sincere; at
other times, it is dictated by pride or, policy -- But in all such cases, where
one party is not powerful enough to dictate to the other, and where there is a
mutual disposition to avoid war; the natural retreat for both is in compromise,
which waves the question of first aggression or delinquency. This is the salvo
for national pride; the escape for mutual error; the bridge by which nations,
arrayed against each other, are enabled to retire with honor, and without
bloodshed, from the field of contest. In cases of mutual delinquency, the
question of the first default is frequently attended with real difficulty and
doubt. -- One side has an equal right with the other, to have and maintain its
opinion. -- What is to be done, when the pride of neither will yield to the
argument of the other? War, or a waver of the point, is the alternative What
sensible man, what humane man, will deny, that a compromise, which secures
substantially the objects of interest, is almost always preferable to war on so
punctilious and unmanageable a point?

Reject the principle of compromise, and the feuds of nations must become much
more deadly than they have hither^^ been. There would scarcely ever be room for
the adjustment of differences, without an appeal to the sword; and, wh^ drawn,
it would seldom be shcathed but with the destructi^^ of one or the other party.
The earth, now too often staine^, would then continually stream with human gore.

From the situation of the thing, and of the parties, that never could be a
rational doubt, that the compromising p^^^ was the only one on which the United
States and Great Britain could ever terminate their differences without war;
the the question, who was the first delinquent, would have (...) an eternal bar
to accommodation, and consequently, that is dismission of that question was a
pre-requisite to agreem^^^ Had our envoy permitted the negotiation to be
arrested ^y obstinacy on this head, he would have shown himself to be (...)
diplomatic pedant, rather than the able negociator, and wo^^^ have been justly
chargeable with sacrificing to punctilio, the peace of his country. It was
enough for him, as he did, (...) ascertain by a preliminary discussion, the
impossibility of br^^ing the other party to concede to the point.

An impartial survey of the real state of the question, (...) satisfy candid
and discerning men, that it was wise and politic to dismiss it. This shall be
attempted.

It has been observed, that two breaches of the treaty of peace are charged
upon Great Britain; the carrying away of the Negroes, and the detention of the
posts. It remains to investigate the reality of these breaches, and to fix the
periods when they can be said to have happened.

As to the Negroes, the true sense of the article in the treaty of peace, which
respects them, is disputed.

The words of the stipulation are (Art. 7.) that "his Britannic majesty shall,
with all convenient speed, and without causing any destruction or carrying away
any Negroes or other property of the American inhabitants withdraw all his
armies, garrisons, and fleets, from the United States."

These terms admit of two constructions; one, that no Negroes, or other
articles which had been American property, should be carried away; the other,
that the evacuations were to be made, without depredation; consequently, that
no new destruction was to be committed, and that: Negroes, or other articles,
which, at the time of the cessation of hostilities, continued to be the
property of American inhabitants, unexchanged by the operations of war, should
be forborne to be carried away.

The first was the construction which was adopted by this country; and the last
is that insisted upon by Great Britain.

The arguments which support her construction, are these:

I. The established laws of war give to an enemy the use and enjoyment, during
the war, of all coal property, of which he obtains possession, and the absolute
ownership of all personal property which falls into his hands. The latter is
called ^^^ty: and, except ships, becomes vested in the captors the moment they
acquire a firm possession. With regard to ships, it seems to be a general rule
of the marine law, that condemnation is necessary to complete investment of the
property in the captor. II. Negroes, by the laws of the states, in which
slavery is allowed, are personal property. They, therefore, on the principle of
those laws, like horses, cattle, and other movables, were liable to become
booty -- and belonged to the enemy, as soon as they came into his hands.
Belonging to him, he was free either to apply them to his own use, or to set
them at liberty. If he did the latter, the grant was irrevocable, restitution
was impossible. Nothing in the laws of nations, or in those of Great Britain,
will authorize the resumption of liberty, once granted to a human being. III.
The negroes in question were either taken in the course of military operations,
or they joined the British army upon invitation by proclamation. However
dishonorable to Great Britain the latter may have been, as an illiberal
species o^ warfare, there is no ground to say that the strict rules of wa^ did
not warrant it; or that the effect was not in the one case, as well as in the
other, a change of property in the thing. IV. The stipulation relates to
"Negroes or other property of the American inhabitants;" putting Negroes on the
same footing with any other article. The characteristic of the subject of the
stipulation being property of American inhabitan^^ whatever had lost that
character could not be the object o^ the stipulation. But the Negroes in
question, by the laws (...) war, had lost that character; they were therefore
not within the stipulation. Why did not the United States demand the surrender
(...) captured vessels, and of all other movables, which had fallen into the
hands of the enemy? The answer is, because common sense would have revolved
against such a construction. No one could believe, that an indefinite surrender
of al^ the spoils or booty of a seven year's war was ever intended (...) be
stipulated; and yet the demand for a horse, or an or, or a piece of furniture,
would have been as completely within the terms "negroes and other property," as
a negro; consequently, the reasoning which proves that one is not included
excludes the other.

The silence of the United States, as to every other articl^ is therefore a
virtual abandonment of that sense of the stipulation which requires the
surrender of negroes.

V. In the interpretation of treaties, things odious or immor^^ are not to be
presumed. The abandonment of Negroes, who had been induced to quit their
masters, on the faith of o^^^cial proclamation, promising them liberty, to fall
again under the yoke of their masters, and into slavery, is as odi^^^ and
immoral a thing as can be conceived. It is odious (...) only as it imposes an
act of perfidy on one of the contracting parties; but as it tends to bring back
to servitude, m^^ once made free. The general interests of humanity conspi^^^
with the obligation which Great Britain had contracted ^^wards the Negroes, to
repel this construction of the treat^^ if another can be found. VI. But
another, and a less exceptionable construction i^ found in considering the
clause as inserted, for greater caution to secure evacuations without
depredation. It may be answered, that this was superfluous, because hostilities
having ceased, she stipulation to surren^^^, implied of itself, that it was to
be alone without depredation. But, to this the reply is, that a part of the
clause manifestly contemplates the case of new depredations, and provides a
guard against it, in the promise, that the evacuations shall be made without
causing any destruction. To cause destruction is to do some new act of
violence. This reflection destroys the argument drawn from the superfluousness
of the stipulation in the sense here given to it, and by showing that it must
have such a sense in one part, authorizes the conclusion, that the remainder of
the clause has a similar sense. The connection of the two things, in parts of
one sentence, confirms this inference.
These arguments certainly have great weight, and do not admit of easy
refutation. It is a fact, too, that the opinions of some of the ablest lawyers
of our own country, have, from the beginning, corresponded with the
construction they enforce.

It is not enough for us to be persuaded, that some of the negociators, who
made the peace, intended the article in our sense. It is necessary that it
should be found in the instrument itself, and, from the nature of it, ought to
have been expressed with clearness and without ambiguity. If there be real
ambiguity in such a case, the odiousness of the effect will incline the scale
against us.

It does not remove the difficulty, to say, that compensation for the negroes
might have been a substitute for the thing. -- When one party promises a
specific thing to another, nothing but the thing itself will satisfy the
promise. The party to whom it is made cannot be required to accept in lieu of
it an equivalent. It follows, that compensation for the negroes would not have
been a performance of the stipulation to forbear to carry them away; and
therefore, if there be any thing odious in the specific thing itself, the
objection to the interpretation which requires it, is not done away by the idea
of substituting compensation. For the article does not admit such substitution,
and its sense cannot be defined by what it does admit.

Some color to our sense of the article results from these expressions in the
same clause, "leaving in all fortifications, the American artillery that may be
therein." -- But this expression is not of equivalent force to that of property
of American inhabitants. -- For example suppose an American ship to have been
captured and condemned, it might still be said of her, in a certain sense, this
is an "American ship," alluding to the country of which she had been the ship;
but it could not be said in any sense of her, this ship is American property,
or the property of American inhabitants. The country of which (...) thing was,
may often be used with aptness as a term of description of that thing, though
it may have changed owner^^ but the term property, which is synonimous with
ownership, can never be used in the present tense as descriptive of an
ownership, which has ceased. Moreover, if the expressions in the two cases had
been (as they are not) of equivalent force, (...) would not follow that they
were to have the same meaning i^ both cases, being applied to different
matters. For an odious consequence in one instance, would be a reason for
rejecti^^ a particular sense of a word or phrase, which would be prop^^ in
another, to which no such consequence was attached.

Let me now ask this question of any candid man. Is o^^ construction of the
article respecting the negroes, so much better supported than that of
Great Britain, as to justify o^^ pronouncing with po^tiveness, that the
carrying them away was a breach of the treaty?

To me it appears clear, that this must be considered, speaking favorably for
us, as a very doubtful point, and that (...) cannot with confidence predicate a
breach of the treaty (...) Great Britain upon this event. If it was one, it
happened (...) May 1783.

The affair of the western posts is now to be examined; (...) the detention of
them, after the proper point of time for (...) livering them up, was a breach
of the treaty, will not be^^^ dispute. But what that proper time was, it a
serious ques^^^ between the two parties.

Our government has contended, that the posts ought to h^^^ been surrendered
with all convenient speed, after the provi^^^al treaty took effect: and mr.
Jefferson, who is much cited (...) the present occasion has shown, by an
ingenious and cla^^^rate deduction of circumstances, that this was not only
(...) done, but never intended.

But mr. Jefferson has not even discussed the question, which (...) the
provisional or the definitive treaty was the act from which the obligation to
perform was to date. This is an import^^ omission; for Great Britain affirms
the definitive treaty to (...) the criterion.

As an original question, much might be said on both (...) The natural relation
of the terms provisional or preliminary and definitive seems to exhibit the
former as inchoate and imp^^^^ct, and to refer to the latter the conclusive
obligatory force and legal perfection. There is room, therefore, to say, that
all but the mere cessation of hostilities, or for the execution of which there
is no precise point of time fixed in the preliminary articles, is referred to
in the definitive treaty.

On the other hand, it may be argued, that a preliminary treaty is as much a
national treaty as a definitive one, both being made by an equal and the
competent authority; and that there is no good reason why those things which
are sufficiently regulated by the preliminary, should not go into immediate and
complete effect, equally as if regulated by the definitive treaty; or why the
latter should be considered as any thing more than an instrument for adjusting
points which may have been left open by the preliminary articles, and for
giving more perfect form. Accordingly, there are examples of preliminary
treaties going into mutual and full execution, though never followed by
definitive treaties.

But, however this question may have stood on principle, the conduct of our
government in the particular case has settled it against us, and has completely
sanctioned the doctrine of Great Britain.

If performance was to date from the provisional articles, this applies as well
to us to to Great Britain. It was incumbent upon congress to have notified the
treaty, with the proper solemnities, to the different states and their
citizens; to have made the recommendations stipulated by the fifth article; and
to have enjoined the observance of all those things which we promised on our
part. The nature of some of these stipulations rendered it particularly urgent
that no time should be lost. But all was deferred till the ratification in this
country of the definitive treaty. The 15th of January 1784, is the date of the
act which attempts to carry the treaty into effect on our part. This then is a
practical settlement by ourselves of the principle, that performance was to
date from the definitive treaty.

It is no objection to the position, that our sea ports were previously
evacuated; that was matter of mutual convenience; and though done, does not
change the state of strict obligation between the parties. Even in the view of
liberal and conciliating procedure, the prompt surrender of our (...) a ports
are, for obvious reasons, very different things.

But our dilemma is this, if the delay of orders for evacuating the western
posts, previous to the ratification of the definitive treaty, was, on the part
of Great Britain, a breach of treaty, our delay to act upon the points
stipulated by us till after th^^ ratification, must have been equally a breach
of treaty; and it must have been at least cotemporary with any breach tha^
could have been committed by Great Britain.

We are compelled then by our own example to agree wi^^ Great Britain that she
was not obliged to surrender the western posts till after the mutual
ratification of the definitive treaty^ and to abandon the superstructure,
however soothing to o^^ wishes, which has been reared upon a different
foundation. (...) so, we must look to the period of the exchange of the
ratificati^^ in Europe for the date of the orders for evacuating. I have (...)
in my possession materials for fixing with accuracy that peri^^ but considering
the time of the ratification here and the ti^^ of its probable arrival in
England, we are carried to the la^^ end of April or beginning of May 1784; so
that it is not till ^^bout May 1784, that we can charge upon Great Britain a
d^^linquency as to the surrender of the posts.

Having now examined the nature of the infractions of (...) treaty of peace
charged upon Great Britain with reference (...) dates I shall, in the next
number of this defense, trace some ^^stances of infraction on our part with a
like reference. Th^^ conclusions to be drawn from this comparison, if I mistake
no^ will greatly disconcert some articles of the prevailing creed (...) this
head, and go far toward confirming what was preliminarily offered to evince
the prudence of our envoy in relinqui^^ing the favorite ground.

CAMILLUS.

No IV.
AN accurate enumeration of the breaches of the treat^ of peace on our part,
would require a tedious research. It will suffice to select and quote a few of
the (...) prominent and early instances.

One of the earliest is to be found in an act of this state, ^^^granting a more
effectual relief in cases of certain trespass^^ passed the 17th March, 1783.
This act takes away from any person (subjects of Great Britain of every
description incl^^^ed) who had, during the war, occupied, injured, destroyed
(...) received property, real or personal, of any inhabitant without the
British lines, the benefit of the plea of a military order; consequently the
justification which the laws and usages of war give, and the immunity resulting
from the reciprocral am^esty, which, expressly or virtually, is an essential
part of every treaty of peace. To this it may be added that it was considered
by Great Britain as a direct infraction of the 6th article of her treaty with
us, which exempts all persons from prosecution "by reason of the part they
might have taken in the war."

Mr. Jefferson, not controverting the point that the provisions of this act
were contrary to the treaty, endeavors to get rid of the inference from it, by
alleging three things. -- 1st. That it passed antecedently to the treaty, and
so could not be a violation of an act of subsequent data. -- 2d. That the
treaty was paramount to the laws of the particular states, and operated a
repeal of them. -- 3d. That the exceptionable principle of this act was never
sanctioned by the courts of justice, and in one instance (the case of Rutgers
and Waddington in the mayor's court) was over ruled.


As to the first point, it is sufficient to answer, that the law continued to
operate, in fact, from the time of the treaty rid the 4th of April, 1787, when
there was a repeal of the exception^ble clause, by an act of our legislature.
During the period of ^our years, many suits were brought and many recoveries
had; extending even to persons who had been in the military ^^^^rvice of
Great Britain.

To the second point, these observations may be opposed.

The articles of the confederation did not, like our present constitution,
declare that treaties were supreme laws of the ^and. The United States, under
that system, had no courts of their own, to expound and enforce their treaties
as laws. All was to depend upon the comparative authority of laws and ^^eaties,
in the judgment of the state courts.

The question, whether treaties were paramount to, and a ^^rtual repeal of
antecedent laws, was a question of theory, about which there was room for, and
in this country did exist much diversity of opinion. It is notorious, that it
has been ^renuously maintained that however a national treaty ought, a good
faith, to be conclusive on a state, to induce a repeal of ^^ws contrary to it;
yet its actual laws could not be controverted by treaty, without an actual
repeal by its own authority. This doctrine has been emphatically that of the
party distin^uished by its opposition to national principles.

And it is observable, that congress, not relying entirely up on the force of
the treaty, to abrogate contravening laws, in their address already cited, urge
the states to a repeal of those laws. It is likewise observable in respect to
the very act under consideration, that the legislature of the state, in April,
1787, thought a positive repeal of the exceptionable clause necessary.

The complaints of a power, whose treaty with us was, (...) fact, violated by
the operation of a state law, could never (...) satisfactorily answered by
referring to a theoretic, abstract, ^^^puted proposition. Such a power might
reply with irresisti^^ force: "It is not for us to concern ourselves about the
stru^^ture and meaning of your political constitutions, or the fou^^ of legal
maxims deducible from the forms and distributions of power which you have
adopted for your governments. It is the act in which alone we are interested --
you have stipulated this and that to us -- your stipulation in practice is
contravened. It is your duty to so that there are no impediment from
conflicting authorities within yourselves, to an exact ^^^silment of your
promises. If you suffer any such impediment to exist, you are answerable for
the consequences."

As to the third point, it is to be observed, that though th^^ may have been no
express formal decision of our courts, (...) forcing the exceptionable
principle of the trespass act: (...) there never was a decision of a supreme
court against it; (...) it may not be amiss to remark incidentally, that the
de^^^^ of the mayor's court, from which mr. Jefferson is glad to (...) rive an
exculpation of our conduct, was the subject of ^^^^vere animadversion at a
popular meeting in this city, as ^^^^^diciary encroachment on the legislative
authority of the (...). The truth on this point is, that according to the
opini^^^ our bar, a defense under a military order was desperate, (...) it was
believed that a majority of our supreme court (...) would overruled the plea.
Hence in numerous cases wh^^^ might have been used, it was waved; and the
endeavo^^^ behalf of the defendants, was either to effect on coll^^^ grounds, a
mitigation of damages, or to accomplish the^^^ compromises that could be
obtained; even the suit of Ru^^^ and Waddington, after a partial success in the
mayor's (...) was terminated by a compromise, according to the advi^^^ the
defendant's council, owing to the apprehension of an (...) favorable issue in
the supreme court; and this, notwi^ing the defendant was a British subject.

Under these circumstances, which are faithfully repe^ is it possible to doubt,
that the act in question operated a breach of our treaty with Great Britain?
and this from the commencement of its existence? can we reasonably expect, that
nations with whom we have treaties, will allow us to substitute theoretic
problems to performances of our engagements, and will be willing to accept them
as apologies for actual violations?

It is pertinent to remark, that the British commander in chief very early
remonstrated against this act; but the remonstrance produced no effect.

Another act of the state of New York may be cited as a violation of the treaty
on our part, which must have been ^early cotemporary with that of the detention
of the posts. Its date is the 12th of May, 1784; this act confirms, in ex^^ess
terms, all confiscations before made, notwithstanding Errors in the
proceedings, and takes away the writ of error upon any judgment previously
rendered.

This was, in substance, a new confiscation; judgments which from error were
invalid, were nullities. To take away (...) writ of error, by which their
nullity might be established, (...) to give them an efficacy which they did not
before possess; (...), as to the operation, cannot be distinguished from the
ren^ing of new judgments. To make voidable acts of confis^^tion valid and
conclusive, is equivalent to new acts of con^cation. A fair execution of the
treaty, required, that every ^^ng in this respect should be left where it was,
and forbade (...) remedying of defects, in former proceedings, as much as (...)
restitution of new judgments.

Another, and an unequivocal breach of the treaty, is found (...) act of
South Carolina, of March 26, 1784. This act ^^^^ends the recovery of British
debts for nine months, and (...) allows them to be recovered only in four
yearly install^^^s, contrary to the express stipulation of the IVth article,
"(...) creditors on either side, shall meet with (...) lawful impedi^^^s to the
recovery of the full value in sterling money, of all bon^ (...) debts
theretofore contracted."

It is idle to attempt to excuse infractions of this kind, by ^^^pleas of
distress and inability. This is to make the conve^^^^ce of one party the
measure of its obligation to perform (...) promises to another. If there was
really an impossibility of ^^^ent, as has been pretended, there was no need of
legisla^e obstruction; the thing would have regulated itself; and the very
interest of the creditor was a pledge, that no gene^^^ evil could have resulted
from allowing a free course to t^^ laws. If such impediments could be
justified, what imped^ments might not be justified? What would become of the
article, the only one in the treaty, to be performed by us, (...) real
consequence to Great Britain?

This infraction by South Carolina, was prior to that of (...) detention of the
posts, by Great Britain.

But the case of Virginia is still stronger than that of South Carolina. There
is evidence which cannot be disputed, the her courts, in defiance of the
treaty, have constantly remained shut to the recovery of British debts, in
virtue of laws passed during the war.

An act of her general assembly of the 22d June, 1784, ^^^ter suggesting as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain, (...) carrying off of the negroes, and
the detention of the posts, a^^^ instructing her delegates in congress to
request a remonstra^^^ to the British court, complaining of those infractions,
and (...) siring reparation, and after declaring that the national hou^^ and
interest of the citizens of that common wealth obliged (...) assembly to
withhold their cooperation in the complete fulfill (...) the said treaty, until
the success of the aforementioned re^^strance is known, or congress shall
signify their senti^^^ touching the premises, concludes with the following
re^^^tion:

"That so soon as reparation is made for the foreg^^^^ fraction, or congress
shall judge it indisputably necessary, acts and parts of acts passed during the
late war, as inhibit recovery of British debts, ought to be repealed, and
payment (...) of made in such time and manner as shall consist with the ^^^ted
situation of the commonwealth."

The plain language of this resolution is, that there (...) acts passed during
the war, which then actually inhibi^^^ recovery of British debts; and that for
the removal of th^^ hibition, a repealing act by the authority of Virginia was
^^^cessary.

However unfounded this position might have been in th^^ here is conclusive
evidence that the fact in Virginia was ^^formable to it; that her courts had
been, ever since the (...) then were, and until a repealing law was passed,
were to continue to be shut against the recovery of British d^^^ When testimony
of this kind was urged by the British ^^^^ter, was it possible for our envoy to
make any solid (...) Who could be supposed to know better than the legislature
of Virginia, the real state of the fact? When that legislature declared it to
be as has been stated, who, or what could contradict it? With what truth has it
been asserted, that "it was at all times perfectly understood" that treaties
controuled the laws of the states?

Additional proof of the contrary is found in the subsequent conduct of
Virginia. On the 12th of December, 1787, the state passed an act repealing all
such acts or parts of acts of the late, as had prevented, or might prevent the
recovery of debts due to British subjects, according to the true intent of the
treaty; but with this proviso, that there should be a suspension of the repeal,
'till the governor, by advice of council had, by proclamation, notified that
Great Britain had delivered up the posts, and was taking measures for the
further fulfillment of the treaty by delivering up the Negroes, or by making
compensation for them. This denotes clearly, that in the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia, there were acts of that state which had prevented and
might prevent the recovery of debts according to the treaty.

It is observable, too, that the resolutions of June, 1784, do not even give
the expectation of a complete repeal of the impeding laws, in the event of
reparation of the breaches of treaty by Great Britain. They only promise such a
modification of them as would permit the payment in such time and man^^^ as
should consist with the exhausted situation of the common^^^lth; that is, not
according to the true intent of the treaty, (...) according to the opinion of
the legislature of Virginia of ^^e abilities of the commonwealth.

As the infraction which these proceedings of Virginia ad^^^, resulted from
acts passed during the war, it of course was ^^eval with the first existence of
the treaty of peace, and seems (...) preclude the possibility of any prior
breach by Great Britain. It has been at least demonstrated, that the detention
of ^^e posts was not such prior breach; as there was no obligation to surrender
'till after the exchange of the ratifications of the definitive treaty in
England.

I pass by the serious contraventions of the treaty in this important article
of the debts, which are of a later date, because they do not affect the
question of the first breach, though they ^^e of great weight to demonstrate
the obligation of the United States to make conpensation.

The argument then, upon the whole, as to the question of the first breach,
stands thus -- It is a great doubt whether the carring away of the negroes was
at all a breach. If it was one, the trespass act of this state preceded it in
date, and went into operation the very moment it was possible to issue process.
The detention of the posts is subsequent to breaches of the article concerning
their recovery of debts on our part. This, i^ the case of South Carolina, is
determined by the date of her act (March 26, 1784) which is before the exchange
of the ratifications of the definitive treaty could have taken place. In that
of Virginia, it results from her own testimony, that impediments to the
recovery of British debts, created by acts passed during the war, continued
from the first moment of the peace until after the year 1787. Or if, contrary
to our own interpretation, we are disposed to adhere to the provisional treaty
as the act from which performance was to date, we were guilty of a breach in
not acting ourselves upon that treaty: a breach, which being co-temporary with
the existence of the treaty, seems not to admit of any prior contravention.
From all which it follows, that take what ground we will, we must be perplexed
to fix the charge of the first breach of the trea^y upon Great Britain.

Let the appeal be to the understandings and hearts of ^^^did men -- men who
have force of mind sufficient to refe^ themselves from the trammels of
prejudice, and who dare (...) look even unpalatable truths in the face. Let
such men pronounce, whether they are still satisfied that Great Britain i^
clearly chargeable with the first breaches of the treaty? -- Whether they are
not, on the contrary, convinced that the question is one so mixed and doubtful,
as to render a warm of it, even on the score of intrinsic merit, expedient on
(...) part? and especially whether they can entertain a particle of doubt, that
it was wiser to wave it than to suffer it to prover final obstacle to the
adjustment of a controversy on which the peace of their country was suspended?
This was undoubte^^ the alternative to our envoy. In the choice he made, the
(...) mate opinion of our enlightened country cannot fail to upplaud his
prudence.

CAMILLUS.

No. V.
THE discussion in the two last numbers has shown, if (...) mistake not, that
this country by no means stands upon such good ground, with regard to the
inexecution of the tr^^ty of peace, as some of our official proceedings have
advanced, and as many among us have too lightly credited. The task of
displaying this truth has been an unwelcome one. As long as a contrary doctrine
was either a mere essay of polemical skill, or a convenient ingredient of
negotiation, it was natural for those who thought differently of it, to prefer
silence to contradiction; but when it is made the engine of great errors, of
national conduct, of excessive pretensions, which forbid a reasonable
accommodation, of national difference, and endangers rupture and war, on
grounds which reason disapproves and prudence condemns, it becomes an
indispensible duty to expose its hollowness and fallacy. -- Reserve then would
be a crime. The true patriot, who never fears to sacrifice popularity to what
he believes to be the cause of public good, cannot hesitate to endeavor to
unmask the error, though with the certainty of incurring the displeasure and
censure of the prejudiced and unthinking.

The disposition to infract the treaty, which, in several particulars,
discovered itself among us, almost as soon as it was known to have been made,
was, from its first appearance, a source of humiliation, regret, and
apprehension to those who could dispassionately estimate the consequences, and
who felt a proper concern for the honor and character of the country. They
perceived that besides loss of reputation, in must sooner or later lead to very
serious embarrassments. They have been hitherto mistaken in no part of their
anticipations; and if their faithful warning voice, now raised to check the
progress of error, is as little listened to as when it was raised to prevent
the commencement of it, there is too much cause to fear, that the experience of
extensive evils may extort regrets which the foresight of an enlightened people
ought to avert.

Citizens of United America! as you value your present enviable lot, rally
round your own good sense! Expel from your confidence, men who have never
ceased to misadvise you! Discard intemperate and illiberal passions! Aspire to
the glory of the greatest triumph which a people can gain, a triumph over
prejudice! Be just, be prudent! Listen impartially to the unadulterated
language of truth! And, above all, guard your peace with anxious vigilance
against all the artful snares which are laid for it! Accompany me with minds
open to conviction, in a discussion of unspeakable importance to your welfare!

Weigh well, as preliminary to further investigation, this momentous
proposition. "PEACE, in the particular situation of this independent country,
is an object of such GREAT and PRIMARY magnitude, that it ought not to be
relinquished, unless the relinquishment be clearly necessary to PRESERVE our
HONOR in some UNEQUIVOCAL point, or to avoid the sacrifice of some RIGHT or
INTEREST of MATERIAL and PERMANENT importance." This is the touchstone of every
question which can come before us, respecting our foreign concerns.

As a general proposition, scarcely any will dispute it; but in the application
of the rule, there is much confusion of ideas; much false feeling and falser
reasoning. The ravings of anger and pride are mistaken for the suggestions of
honor. Thus are we told in a delirium of rage, by a gentleman of
South Carolina, that our envoy should have demanded an unconditional
relinquishment of the western posts as a right; till which was granted, and
until lord Grenville had given orders to lord Dorchester to that effect, open
to be sent to our president, to be by him forwarded, he should not have opened
his lips about the treaty. It was prostrating the dearest rights of freemen,
and laying them prostrate at the feet of royalty.

In a case of incontestible, mutual infractions of a treaty, one of the parties
is to demand, peremptorily of the other, an unconditional performance upon his
part, by way of preliminary and without negotiation. An envoy sent to avert
war, carrying with him the clearest indications of a general solicitude of his
country, that peace might be preserved, was, at the very first step of his
progress, to render hostility inevitable, by exacting, not only what could not
have been complied with, but what must have been rejected with indignation. The
government of Great Britain must have been the most abject on earth, in a case
so situated, to have listened for a moment to such a demand. And because our
envoy did not pursue this frantic course; did not hold the language of an
IMPERIOUS BASHAW to his TREMBLING SLAVE, he is absurdly stigmatized as having
prostrated the rights of freemen, at the foot of royalty. What are we to think
of the state of mind which could produce so extravagant a sally? would a
prudent people have been willing to have entrusted a negotiation which involved
their peace to the author of it? will they be willing to take him as their
guide in a critical emergency of their affairs? No man in the habit of thinking
well, either of mr. Rutledge's head or heart, but must have felt, at reading
the passages of his ^peech, which have been published, pain, suprise, and
mortification. I regret the occasion, and the accessity of and adv^^sion.


True honor is a rational thing. It is as distinguishable from Quixotism, as
true courage from the spirit of bravo. It is possible for one nation to commit
so undisguised and unqualified an outrage upon another, as to render a
negotiation of the question dishonorable. But this seldom, if ever happens. In
most cases, it is consistent with honor to precede rupture by negotiation, and
whenever it is, reason and humanity demand it. Honor cannot be wounded by
consulting moderation. As a general rule, it is not till after it has become
manifest, that reasonable reparation for a clear premediated wrong cannot be
obtained by an amicable adjustment, that honor demands a resort to arms. In all
the questions between us and Great Britain, honor permitted the moderate
course; in those which regard the inexecution of the treaty of peace, there had
undoubtedly been mutual faults. -- It was, therefore, a case for negotiation
and mutual reparation. True honor, which can never be separated from justice,
even requires reparation from us to Great Britain, as well as from her to us.
The injuries we complain of in the present war, were also of a negociable kind.
The first was bottomed on a controverted point in the laws of nations. The
second left open the question, whether the principal injury was a designed act
of the government or a misconstruction of its courts. To have taken, therefore,
the imperious ground which is recommended, in place of that which was taken --
would have been not to follow the admonitions of honor, but to have submitted
to the impulse of passion and phrenzy.

So likewise, when it is asserted that war is preferable to the sacrifice of
our rights and interests, this, to be true, to be rational, must be understood
of such rights and interests as are certain, as are important, such as regard
the honor, security, or prosperity of our country. It is not a right
disputable, or of small consequence, it is not an interest temporary, partial
and inconsiderable, which will justify, in our situation, an appeal to arms.

Nations ought to calculate as well as individuals; to compare evils; and to
prefer the lesser to the greater; to act otherwise, is to act unreasonably;
those who counsel it, are impostors or madmen.

These reflections are of a nature to lead to a right judgment of the conduct
of our envoy in the plan of adjustment to which he has given his assent.

Three objects, as has appeared, were to be aimed at, on behalf of the United
States. 1st, Compensation for Negroes carried away. 2d, Surrender of the
Western Posts. 3d, Compensation for spoliation during the existing war.

Two of these objects, and these in every view the most important, have been
provided for; how fully will be examined hereafter. One of them has been given
up (to wit) compensation for the Negroes.

It has been shown, as I trust, to the conviction of dispassionate men, that
the claim of compensation for the Negroes, is, in point of right, a very
doubtful one; in point of interest, it certainly falls under the description of
partial and inconsiderable; affecting in no respect, the honor or security of
the nation, and incapable of having a sensible influence upon its prosperity.
The pecuniary value of the object is, in a national scale, trifling,

Not having before me the proper documents, I can only speak from memory. But I
do not fear to be materially mistaken in stating that the whole number carried
away, so ascertained as to have afforded evidence for a claim of compensation,
was short of 3000 persons, of whom about 1300 were of sixteen years and
upwards, men, women, and children. Computing these at an average of 150 dollars
per head, which is a competent price, the amount would be 450, 000 dollars, and
not two or three millions, as has been pretended.

It is a fact, which I assert on the best authority, that our envoy made every
effort in this power to establish our construction of the article relating to
this subject, and to obtain compensation; and that he did not relinquish it,
till he became convinced, that to insist upon it would defeat the purpose of
his mission, and leave the controversy between the two countries unsettled.

Finding, at the same time, that the two other points in dispute could be
reasonably adjusted, is there any one who will be rash enough to affirm, that
he ought to have broken off the negotiation on account of the difficulty about
the Negroes? Yes! there are men, who are thus inconsiderate and intemperate!
But will a sober reflecting people ratify their sentence?

(To be Continued.)
[No. II.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- AUGUST 2^, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. CAMILLUS, No. V. -- continued 75 2. -- No. VI. 78 3. -- No. VII. 82 4. --
No. VIII. 90 5. Impressment of American Seamen at Jeremie, by the Commander of
the Hermione, July 4, 1795 98 6. Breach of the Laws of Neutrality, by the
Commander of the Africa, August 1st, 1795 100 7. Resolutions of the Citizens of
Petersburg, August 1st, 1795 102 8. Caius's Address to the President of the
United States, July 21st, 1795 106 9. Cato, No. I. 114 10. -- No. II. 119 11.
Address of a Number of Citizens of Philadelphia to the President of the United
States 122 12. President's Answer to the Address 125 13. Dissent of a Number of
Citizens of Boston, from the Proceedings of their late Town-Meeting 126 14.
Dissent of a Number of Citizens of Trenton from the Proceedings of their late
Town-Meeting 127 15. Proceedings at Trenton, August 13th, 1795 12^ 16.
Proceedings of the Boston Chamber of Commerce, August 11th, 1795 129 17.
Resolutions of the Citizens of the Borough of Your (Pennsylvania) August 17th,
1795 130 18. Caroliniensis 131 19. Resolutions of the Citizens of Richmond,
July 29th, 1795 13^ 20. Report of the Committee chosen by the Citizens of
Savannah, July 29th, 1795 134 21. Resolutions of the Inhabitants of Bordenton,
Crosswicks, Black Horse, and Reckless Town, August 8th, 1795 139 22. An Essay
on Jacobinical Thinkers 141 23. Remarks on the Ild Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty
143
CAMILLUS -- No. V. -- Continued.
WHAT would such a people have said to our envoy, had he returned with this
absurd tale in his mouth! "Countrymen! I could have obtained the surrende of
your posts, and an adequate provision for the reparation of your losses by
unjust captures -- I could have terminated your controversy with Great Britain,
and secured the continuance of your peace, but for one obstacle, a refusal to
compensate for the negroes carried away; on this point the British government
maintained a construction of the treaty different from ours, and adhered to it
with inflexibility. I confess, that there appeared to be much doubt concerning
the true construction: I confess, also, that the object was of inconsiderable
value. Yet it made a part of our claims; and I thought the hazards of war
preferable to a renunciation of it."

What would his adversaries have replied to him on such an occasion? No
ridicule would have been too strong, no reproach too bitter. Their triumph
would have been complete: for he would have been deservedly left without
advocate, without apologist.

It cannot admit of a serious doubt, that the affair of the negroes, was too
questionable in point of right, too insignificant in point of interest, to have
been suffered to be an impediment to the immense objects which were to be
promoted by an accommodation of differences acceptable in other respects. There
was no general principle of national right or policy to be renounced. No
consideration of honor forbid the renunciation, every calculation of interest
invited to it. The evils of war for one month would outweigh the advantage, if
at the end of it there was a certainty of attainment.

But was war the alternative? Yes, war or disgrace.

The United States and Great Britain had been brought to issue. The recent
spoliations on our commerce, superadded to the evils of a protracted Indian
war, connected with the detention of the western posts, and accompanied with
indications of a design to contract our boundaries, obstructing the course of
our settlements and the enjoyment of private rights, and producing serious and
growing discontent in our western country, rendered it indispensable, that
there should be a settlement of old differences, and a reparation of new
wrongs; or, that the sword should vindicate our rights.

This was certainly, and with reason, the general sense of our country, when
our envoy left it. There are many indications that it was the opinion of our
government; and it is to be inferred, that our envoy understood the alternative
to be as has been stated.

Indeed what else could be contemplated? after the depredations which had been
committed upon our commerce, after the strong sensibility which had been
discovered upon the o^casion in and out of our public councils, after an envoy
extraordinary had been sent to terminate differences and obtain reparation; if
nothing had resulted, was there any choice but reprisals? should we not have
rendered ourselves ridiculous and contemptible in the eyes of the whole world,
by forbearing them?

It is curious to ^^^serve the inconsistency of certain (...). They reprobate
the treaty as incompatible with our honor, and yet they affect to believe an
abortion of the negotiation would not have led to war. If they are fincere,
they must thi^^ that national honor consists in perpetually railing,
compl^^^^ing, blustering, and submitting. For my part, much as I (...) precate
war, I entertain no doubt that it would have been (...) duty to meet it with
decision, had negotiation sailed; that is due regard to our honor, our rights
and our interests would have enjoined it upon us. Nor would a pusillanimous
pass^^^ness have saved us from it. So unsettled a state of things would have
led to fresh injuries and aggravations; and circumstamo^^ too powerful to be
resisted, would have dragged us into (...) We should have lost our honor
without preserving our pe^^^ Nations in similar situations have no option but
to accom^^^ date differences, or to fight. Those which have strong moti^^^ to
avoid war, should, by their moderation, facilitate the a^^ commodation of
differences. This is a rule of good sense, a^ maxim of sound policy.

But the misfortune is, that men will oppose imagination (...) fact. Though we
see Great Britain predominant on the occea^^^ though we observe her
pertinaciously resisting the idea of pacification with France, amidst the
greatest discourageme^^^; though we have employed a man whose sagacity and
integrity have been hitherto undisputed, and of a character far from ^^^^ible,
to ascertain what was practicable; though circumstan^^s favored his exertions;
though much time and pains were bestowed upon the subject; though there is not
only his testi^^ny, but the testimony of other men who were immediately (...)
the scene, and in whom there is every reason to confide, that all was attained
which was attainable: yet we still permis ourselves to imagine, that more and
better could have been done, and that by taking even now a high and menacing
tone, Great Britain may be brought to our feet.

Even a style of politeness in our envoy has been construed to his
disadvantage. Because he did not mistake strut for dignity, and rudeness for
spirit; because he did not, by petulence and asperity, inlist the pride of the
British court against the success of his mission, he is represented as having
humiliated himself and his nation. It is forgotten that mildness in the manner,
and sirmness in the thing, are most compatible with true dignity, and almost
always go further than harshness and stateliness.

Suppositions that more could be done by displaying, what is called, greater
spirit, are not warranted by facts. It would be extremely imprudent on that
basis, to trust ourselves to a surther experiment -- to the immense
vicissitudes in the affairs of Europe, which from moment to moment may
essentially vary the relative situations of the contending parties. If there
ever was a state of things which demanded extraordinary circumspection, and
forbade a spirit of adventure, it is that of the United States at the existing
juncture, viewed in connection with the present very singular and incalculable
posture of Europe.

But it is asked, to avoid S^ylla, may we not run upon Charybdis? -- If the
treaty should preserve our peace with Britain, may it not interrupt it with
France? -- I answer, that to me there appears no room for apprehension. It will
be shown in the course of the discussion, that the treaty interferes in no
particular with our engagements to France, and will make no alteration whatever
in the state of things between us and her, except as to the selling prizes in
our ports, which, not being required by treaty, was originally permitted merely
because there was no law to forbid it, and which being confined to France was
of very questionable propriety on the principles of neutrality, and has been a
source of dissatisfaction to the other belligerent powers. This being the case,
no cause of umbrage is given to France by the treaty, and is as contrary to her
interest as to inclination, wantonly to seek a quarrel with us. Prostrate
indeed were our situation, if we could not, without offending France, make a
treaty with another power, which merely tended to extinguish controversy, and
to regulate the rules of commercial intercourse, and this not only without
violating any duty to France, but without giving any preference to another. It
is astonishing that those who affect so much nicety about national honor, do
not feel the extreme humiliation of such an idea. As to the denomination of
alliance with Great Britain which has been given to the treaty, it is an insult
to the understandings of the people, to call it by such a name. There is not a
tittle of it which warrants the appellation.

CAMILLUS.

No. VI.
THERE is one more objection to the treaty for what it does not do, which
requires to be noticed. This is a^ omission to provide against the impressment
of our seamen.

It is certain that our trade has suffered embarrassments in this respect, and
that there have been abuses which have operated very oppressively upon our
seamen; and all will join in the wi^^ that they could have been guarded against
in future by the treaty.

But it is easier to desire this, than to see how it could have been done. A
general stipulation against the impressment of our seamen would have been
nugatory, if not derogatory. Our right to an exemption is perfect by the laws
of nations, and a contrary right is not even pretended by Great Britain. The
difficulty has been, and is, to fix a rule of evidence, by which to
discriminate our seamen from theirs, and by the (...) crimination to give ours
protection, without covering theirs in our service. It happens that the two
nations speak the ^ame language, and in every exterior circumstance closely
resemble each other; that many of the natives of Great Britain and Ireland are
among our citizens, and that others, without being properly our citizens, are
employed in our vessels.

Every body knows, that the safety of Great Britain depends upon her marine.
This was never more emphatically the cafe, than in the war in which she is now
engaged. Her very e^istence as an independent power, seems to rest on a
maritime superiority.

In this situation, can we be surprised that there are difficulties in bringing
her to consent to any arrangement which would enable us, by receiving her
seamen into our employment, to detain them from her service? Unfortunateds;
there can be devised no method of protecting our seamen which does not involve
that danger to her. Language and appearance, instead of being a guide, as
between other nations, are between us and Great Britain, sources of mistake and
deception. The most familiar experience in the ordinary affairs of society,
proves, that the oaths of parties interested cannot be fully relied upon.
Certificates of citizenship, by officers of one party, would be too open to the
possibility of collusion and imposition, to expect that the other would admit
them to be conclusive. If inconclusive, there must be a discretion to the other
party which would destroy their efficacy.

In whatever light they may be viewed, there will be found an intrinsic
difficulty in devising a rule of evidence, sase for both parties, and
consequently, in establishing one by treaty. No nation would readily admit a
rule which would make it depend on the good faith of another, and the integrity
of its agents, whether her seamen, in time of war, might be drawn from her
service, and transferred to that of a neutral power. Such a rule between Great
Britain and us, would be peculiarly dangerous, on account of circumstances, and
would facilitate a transfer of seamen from one party to another. Great Britain
has accordingly perseveringly declined any definitive arrangement on the
subject; notwithstanding earnest and reiterated efforts of our government.

When we consider heartily the peculiar difficulties which various
circumstances of similitude, between the people of the two countries, oppose to
a satisfactory arrangement, and that to the belligerent party, it is a question
of national safety, to the neutral party a question of commercial convenience
and individual security, we shall be the less disposed to think the want of
such a provision as our wishes would dictate, a blemish in the treaty.

The truth seems to be, that from the nature of the thing, it is matter of
necessity to leave it to occasional and temporary expedients -- to the effects
of special interpositions from time to time, to procure the correction of
abuses; and if the abuse becomes intolerable, to the ultima ratio; the good
faith of the parties, and the motives which they have to respect the rights of
each other, and to avoid causes of offense, and vigilance in noting and
remonstrating against the irregularities which are committed, are probably the
only peaceable sureties of which the case is susceptible.

Our minister plenipotentiary, Mr. Pinckney, it is well known, has long had
this matter in charge, and has strenuously exerted himself to have it placed
upon some acceptable sooting; but his endeavors have been unsuccessful,
further than to mitigate the evil by some additional checks, and by drawing the
attention of the British government to the observance of more caution. A more
sensible effect of our representations has been lately experienced; and with
attention and vigilance, that effect may be continued, and perhaps increased.
But there is reason to sear that it would constantly be found impracticable to
establish an efficacious conventional guard.

I proceed now to the examination of the several articles in the treaty, in the
order in which they stand.

The first contains merely a general declaration that there shall be peace and
friendihip between the contracting parties, the countries and people of each,
without exception of persons or places.

One would have imagined that this article, at least, would have escaped a
formal objection; however it might have been secretly viewed as the most sinful
of all, by those who pant after war and enmity between the two countries.
Nothing but the fact could have led to a farmise that it was possible for it to
have been deemed exceptionable, and nothing can better display the rage for
objection, which actuates the adversaries of the treaty, than their having
invented one against so innocent a provision.

But the committeee appointed by a meeting at Charleston, (South Carolina) hare
sagaciously discovered, that this article permits "the unconditional return to
our country of all persons who were proscribed during the late war."

With all but men determined to be dissatissied, it would be a sufficient
answer to such an objection to say, that this article is a formula in almost
every treaty on record, and that the consequence attributed to it was never
before dreamt of, though other nations besides ourselves have had their
proscriptions and their banishments.

But this is not all -- our treaty of peace with Great Britain in 1783, has an
equivalent slipulation in these words (article 6) "there shall be a firm and
perpetual peace between his Britannic majesty and the said states, and between
the subjects of the one, and the citizens of the other." In calling this an
equivalent stipulation, I speak with reference to the objection which is made.
The argument to support that objection would be to this effect; "Exiles and
criminals are regarded as within the peace of a country; but the people of each
are, by this article, placed within the peace of the other; therefore
proscribed persons are restored to the peace of the United States, and so lose
the character of exiles and criminals." Hence the argument will turn upon the
word "peace" -- the word "friendship" will have no influence upon the question.
In other respects there is no difference, in substance, between the two
articles. For the terms "people," "subjects," "citizens," as used in the two
treaties, are synonimous. If, therefore, the last treaty stipulates that there
shall be peace between the governments, countries, and people of the two
nations, the first stipulates what is equivalent, that there shall be peace
between the two governments, and the subjects and citizens of each. The
additional words, without exception of persons and places, can make no
difference, being merely surplusage If A says to B, "I will give you all the
money in this purse," the gist is as complete as if he had said, "I give you
all the money in this purse, without exception of a single dollar."

But the object of the stipulation, and the subject of the objection, have no
relation to each other. -- National stipulations are to be considered in the
sense of the laws of nations. Peace, in the sense of those laws, defines a
state which is opposite to WAR. Peace, in the sense of the municipal laws,
defines a state which is opposite to that of crimm^lity. They are,
consequently, different things; and a subject of Great Britain, by committing a
crime, may put himself out of the peace of our government, in the sense of our
municipal laws, while there might be perfect peace with him, in the sense of
the laws of nations; and vice versa, there might be war with him, in the sense
of the laws of nations, and peace in that of the municipal laws.

The punishment of a subject of Great Britain as a felon, would certainly not
constitute a state of war between the parties, nor interfere with the peace
which is stipulated by this article; though it is declared that it shall be
inviolable, and might as well be affirmed to prevent the punishment of future,
as of former criminals.

But who, in the contemplation of the laws of the respective states, are the
proscribed persons? they must have been understood to have been subjects or
citizens of the states which proscribed them -- consequently cannot be presumed
to be comprehended in an article which slipulates peace between the nations and
their respective citizens.

This is not a stipulation of peace between a nation and its own citizens; nor
can the idea of expatriation be admitted to go so far as to destroy the
relation of citizen, as regards amenability for a crime. To this purpose, at
least, the offender must remain a citizen.

There can hardly have been a time when a treaty was formed between two
nations, when one or the other had not exiled criminals or sugutives from
justice, which it would have been unwilling to remilate. Yet this was (...)
^cemed an obstacle to the article, nor has an immunity from punishment (...)
been claimed under it, not is there the least ground to assent that it might be
claimed under it.

It follows that the objection which has been taken to this article is wholly
without foundation. It is humiliating to the human understanding, or
disreputable to the human heart, the similar objections should come from
sensible men; it is disg^^ful to have bo resure them. The regard I feel for
some of these who have brought it forward, makes it a painful task. How great
is the triumph of passion over the judgment, on this ^casion! From a note of
the editor of the Argus, it is inferred, that (...) piece has been sent to him,
charging the writer of Camillus (...) having liberated some person from jail to
insult or fight those who are called respectable whigs -- The suggestion is a
total falschood. The writer of Camillus has not recently liberated any person
(...) jail -- though if he had, it would not be the first instance that ^^^ble
actions have been misconstrued and imputed to him as cri^^. This is a specimen
of the detestable arts which are employed to (...) resentment against the
supposed author of C^^illus; what does all this mean?


CAMILLUS

No. VII.
THE second article of the treaty stipulates, that his (...) tannic majesty
will withdraw all his troops and garri^^^ from all posts and places within the
boundary lines assigned (...) the treaty of peace to the United States; and
that this eva^^tion shall take place on or before the first day of June, 1796
the United States in the mean time, at their discretion, extending their
settlements to any part within the said boundary line, ^cept within the
precincts or jurisdictions of any of the said posts, that all settlers and
traders within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said posts, shall continue
to enjoy, unmolested, all th^^ property of every kind, and shall be protected
therein; (...) they shall be at liberty to remain there, or to remove with all
(...) any part of their effects; also to sell their lands, houses, (...)
effects, or to retain the property thereof at their discretion; (...) such of
them as shall continue to reside within the said boundary lines, shall not be
compelled to become citizens of the United States, but shall be at liberty to
do so, if they think proper, making and declaring their election within a year
after the evacuation; and that those who should continue after the expiration
of a year, without having declared their intention of remaining subjects of his
Britannic majesty, shall be considered as having elected to become citizens of
the United States.

This article, which accomplishes a primary object of our envoy's mission, and
one of primary importance to the United States, has been as much clamoured
against as if it had made a formal cession of the posts to Great Britain. On
this point an uncommon degree of art has been exerted, and with no small
success. The value of the principal thing obtained has been put out of sight by
a misrepresentation of incidental circumstances.

But the fact is, nevertheless, that an object has been accomplished, of vast
consequence to our country. The most important desiderata in our concerns with
foreign powers are, the possession of the western posts, and a participation in
the navigation of the river Mississippi. More or fewer of commercial privileges
are of vastly inferior moment. The force of circumstances will do all we can
reasonably wish in this respect; and, in a short time, without any steps that
may convulse our trade or endanger our tranquillity, will carry us to our goal.

The recovery of the western posts will have many important consequences. It
will extinguish a source of controversy with Great Britain, which, at a period,
not distant, must have inevitably involved the two countries in a war, and the
thing was becoming every day, more and more urgent. It will enable us
effectually to control the hostilities of the northern and western Indians,
and in so doing will have a material influence on the southern tribes. It will
therefore tend to rescue the country from what is at present its greatest
scourge, Indian wars. When we consider that these wars have, four years past,
taken an extra million annually from our revenue, we cannot be insensible of
the importance of terminating that source of expense. This million turned to
the redemption of our debt, would contribute to complete its extinquishment in
about twenty years. This is a rough calculation, but it cannot materially err.
The benefits of tranquillity to our frontier, exempting its inhabitants from
the complieated horrors of savage warfare, speak too loudly to our humanity, as
well as to our policy, to need a commentary.

The advantages of the recovery of the posts do not stop here; an extension of
trade is to be added to the catalogue. This, however, need only be mentioned at
this time, as it will come again into view in considering the third article.

But two consequences, not commonly adverted to, require particular notice in
this place.

There is just ground of suspicion, corroborated by various concurring
circumstances, that Great Britain has entertained the project of contracting
our boundaries to the Ohio. This has appeared in Canada -- at the British
garrisons -- at the Indian towns -- at Philadelphia, and at London. The
surrender of the posts for ever cuts up by the roots, this pernicious project.
The whole of our western interests are immediately and deeply concerned in the
question.

The harmonious and permanent connection of our westen with our Atlantic
country, materially depends on our possession of the western posts. Already had
great discontent been engendered in that country by their detention. That
discontent was increasing and rankling daily. It was actually one of the
aliments of the insurrection in the western parts of Pennsylva^^^. While the
posts remained in the hands of Great Britain, dangerous tamperings with the
inhabitants of that country were to be apprehended -- a community of views
between Great Britain and Spain might have taken place, and by force and
sedition, events formidable to our general union might have been hazarded. The
disposition or prevention of that community of views, is a point of the
greatest moment in our system of national policy. It presses us to terminate
differences, and extinguish misonderstandings with Great Britain; -- it urges
^s to improve the favorable moment, and stamps with the charge of madness, the
efforts to let go the hold which the treaty, (...) mutually ratified, would
give us.

Whoever will cast his eye upon the map of the United States, will survey the
position of the western posts, their relations to our western waters, and their
general bearings upon our western country; and is at the same time capable of
making the reslections, which an accurate view of the subject suggests, will
discover multiplied confirmations of the position, that the possession of those
posts by us, has an intimate connection with the preservation of union between
our western and Atlantic territories; and whoever can appreciate the immense
mischiefs of a disunion, will feel the prodigious value of the acquas^^on ^o
such a man, the question may be confidently put: Is there any thing in the
treaty conceded by us to Great Britain, to be placed in competition with this
single acquisition? The answer could not sail to be in the negative.

But it is said by way of objection, that admitting the posts will be
surrendered at the time stipulated, it is no acquisition by this treaty: it is
only the enjoyment of a right which was secured by the treaty of peace.

With as much good sense might it be said, that the stipulation of reparation
for the spoliation of our property, or even immediate actual reparation, if it
had been obtained, was nothing gained; because the laws of nations gave us a
right to such reparation; and it might in this way be proved to have been
impossible for our envoy to have effected any thing useful or meritorious.

Let us see what is the real state of the case. Great Britain had engaged by
the treaty of peace, to surrender the western posts with all convenient speed;
but without fixing a precise time. For the cause, or on the pretext of our not
having complied with the treaty on our part, especially in not removing the
impediments which the antecedent laws of particular states, opposed to the
recovery of British debts, she delayed, and afterward refused to make the
surrender; and when our envoy left this country, there was too much appearance
of an intention on her part, to detain them indefinitely, and this after having
actually kept them ten years. The treaty of peace was consequently in this
particular suspended, if not superseded. It was either to be reinstated by a
new agreement, or enforced by arms. The first our envoy has effected; he has
brought Great Britain to abandon the dispute, and to fix a precise, determinate
time when, at furthest, the posts are to be delivered up. It is therefore to
this new agreement, that we shall owe the enjoyment of them, and it is of
course, entitled to the merit of having obtained them; it is a positive
ingredient in its value, which cannot be taken from it; and it may be added,
that this is the first time that the merit of procuring, by negotiation,
restitution of a right withheld, was ever denied to the instrument which
procured it.

But the picture given of the situation of Great Britain, to warrant the
inferences which are drawn, is exaggerated and false. It cannot be denied that
she is triumphant on the ocean; that the acquisitions which she has made upon
France, are hitherto greater than those which France has made upon her. If, on
the one hand, she owes an immense debt, on the other she possesses in immense
credit, which there is no symptom of being i^paited. -- British credit has
become, in a British mind, an article of faith, and is no longer an object of
reason. How long it may last, how far it may go, is incalculable. But it is
evident, that it still affords prodigious resources, and that it is likely for
some time to come, to continue to afford them. I^ addition to this, it is a
well ascertained fact, that her government possesses, internally, as much
vigor, and has as much national support, as it perhaps ever had at any former
period (...) her history. Alarmed by the unfortunate excesses in France, most
men of property cling to the government, and carry with them the great bulk of
the nation, almost the whole of the farming interest, and much the greatest
proportion of other industrious classes. Her manufactures, though probably
wounded by the war, are still in a comparatively flourishing condition. They
suffice not only for her own supply, but for the full ^^tent of foreign demand,
and the markets for them have (...) been materially contracted by the war. --
Her foreign comment continues to be immense; as a specimen of it, it may be
mentioned, that the ships from India this year, announced to have been seen
upon or near the British coast, amounted to 35 in number, computed to be worth
between four and five millions sterling. It is no light circumstance in the
estimate of her (...) sources, that a vast preponderancy in that quarter of the
g^^^ continues to nourish her wealth and power.

If from a view of Great Britain, singly, we pass to a view (...) her in her
foreign connections, we shall find no cause to o^^ sider her as a prostrate
nation. Among her allies, are the (...) greatest powers of Europe (France
excepted) namely, R^^^ and Austria, or the emperor: Spain and Sardinia continue
(...) make a common cause with her. There is no power of Eu^^^ which has
displayed a more uniform character of persevera^^^ than Austria; for which she
has very strong motives on the present occasion. Russia, too, is remarkable for
her stead^^^^ to her purpose, whatever it may be. It is true, that here^^^^^
she has not discovered much zeal in the coalition, but (...) are symptoms of
her becoming more closely and cordially engaged. If she does, she is a great
weight in the scale.

Against this will be set the astonishing victories, heroic ^^ploits, and vast
armies of France, her rapid conquests to the Rhine, the total reduction of
Holland, the progress of (...) arms in Spain and Italy, the detaching of the
king of Pr^^^^ from the coalition, and the prospect of detaching some others of
the German princes; and it will be added, that the continental enemies of
France appear exhausted, despairing and enable to continue the war.

This, if offered only to show that there is no probability that the enemies of
France can succeed in the orginal object of the war against her, or can divest
her of her acquisitions on the continent, has all the force that may be desired
to be given to it; but when it is used to prove that the situation of Great
Britain is so desperate and humbled as to oblige her to receive from France, or
the United States, any conditions which either of them may think fit to impose,
the argument is carried infinitely too far. It is one thing for a country to be
in a posture not to receive the law from others, and a very different thing for
her to be in a situation which obliges others to receive the law from her, and
what is still stronger, from all her friends. France evidently cannot annoy
Russia -- she cannot, without great difficulty, from their geographical
position, make any further acquisitions upon the territories of Austria.
Britain and her possessions are essentially safe, while she maintains a decided
maritime superiority. As long as this is the case, even supposing her abandoned
by all her allies, she never can be in the situation which is pretended by the
opposers of the treaty.

But in describing the situation of France, only one side of the medal is
presented. There is another side far less flattening, and which, in order to
come to a just conclusion, must be impartially viewed.

If the allies of Great Britain are fatigued and exhausted, France cannot be in
a better condition. The efforts of the latter, in proportion to intrinsic
resources, have, no doubt, been much greater than those of the former. It is a
consequence from this, physically certain, that France must be still more
fatigued and exhausted, even than her adversaries. Her acquisitions cannot
materially vary this conclusion: the low countries, long the theater of the
war, must have been pretty well emptied before they fell into her hands.
Holland is an artificial power; her life and strength were in her credit; this
perished with her reduction. Accordingly the succors extracted from her,
compared with the scale of the war, have been insignificant.

But it is conjectured, that as much has not been done as might have been done;
that restitution of the posts has not been procured, but only a promise to
restore them at a remote period, in exchange for a former promise, which had
been violated. That there is no good ground of reliance upon the fulfillment of
this new promise, for the performance of which there ought to have been some
surety or guarantee. That the restitution of the posts ought to have been
accompanied with indemnification for the detention, and for the expenses of the
Indian wars which have been occasioned by that detention, and by the
instigation of British intrigue. That it was better to go to war than to
relinquish our claim to such indemnification; or if our present circumstances
did not recommend this, it was better to wait till it was more convenient to us
(...) enforce our claims, than to give them up. -- These are the declamations
by which this part of the treaty is arraigned. Let us see if they are the
random effusions of enthusiasm, or the rational dictates of sound policy.

As to the suggestion, that more might have been done than was done, it must of
necessity be more conjecture and imagination. If the picture given of the
situation of Great Britain, was better justified by facts than it is, it would
not follow that the suggestion is true; for the thing would depend not on the
real situation of the country, but on the opinion entertained of it by its own
administration, on the personal character of the prince and of his council; on
the degree i^ which they were influenced by pride and passion, or by reason.
The hypothesis, that the dispositions of a government are conformable with its
situation, it as fallacious a one as can be entertained. It is to suppose,
contrary to every day's experience, that cabinets are always wise. It is, on
the part of those who draw the inference, to suppose, that a cabinet, the most
violent, rash, and foolish, of Europe, is at the same time moderate and prudent
enough to act according to the true situation of the country. Who of our
enthusiasts, reasoning from his view of the abased condition of Great Britain,
has not long since imagined that she ought to be on her knees to France, suing
for mercy and forgiveness? Yet how different hitherto is the fact! If we
carefully peruse the speeches of the leading members of the convention, we
shall observe the mena^^ against Britain frequently interspersed with
invitations to peace; while the British government maintains a proud and
distant reserve, repels every idea of peace, and inflexibly pursues the path of
war. If the situation of Europe in general, and of Great Britain in particular,
as is pretended, authorized us (...) expect whatever we chose, how happens it
that France, with all her victories, has not yet been able to extort peace?

As to the true position of France, we are not left to mere inference. All the
official reports, all the private accounts from thence acknowledge a slate of
extreme embarrassment and distress; an alarming d^rangement of the finances,
and a scarcity not distant from famine. so this are to be added, a continuance
of violent and destructive conflicts of parties, and the unextinguishable
ember^ of insurrection.

This fair comparison of the relative situation of the contending parties,
will, I know, b^ stigmatized as blazoning the strength and resources of Great
Britain, and depreciating the advantages of France. But the cant phrases of
party cannot alter the nature of truth -- nor will they prevent the people of
the United States from listening impartially to it, or from discerning that it
is a mark of fidelity to their interests, to counteract misrepresentation, by
placing facts fairly before them, and a duty which they owe to themselves, and
which they cannot omit to perform without betraying their own interests, to
receive them heartily, and weigh them maturely.

The conclusion is, that all those highly-charged declamations which describe
Great Britain to us as vanquished and humbled; as ready to pass under the yoke
at command, and to submit to any conditions which we may think fit to
prescribe, are either the chimeras of overheated imaginations, or the
sabrication of impostors; and if listened to, can have no other effect than to
inspire a delusive presumption, and a dangerous temerity.

But to judge the better of the extravagance of these declamations, it will be
useful to go back to the periods when the negotiation began and ended. Our
envoy arrived in England and entered upon the business of his mission, at the
moment when there was a general elation on account of the naval victory gained
by Lord How, and previous to those important successes, which have terminated
in the conquest of Holland; and the treaty was concluded by the 19th of
Novemver last, prior to the last mentioned event, and the defection of the king
of Pr^ffia. The posture of things at the time it was in negotiation, and not at
this time, is the standard by which to try its merits; and it may be observed,
that it is probable the negotiation received its first impression, and even its
general outline anterior to the principal part of the disasters sustained by
the coalesced powers in the course of the last campaign.

It may not be improper to add, that if we credit the representations of our
envoy, Great Britain manifested similar dispositions with regard to the treaty
at the commencement as at the close of the negotiation: whence it will follow,
that too much has been attributed in this country to the victories of France.

The subject of the second article will be resumed and concluded in the next
number.

CAMILLUS.

No. VIII.
ONE of the particulars, in which our envoy is alleged to have fallen short of
what might or ought to have been done, respects the time for the surrender of
the western posts. It is alleged, that there ought either to have been an
immediate surrender, or some guarantee or surety for the performance of the new
promise. Both parts of the alternative presuppose that Great Britain was to
have no will upon the subject; that no circumstances of security or convenience
to her were to be consulted; that our envoy was not to negociate, but to
command. How unsubstantial the foundation on which this course of proceeding is
recommended, has been already developed.

The fact was, that our envoy pressed an early evacuation of the posts; but
there was an inflexible adherence, on the other side, to the term limited in
the treaty. The reasons understood to have been assigned for it, were to this
effect, viz. That according to the course of the Indian trade, it was customary
(...) spread through the nations, goods to a large amount; the returns for
which could not be drawn into Canada, in a sh^^^er period than was proposed to
be fixed for the evacuation; that the impression which the surrender of all the
posts to American garrisons might make on the minds of the Indians, could not
be foreseen; that there was the greatest reason for caution, as, on a former
occasion, it had been intimated to them by public agents of the United states,
that they had been fors^^^ and given up by the British government; that the
protection promised on our part, however sincere, and however competent in
other respects, might not be sufficient in the first instance to prevent the
embarrassment which might ensue; that (...) these reasons the traders ought to
have time to conclude th^^ adventures, which were predicated upon the existing
state of things; that they would in future calculate upon the new state of
things; but that, in the mean time, the care of government ought not to be
withdrawn from them.

There is ground to believe, that there were representatie^^ on behalf of the
Canada traders, alleging a longer term than that which was adopted in the
treaty, to be necessary to wind up and adapt their arrangements to the new
state of things; and that the term suggested by them was abridged several
months. And it may not be useless to observe, as explanatory to the reasons
given, that in fact it is the course of the trade (...) give long credits to
the Indians, and that the returns for good furnished in one year, only come in
the next year.

What was to be done in this case? Was the negotiation to break off, or was the
delay to be admitted? The last was preferred by our envoy; and the preference
was rightly judged.

The consequence of breaking off the negotiation has been stated. No reasonable
man will doubt, that delay was preferable to war, if there be good ground of
reliance, that the stipulation will be fulfilled at the appointed time. Let us
calmly examine this point.

The argument against it, is drawn from the breach of the former promise. To be
authorized to press this argument, we ought to be sure that all was right on
our part. -- After what has been offered on this subject, are we still
convinced that this was the case? Are we able to say, that there was nothing in
our conduct which furnished a ground for that of Great Britain? Has it not been
shown to be a fact, that, from the arrival of the provisional articles in this
country, till after the ratification thereof, by the definitive treaty, acts of
states interdicting the recovery of British debts, and other acts militating
against the treaty, continued in operation? Can we doubt, that subjects of
Great Britain, affected by these acts, carried complaints to the ears of their
government? Can we wonder, if they made serious impressions there, if they
produced dissatisfaction and distrust? Is it very extraordinary, if they
excited the idea of detaining the posts as a pledge, till there were better
indications on our part? Is it surprising, if the continuance of these acts,
and the addition of others, which were new and positive breaches of the treaty,
prolonged the detention of the posts? --

In fine, was the delay in surrendering so entirely destitute of cause, so
unequivocal a proof of a persidious character, as to justify the conclusion,
that no future dependence can be made on the promises of the British
government? Discerning men will not hastily subscribe to this conclusion.

Mutual charges of breach of faith are not uncommon between nations: yet this
does not prevent their making new stipulations with each other, and relying
upon their performance. The argument from the breach of one promise, if real,
to the breach of every other, is not supported by experience; and if adopted as
a general rule, would multiply, infinitely, the impediments to accord and
agreement among nations.

The truth is, that though nations will too often evade their promises on
colorable pretexts, yet few are so profligate as to do it without such
pretexts. In clear cases, self-interest dictates a regard to the obligations of
good faith: nor is there any thing in the history of Great Britain which
warrants the opinion, that she is more unmindful than other nations, of her
character for good faith.

Yet she must be so, and in an extreme degree, if she be capable of breaking,
without real cause, a second promise on the same point, after the termination,
by a new treaty, of an old dispute concerning it, and this too on the basis of
mutual reparation. It would indicate a destitution of principle, a contempt of
character, much beyond the usual measure, and to an extent which it may be
affirmed is entirely improbable.

It is a circumstance of some moment in the question, that the second promise
is free from the vagueness of the first, a to the time of execution -- It is
not to be performed with (...) convenient speed, but by a day certain, which
cannot be exceed. This would give point to violation, and render it unequivocal.

Another argument, against the probability of performance has been deduced from
the supposed deficiency of good reason for the delay, which is represented as
evidence of want of ^^^cerity in the promise.

Besides the reasons which were assigned for that delay, th^^^ are others that
may be conjectured to have operated, which (...) would not have been equally
convenient to avo^^; but wh^^^ serve to explain the delay different from the
supposition of (...) having been calculated for ultimate evasion. If, as we
have (...) too much cause suspected, Great Britain, or her representation in
Canada, whether with or without orders, had really co^^^nauced the hostilities
of the western Indians, it was to be ^^^pected, that she should think it
incumbent upon her, to (...) them sufficient time to make peace, before an
evacuation (...) the posts should put them entirely in our power. She might
otherwise, have provoked them to hostilities against her (...) ^ettlements, and
have kindled in their minds, inextingui^^^ resentments. It was not certain, how
soon a peace should (...) brought about; and it might be supposed, that the
dispo^^^ to it on our part, might be weakened or strengthened, by (...)
proximity or remoteness of the period of the surrender. M^^^ over, some
considerable time might be requisite, to prep^^^ those establishments for the
security of Canada, which the (...) linquishment of the posts on our side,
would be deemed (...) render necessary.

The latter motive is one, not justly objectionable: the f^^mer implies an
embarrassment, resulting from a culpable policy, which was entitled to no
indulgence from us, but which nevertheless, must have had a pretty imperi^^^
(...) ^^^fluence on the conduct of the other party, and must have created an
ob^^^ to a speedy surrender, not easy to be s^rmoanted. Taken together, we find
in the reasons assigned, and in those which may be presumed to have operated, a
solution of the pertinacity of Great Britain on the subject of time, without
^^^p^^ching, on that account, the sincerity of the promise to surrender.

But we have very strong holds, for the performance of this promise, upon the
interest of Great Britain: 1st. The interest which every nation has, in not
entirely forfeiting its reputation for honor and fidelity. 2d. The interest
which results from the correlative stipulation with regard to the
indemnification for the British debts, a point upon which there will be no
inconsiderable mercantile sensibility. 3d. The interest of preserving peace
with this country, the interruption of which, after all that has passed, could
not fail to attend the non-surrender of the posts at the stipulated time.

It is morally certain, that circumstances will every day add strength to this
last motive. -- Time has already done much for us, and will do more. Every
hour's continuance of the war in Europe, must necessarily add to the
inconveniences of a rupture with this country, and to the motives which Great
Britain must feel, to avoid an increase of the number of her enemies, in desire
peace, and, if obtained, to preserve it.

The enemies of the treaty, upon their own calculations, can hardly dispute,
that if the war continues another year after the present, the probable
situation of Great Britain, will be a complete security, for her compliance
with her promise, to surrender the posts. But ^^t us suppose, that a general
peace takes place in Europe this winter, what may then be the disposition of
Great Britain in June next, as to war or peace with this country?

I answer, that the situation will be, of all others, that which is most likely
to indispose her to a war with us. There is no juncture, at which war is more
unwelcome to a nation, than immediately after the experience of another war,
which has required great exertions, and has been exp^nsive, bloody, and
c^lamitous. The minds of all men then dread the renewal of so great an evil,
and are disposed rather to make sacrifices to peace than to plunge afresh into
hostilities. The situation of Great Britain, at the end of the war, in which
she is now engaged, is likely to be the most discouraging that can be im^^gined
to the provocation of new wars. Here we may discover (...) powerful security
for the performance of her stipu^ations.

As to the ^^ei of a gua^^ntee or surety for the sulsilm^^^ of the promise, it
cannot be s^rioully b^^^ved that it was ob^^^^ble. It would have been an
admission of the party, that there was a well founded distrust of its faith. To
consent to it, therefore, would have been to subscribe to its own humiliation
and disgrace, the expectation of which has been shown to be ri^^culous.

But why was there not equally good reason that we should have given a
guarantee or surety for the performance of (...) new promise, with regard to
the debts? And if there was (...) have been reciprocity, where should we have
convemently ^o^^^ that guarantee or surety? Should we have thought it very
^^putable to ourselves, to have been obliged to furnish it?

The arguments of the opposers of the treaty, are extre^^^ly at variance with
each other. On the one hand, they rep^^sent it as fraught with advantages to
Great Britain, without equivalents to the United States -- as a premeditated
scheme to sacrifice our trade and navigation to hers -- as a plan dictated by
her, for drawing the two countries into close connection and alliance, and for
making our interests subservient to hers; on the other hand, they tell us, that
there is no security for the surrender of the po^^s, according to stipulation.
How is (...) one thing to be reconciled with the other? If the treaty is such
(...) immense boon to Great Britain, if it be such a masterpiece (...)
political craft on her side, can there be any danger that ^^^e (...) destroy
her favorite work, by not performing the conditio^^^ (...) which its e^^icacy
and duration must depend? There is no ^^^sition better settled, than that the
breach of any article (...) treaty by one party, gives the other an option to
consider of (...) whole treaty as annu^^^ed. Would Great Britain give us this
option, in a case in which ^^^e had so much to lose by doing is?

This gl^ring collision of arguments, proves how supersf^^^ally the adversaries
of the treaty have considered the subject, and how little reliance can be
placed on the views they give of it.

In estimating the plan which the treaty adopts, for the settlement of the old
controversy, it is an important re^^^ection, that, from the course of things,
there will be nothing to be performed by us before the period for the
restitution of the posts will have elapsed; and that, if this restitution
should be evaded, we shall be free to put an end to the whole treaty, about
which there could not be a moment's hesitation. We should then be where we were
before the treaty, with the advantage of having strengthened the justice of our
cause, by removing every occasion of reproach, which the infractions of the
treaty of peace may have furnished against us.

Two other particulars, in which this part of the treaty is supposed to be
defective, regard the want of indemnification for the detention of the posts,
and for the expenses of Indian wars.

Those who make the objection, may be safely challenged to produce precedents
of similar indemnifications, unless imposed by conquering powers on the
vanquished, or by powers of overhearing strength upon those which were too weak
to dispute the logic of superior force. If this were the real situation of the
United States and Great Britain, then is the treaty inexcusably faulty; but if
the parties were to treat and agree as equal powers, then is the pretension
extravagant and impracticable. The restitution of the specific thing detained,
is all that was to be expected, and, it may be added, it is all that was ever
really expected on the part of this country, so far as we may reason either
from official acts or informal expressions of the public opinion.

In eases where clear injuries are done, affecting objects of known or easily
ascertained values, pecuniary compensation may be expected to be obtained by
negotiation; but it is believed that it will be impossible to cite an example
of compensation so obtained, in a case in which territory has been withheld on
a dispute of title, or as a hostage for some other claim (as, in the present
instance, for securing the performance of the 4th article of the treaty of
peace.) The recovery of the territory withheld is the usual satisfaction.

The want of a rule to adjust consequential damages, is, in such cases, a very
great difficulty. In the instance under distaffion, this difficulty would be
peculiarly great. -- The posts are, for the most part, in a wilderness. There
are but two of them which have any adjacent settlements; Point-au-fer, or
Dutchman's point, to which a part of a tract of land, called Called well's Manor,
with a few inhabitants, has been claimed as appurtenant; and Detroit, which has
a settlement in the town and neighborhood of between two and three thousand
souls. In the vicinity of the other posts, on our side, there is scarcely an
inhabitant. It follows, that very little damage could be predicated either upon
the loss of revenue from, or of the profits of trade with, the settlements in
the vicinity of the posts. The trade of the Indians within our limits would
consequently be the basis of the claim of compensation. -- But here the
ignorance or spirit of exaggeration of the opponents of the treaty has been
particularly exemplified. The annual lo^^ from this source has been stated by a
very zealous writer against the treaty, who signs himself Cato, at 800, 000
dollars.

Now it is a fact well ascertained, that the mean value of the whole exports
from Canada in peltries (which constitute the returns of Indian trade) in the
years 1786 and 1787, was something short of 800, 000 dollars. It is also a
fact, in which all men, informed on the subject, agree, that the trade with the
Indians, within our limits, An account of peltries exported from Canada in 1786
and 1787. 1786. 1787. Beaver skins 116, 509 139, 509 Martin do. 58, 132 68, 132
Otter do. 26, 330 26, 330 Mink do. 9, 951 17, 951 Fisher do. 5, 813 5, 813 Fox
do. 6, 213 8, 913 Bear do. 22, 108 17, 108 Deer do. 126, 000 102,656 Raeoon do.
108, 346 140, 346 Cat do. cased 3, 026 4, 526 Do. do. open 2, 925 1, 825 Elk
do. 7, 515 9, 815 Wolf do. 12, 287 9,687 Carcajoux do. 503 653 Tiger do. 77 27
Seal do. 157 125 Muskrat do. 202, 456 240, 456 Deer do. dressed 5, 488 lbs. 1,
788 lbs. Castors 1, 454 lbs. 1, 434 lbs.
is not more than about on^ eighth of that which furnishes the peltry exported
from Canada. Hence the total product of our Indian trade could not be computed
at more than 100, 000 dollars. What proportion of this may be profit, is not
easy to be determined; but it (...) certain, that the profits of that trade,
from the decrease (...) wild animals, and the inferiority of their kinds, are
not con^^derable. -- Many assert, that it is scarcely any longer worth
following. Twenty per cent. therefore, would, probably, (...) a large
allowance, which would bring the loss on our Indi^^^ trade, by the detention of
the posts, to about 20, 000, inst^^^ of 800, 000 dollars per annum, as has been
asserted.

But might not a claim, even of this sum, by way of (...) demnification, be
encountered with some sorce, by the o^^^vation, that there is the highest
probability that the capital a^^^ labor which would have been employed to
produce 20, 000 dollars profit on the trade with the Indians, have been quite
^^productively employed in other channels, and consequen^^^ that there may have
been no loss at all?

Thus we see how erroneous are the data which serve to ^^^nify claims, in
themselves insignificant, and which, from (...) great uncertainty of their
quantum, are exposed to serious objections. Are claims like these, proper
subjects on which to stake the peace of the United States?

The reasonableness of indemnification for the expenses of Indian wars,
independent of the unusual nature of the claim, might have been matter of
endless debate. We might have been told, that the Indians ascribe those wars to
pretensions upon their lands, by virtue of treaties with the former government
of the United States, imposed by violence, or contracted with partial and
inadequate representations of their nation -- that our own public records
witness, that the proceedings of our agents, at some of those treaties, were
far from unexceptionable -- that the wars complained of are to be attributed to
errors in our former policy, or mismanagement of our public agents, not to the
detention of the posts -- that it must be problematical how much of the
duration or expenses of those wars are chargeable upon that detention -- and,
that the posts having been detained by way of security for the performance of
the article respecting debts, there was no responsibility for collateral and
casual damages. Had we resorted to the charge of their having instigated or
prompted those wars, they would have denied the charge, as they have repeatedly
done before; and, though we might have been able to adduce circumstances of
suspicion against them, they would have contested their validity and force,
and, whether guilty or not, would have thought their honor concerned in
avoiding the most distant concession of having participated in so improper a
business.

In every view, therefore, the claim for indemnification was a hopeless one;
and to insist upon it would have answered no other purpose than to render an
amicable adjustment impossible. No British minister would have dared to go to a
British parliament to ask provision for such an expenditure. What, then, was to
be done? Were we now or hereafter to go to war to enforce the claim? suppose
this done, and fifty or a hundred millions of dollars expended in the contest,
what certainty is there that we should at last accomplish the object?

Moreover, the principle of such a war would require, that we should seek
indemnification for the expenses of the war itself, in addition to our former
claim. What prospect is there, that this also would be effected? yet if not
effected, it is evident that we should have made a most wretched bargain.

Why did we not insist on indemnification for the expenses of our revoiution
war? Surely, not because it was less reasonable, but because it was evident
that it could not have been obtained, and because peace was necessary to us as
well as to our enemy. This likewise would be the end of a war undertaken to
enfore the claim of indemnification for the detention of the posts. We should
at length be glad to make peace, either without the indemnification sought, or
at best at an expense to carry on the war, without a chance of reimbursement,
with which the thing gained would bear no comparison.

The idea which has been thrown out, of leaving the posts in the hands of the
British, till we might be better able than, (...) present to go to war for
indemnification, is a notable politi^^ expedient. This would be to postone, of
choice, the possession of an object which has been shown to be demanded by
(...) urgent and important general considerations; to submit to ^^^tain and
great inconveniences from that privation, inch^^^^ probably the continuance or
renewal of Indian hostilities I (...) to run the risk, from the growth of the
British settlement (...) the neighborhood of the posts, and various unforeseen
cas^^ties, of their ultimate acquisition becoming difficult and ^^^^rious: For
what? why, to take at last the chances of war, (...) issue of which is ever
doubtful, to obtain an object, which (...) obtained, will certainly cost more
than it is worth. The ^^^^penses of war apart, pecuniary indemnification upon
any ^^^^ble scale, would ill compensate for the evils of the future ^^^^tion,
till the more convenient time for going to war should (...) rive. What should
we think of this policy, if it should two (...) that the posts and the
indemnification too were to be finally bandoned?

CAMILL^^

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Impressment of American Seamen.
PROTEST.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT, ss. County, City, and Port of New London.
BE it known and remembered, That at the city of New London, on the 29th day of
July, A. D. 1795, before me, the subscriber, a notary public, duly authorized,
and living in said city, personally came Cyprian Cook, master of the stay
Crisis, of Norwich, in said state of Connecticut, also Elijah Clarke, passenger
on board the sloop Crisis, and being duly sworn, deposed and said: --

That on the 4th day of July, instant, they were lying at anchor, together with
upwards of twenty other American vessels, in the port of Jeremie, in
Hispaniola, when the English frigate, called the Hermione, stationed at
Port-au-Prince, came down to Jeremie, and there came to anchor, and sent his
boats on board the said American vessels, and impressed every man from on board
said American vessels (except the captains and mates) to the number of sixty or
seventy, and by force carried them on board the Hermione, where they were kept
for the space of forty-eight hours, without receiving any sustenance, in order
to compel the said American seamen to enter on board the Hermione; during which
forty-eight hours, the several American captains went to the Britsh commandant,
and made complaint to him of the conduct and proceedings of the commander of
the said frigate Hermione, when the commandant w^^wered, "that he could do
nothing about the same, as the ^^mmandent of the Hermione did as he pleased."

After which the said American captains repaired on board the Hermione, and
made applications, to the commander, for the resteration of their men; when the
said commander of the Hermione, called the said American crews up, one by one,
and ex^^^^^d them individually respecting their ages and bodily strength, and
out of the sixty or seventy taken as aforesaid, only five were restored; and
those, as the commander of the Hermione said, because they were inform and
unsit to serve king or country. -- These five he returned to the said American
captains, treating said captains in the most imperious and insulting manner. --
And the depoments further say the sixty or seventy seamen taken as aforesaid,
were all American born, except two who were Danes by birth, but had been
naturalized in America: and that they returned with the said sloop Crisis,
destiture of men, to the port of New London, where they arrived on the 26th
July, instant, and farther say not.

CYPRIAN COOK, master. ELIJAH CLARKE, passenger.
(L. S.) In testimony whereof, etc. LYMAN LAW, notary public.

Breach of the Laws of Neutrality.
BE it known unto all it may concern, that on the day (...) the date hereof,
before me, Christopher Ellery, pulic notary for the county of Newport, in the
state of R^^^^ Island and Providente. Plantations, in the United States
America, came Thomas Bliss, master of the sloop Peggs, of Newport, just arrived
from New York, and Louis Ar^^ Pichon, formerly secretary of the legation of the
French the United States, passenger on board said sloop, together (...) S. A.
Hosser, citizen of Boston, and captain Chabert, (...): passenger on board said
sloop, all of whom, on their (...) declare, that yesterday at 3 o'clock in the
afternoon, being (...) first day of August, instant, they were at a distance
(...) miles from the light-house, in Narraganset bay, in said (...) bound to
Newport; when being opposit^ the same, a (...) ship of war, the Africa,
commanded by Home, fired a (...) shot at said sloop, as a signal to bring her
to; that the (...) had then American colors flying; that the master ob^^^^
signal, soon perceived two beats coming to the sloop, sa^^ (...) ship of war,
which heats were manned by a port of the (...) of this ship, and out of which
came four or five off^^^ (...) of them appearing to be higher in command than
the (...) ordered the captain of the said sloop to go near (...) with which
order he complied, and soon anchored a^^^^ the said ship; that, in the mean
time, the officers after (...) said master of the sloop several questions,
particularly (...) had any passengers on board, and he answering to this (...)
in the affirmative, was told by them, that they came (...) pose to take the
late French minister, M. Fauchet, who^^ (...) knew to be on board with
dispatches; that the master and pasengers then informed them, that M. Fauchet
had left the sloop in the morning, at Stonington, where they had been detai^^
two days, by contrary winds; and that he had also left Stonington aforesaid, on
horseback, with dispatches and pu^^^ papers, which were all taken out of
pasteboard boxes; (...) proof of the last affertion, showed the said boxes
empty, (...) in number, which M. Fauchet had really left. The officers, (...)
satisfied with the answers given, said, their orders were pos^^^^ and directed
them to search all the trunks of the passengen, (...) which proceeding they
hoped no one on board would be (...) as their duty required the same; that they
accordingly had b^^^ the trunks and boxes in the cabin opened, and not finding
a^^ papers, they went into the held, where having ordered (...) Fauchet's
servant to open the trunks of his master, they had them emptied, in presence of
all the passengers, and out of one of the trunks, they took a bundle of paper,
which they gave to one of the officers in care, when the search went on for the
other trunks; that they then asked for two other trunks of M. Fauchet, saying,
that they had notice of four trunks shipped on board the said sloop, and seeing
several other trunks flowed about, they, the said officers, demanded the
owners; that one of these, belonging to captain Chabert, before named, a
gentleman engaged in commercial and seafaring business, was overhauled, and the
papers, consisting chiefly of sea-books, or journals, examined and put aside
with a tin box, containing some papers, with letters directed to different
persons in France: that they then fell upon the trunk of M. Pichon, which as
they found heavy, they desired to have it opened, threatening, as no one
stepped forward with the key, to break the lock thereof; that M. Pichon then
went forward, and opened the trunk, which proved to be full of written papers,
under clothes; these thrown out, they observed that it was the trunk of M.
Fauchet's secretary, and that its containing such a quantity of papers, was a
sufficient reason for taking it on board the ship, for the inspection of the
captain of the ship; that an officer then went on board the ship with such
papers as he thought proper to take with him, that he might receive the orders
of the commanding officer relative thereto, and relative to further
proceedings; that this officer soon returned, and permitted the sloop to
depart, saying that the main object being missed, no further detention was
necessary, and returning the papers which he had taken on board the ship; and
that the two boats having left the sloop, after a detention of two hours, she
came to sail and arrived at Newport in the evening.

THOMAS W. BLISS, LOUIS ANDRE PICHON, S. A. HOFFER, and CHABERT.

In testimony that the aforesaid declaration was made before me, the before
named public notary, as is above set forth, and on the 2d day of August, in the
year 1795, and the 20th year of American independence, I have hereunto set my
hand and notarial seal, the day and year aforesaid.

(L. S.) CHRIST. ELLERY, Public Notary.


Certify conform l'expedition qui sera enregistere en la chancellerte au
consulat de la Republique Francaise a Boston, ce 19 Thermidor, de l'an 3 de la
Republique Francaise, une et indivisible.

Le consul de la Republique Francaise a Boston. MOZARN



RESOLUTIONS Unanimously agreed to, at a Meeting of the Citizens of Petersburg
on Saturday the 1st of August, 1795.
RESOLVED, as the opinion of this meeting, That a strict adherence to the
principles of the constitution, ought at all times to be regarded, as the first
duty of public officers, i^ every department; and that it is the Right of the
People, (...) only to guard against the exercise of a power which has (...)
been delegated, but to see that a power confided to the th^^^ branches of
congress collectively, shall not be assumed by o^^ only, or by two of them.

The members of this meeting conceive, that the constitutio^^ of the United
States, has empowered congress, and not the president and senate,

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and
with the Indian tribes:

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization:

To define and punish piracies:

To declare war, etc. and make rules concerning capture^ on land and water; --
and

To lay and collect taxes, duties, excises, and imposts

And, therefore, that so much of the 3d, 12th, 13th, 14th, and 15th articles of
the treaty, now under consideration, a^ respects the regulation of trade;

So much of the 2d article as gives to a British subject the rights of a
natural-born citizen of the United States; without the previous residence, and
other requisites, enumerated in the late act of Congress;

So much of the 21st article as defines and punishes an act therein pronounced
to be piracy;

So much of the 17th article as makes a rule in cases where vessels shall be
captured or detained, on suspicion of having enemy's property on board; -- and,

So much of the 3d and 15th articles as contains a surrender, by two branches
of the government of the United States, of a right entrusted to the whole
congress, of laying duties and imposts, on British and other vessels, at
discretion;

Are contrary to the constitution, and that the ratification of these clauses
would be absolutely void.

The members composing this meeting, view, with no less astonishment than
concern, the contempt manifested by the senate, for the constitution of the
United States, in advising the president to ratify, provisionally, a treaty,
which violates the essential principles of our government, and excludes the
house of representatives, from an exercise of powers expressly given to them,
as well as to the president and senate. They are of opinion, that the conduct
of the senate demands the serious attention of every real friend to the union;
and that an attempt so daring and so dangerous, calls for the most pointed and
unequivocal censure from the people.

Resolved, as the opinion of this meeting, That the idea on which this treaty
is founded, of terminating the differences between the United States and Great
Britain, without reference to the merits of their complaints and pretensions,
is as fallacious as it is new; that it is contrary to the principles sanctioned
by the executive in the correspondence between the ^a^^ secretary of state and
Mr. Hammond; and ought to be reprobated by a nation which regards either its
honor or its interest.

It is also the opinion of this meeting, That the silence of this treaty, with
respect to the slaves and other property carried off by the British troops,
contrary to the 7th article of the definitive treaty, is in the highest degree
reprehensible; because a claim for compensation, on this account, being a
matter of difference, ought, even under the idea above mentioned, to have ^een
brought forward; because such a claim is founded on an ^xpress obligation
created by the treaty of 1783, as well as in ^u^tice and good faith; and
because in the correspondent^ above mentioned, between the late secretary and
Mr. Hammond, this claim is ranked, not among those things which are of "smaller
^oncern," and may therefore "be passed over," but "insisted ^n," as one,
"rendered indispensible by justice to individuals (...) by public policy."

Resolved, also, as the opinion of this meeting, That the 2d ^rticle of the
treaty, under consideration, is materially defect^ve, because it does not
contain a stipulation on the part of Great ^ritain, to pay to the United
States, a reasonable compensation (...) the various losses sustained, and
expenses incurred by the ^etention of the western posts; that it is vague, in
not desin^ng the precincts and jurisdiction of the said posts; and so absurd in
requiring the cooperation of the United States, and the governor general, in
making previous arrangements concerning the delivery of them, that a belief
must be indulged, that a bona fide execution of this part of the treaty, was
neither intended by the British minister, nor expected by our own.

Resolved, also, as the opinion of this meeting, That an independent people
ought not to conclude a treaty of any kind, with any nation, but on terms of
perfect equality. They regard this as a sacred principle, from which every
consideration of ho^^^ and interest, forbids this country to depart. Under this
imp^^^sion, they view with abhorrence a treaty, the stipulations (...) which,
even after the 12th article shall be removed, so une^^^ vocally admit the
pretensions of Great Britain, to a monopoly of commercial advantages, to be
well founded.

Resolved, also, as the opinion of this meeting, That the (...) article is
unjust, in principle, and will be pernicious in (...) Unjust, because, a
government is not responsible for the (...) of its citizens, unless it ratifies
or approves them; and the (...) now to be paid by the United States, were due
from private (...) dividuals, previous to the adoption of the federal system;
(...) because the present government, instead of throwing imp^^^^ments in the
way of the recovery of British debts, has o^^^^ized courts, whose only
employment has been to enforce (...) payment: And pernicious, because the
circumstances (...) shall entitle a creditor to redress before the
commissioner, (...) not enumerated, as they might easily have been, and thus
g^^^ latitude is left for the exercise of discretionary powers -- because it
cannot be presumed that the real debtors will appear bef^^^ commissioners at a
distance, to controvert claims, in which they are no longer interested; and
thus a door will be ope^^^ to frauds, the extent of which exceeds calculation:
And because it tends to a wanton accumulation of the public de^^^ already
swelled to a size beyond the fears of the friends, or the hopes of the enemies,
of the union.

Resolved, also, as the opinion of this meeting, That the (...) article is
defective, because it does not contain an express (...) cognition of the
illegality of the orders which were issued (...) the British ministry in 1793,
and which occasioned the capt^^^ complained of by the United States: and
because it obliges (...) United States to pay for vessels taken within their
limits (...) jurisdiction, though they are not bound to France, or to (...)
other nation, in like manner, by their treaties with them; and although in
cases of the like nature which may hereafter occur, the 25th article obliges
the United States not to pay but only to use their best efforts to obtain
satisfaction from the offending party.

Resolved, as the opinion of this meeting, That in the event of a war, or
national difference, it may be both just and politic, to sequester and even
confiscate debts, due in this country, to the individuals of a nation at war
with the United States; and that, if this power could be relinquished, sound
policy requires, that, in the present situation of affairs, it should be
retained.

Resolved, as the opinion of this meeting. That as by the law of nations
(according to the modern conventions) and by the treaties between the United
States and the French, the Dutch, the Swedes and the Prussians, free ships make
free goods; -- the 17th article of this treaty, which subjects French property
in American bottoms to seizure, deserves the most pointed reprobation; because,
it will immediately deprive the American merchants, of the benefit of carrying
the goods of nations at war with Great Britain; because, in case of a war
between the United States and France, which the PEOPLE forbid! American
property, in British neutral vessels, would be secure; and because, in the
present state of affair, it will produce such injury to the French, as will
give them just cause of resentment against the partial policy of the American
government.

Resolved, as the opinion of this meeting, That the stipulation in the 18th
article, making ship-timber, tar, hemp, sails and copper, contraband of war,
which are free by our treaties with other nations, is unnecessarily hurtful to
the trade of the United States, and manifests the same unfriendly temper to the
French.

The members of this meeting are also of opinion, That all good citizens should
express their decided disapprobation of the second clause of the 18th article,
which authorizes, though not in words, yet in substance, the seizure of
American vessels carrying provisions to France.

The members of this meeting solemnly declare their abhorrence of a concession,
so incompatible with the object of the late embassy, so derogatory to the
honor, so injurious to the interests of America, and so openly and pointedly
hostile to the cause of France. They detest a war; they consider it as treason
against the happiness of men; but they would cheerfully endure all the
calamities which it produces, rather than in any shape be accessory to a
combination, which is the scourge of Europe, and the dishonor of the world.

Resolved therefore, as the opinion of this meeting, That this treaty ought not
to be ratified by the president and senate of the United States, even if the
British king should consent to a suspension of so much of the 12th article as
respects the trade to be carried on, between the United States and the British
West India islands.

Resolved, That the chairman of this meeting be requested to adopt such method
as he judges best, to furnish the president with a copy of the above
resolutions.

The following resolutions were also agreed to by the meeting.

Resolved, That the minority of the senate, who opposed (...) ratification of
the treaty with Great Britain, are entitled to the thanks of their country; and
that the senators from this st^^^ have justified the confidence reposed in them
by their constituents.

Resolved, That the patriotic boldness, and magnanimous independence of
Stephens Thompson Mason, in having caus^^ the publication of the treaty
aforesaid, deserve the most grateful incense that can be offered to a generous
mind, the praise of Republicans.

JOSEPH JONES, Chairman. WILLIAM WHITLOCK, Secretary.


ADDRESS To the President of the United States.
SIR,
THE sentiments which are now respectfully addressed to you, are not, merely,
the emanations of a solitary individual; they have been already expressed by
thousands of your fellow citizens, whose united voices urge you to adhere to
those principles of patriotism, which have so honorably directed all your
public conduct, by withholding or suspending the last final act which rests
with you for giving effect to the depending treaty between the United States
and Great Britain, or by giving such a direction to the further negociations
respecting it, as m^^y produce a material change from its present form. This
treaty is now before the public, and, when the scrutinizing eye of America,
shall have viewed it in all its aspects, be assured, sir, that the just and
solid objections which apply to it, will be found to be of a nature too
imperious to be resisted by the genuine patriot and guardian of his country's
peace. It is not the object of the present address, to enumerate those
objections at large; a few of the most prominent only are selected for your
serious consideration; of these, the first class may be denominated, omissions
on the part of our negociator, and are as follow:

He has omitted to make any convention or stipulation for the protection of
American seamen from impressment into the British naval service, or otherwise
to secure them against those shameful imprisonments and detentions which have
become a national grievance to the United States: although in the 23d article
he has stipulated, on behalf of Great Britain, "that British ships of war, with
their officers and crews shall be hospitably received in the ports of the
United States, paying due respect to the laws and government thereof; and that
the officers shall be treated with that respect which is due to the commissions
they bear; and if any insult should be offered to them by any of the
inhabitants, all offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of
the peace and unity between the two countries."

He has omitted to make any stipulation for the protection and security of the
commerce of the United States to Spain, Portugal, and the Mediterranean,
against the depredations of the Algerines and Barbary corsairs; although he
knew that this forms one of the most beneficial branches of our trade, yielding
a large annual balance in specie in favor of the United States; and that the
policy of our government has been, in all their treaties with the maritime
powers, to obtain such a stipulation, it being expressly provided in both our
existing treaties with France and Holland, that those powers shall use their
good offices and best endeavors to obtain this object -- Nor could he be
ignorant of what is avowed by lord Sheffield, one of the British king's privy
council, to be the true policy of Great Britain; namely, to countenance and
encourage Algerine depredations on the American trade, and to prevent us, as
much as possible, from becoming carriers. And this omission is now the more to
be regretted, since the recent official intelligence announced in all the
newspapers, that the Algerines, under the mediation of Great Britain and Spain,
have made peace with Portugal, in consequence of which, the Portuguese cruisers
are to be recalled from the Mediterranean, and the Algerines again let loose on
the commerce of the United States.

He has omitted to make any stipulation, or obtain any compensation whatever,
for the negroes and other property carried away contrary to the treaty of
peace, violating, it is believer, his positive instructions on this head.

He has omitted to except cotton, a staple article of (...) United States, as
also melasses, sugar, coffee, and cocoa (...) being the growth, manufacture, or
produce of a British West India island, from the disgraceful prohibition
imposed by the 12th article, on the export and carrying trade of the United
States, admitting British vessels to take and carry away th^^ articles
wheresoever grown, from the United States to any (...) of the world, and
restraining American vessels, only, from doing.

The next class of objections to the treaty consists of acts (...) commission
on the part of our negociator, in stipulations in^^rious and dishonorable to
the United States, as follow:

The second and third articles grant an equivalent for (...) surrender of an
absolute right. -- By the treaty of peace the (...) were to be absolutely
surrendered -- The term surrender is (...) prehensive in the law of nations,
and, as here used, cana^^^^ construed to mean less than a total and entire
evacuation, (...) and military, of the territories of the United States. Mr.
Jay (...) changed the meaning to a mere delivery of the naked wa^^^ the posts
in June 1796, provided the reason assigned by (...) Grenville in his
correspondence with Mr. Jay for this de^^^ to wit, "that the British government
were uncertain what (...) "ration the surrender of the posts would have on the
Indi^^^ should not induce a further delay, or total refusal to deliver (...)
the naked walls themselves. As to our territory, the Bri^^^ are to retain their
possession of it, coextensive with the unde^^^ limits of the terms, "precincts
and jurisdiction," the latter (...) which, it is well known, has been exercised
several hundred miles within our territory; and this possession is guarantee^^
them under the protection of the United States, even as (...) subjects,
presenting the obnoxious spectacle of a British (...) through a great extent of
territory of the United States, (...) establishing that principle, which, in
reference to France, (...) been so much deprecated, "of fraternization" under
the di^^^dant aspect of a co-mixture of subjects and citizens, of monar^^^^ and
republicans, owing allegiance, some to a foreign prince, (...) others to the
republican government of the United States -- Again, as it is well known, that
all the portages and carrying places now used by the British in their trade
with the Western Indians, as well as those nations of Indians themselves, with
whom any beneficial trade for surs and peltry can be carrie^ on, lie
exclusively within the territories of the United States, the permission to the
British to use those portages and carrying places, and hold free trade and
intercourse with those Indious under the same duties, ferriages, and privileges
with citiz^ns of the United States, is an absolute grant and concession to the
British, without equivalent, of a benefit now wholly ours, tending to secure to
them all the advantages of the fur trade, and to rivet their influence over the
western Indians; every stipulation relative to navigation and the importation
of goods into that country by the citizens of the United States, being
calculated to preclude the possibility of any competition on our part. Besides,
if the construction of the term "now," in the 9th article of the treaty, should
allow British subjects to hold lands within the United States, purchased at any
time before the exchange of the ratifications of the treaty, the acquirement of
state rights by British subjects may occasion serious questions, is to the
power of extinguishing the Indian claims, which the intercourse will turn to
the British interest. But, as if our negociator could not sufficiently rivet
the chain of British influence ^ver all the Indians of America, he has agreed,
even without the participation or consent of Spain, that the river Mississippi
shall be entirely open to both parties; and further that all the parts and
places on its eastern side to whichsoever of the parties ^^^ging, shall be
entirely open to both parties; although he knew that the British hold no port
or place whatever on that river; thus, under a covert semblance of reciprocity,
conceding to the British the participation in another benefit exclusively ours,
without any equivalent for the same, and extending, through these means, their
influence over the south western as well as ^^rth western Indians. And all
these stipulations, you will he pleased to remember, sir, are, by the treaty
itself, declared (...) be permanent, that is, for ever irrevocable without the
consent of Great Britain.

The 4th article contains a fruitful source for future war, because it puts the
uncertainty it states upon a worse ground than it stood before; it being a well
known historical fact, that by a similar omission in the treaty of Utrecht, in
not providing a mode for ascertaining definitively the boundary line between
the French and British possessions in America, the famous seven years war was
produced between those two nations, which terminated in the peace of Paris, and
a total relinquishment of all the possessions of France in America to the
English.

The 6th article stands unsupported by any principle of treaty or of the law of
nations. The able disquisition of Mr. Jefferson on this subject, in his
diplomatic correspondence with Mr. Hummond, is irrefragable on this point;
besides, this article is exceptionable in the following instances.

It sanctions claims against the United States for British losses, when the
legal impediments comprehended in the treaty of 1783, may not have occasioned
those losses. Legal impediments as comprehended in that treaty, cannot extend
further than is statutory regulations, peculiarly applicable to British
subjects, yet, where the general rules of evidence applied to the ca^^,
prevented the recovery, this article authorizes a claim upon the United States
for the loss, as in the instances of interest dis^^lowed during the war, losses
sustained by payments in dep^^^ated paper money, and the defeat of evidence to
establish open accounts, under the state laws.

It erects a court to control the courts of the United States, which, and the
sorms of proceeding in which, ought to be the only constitutional resort in
controversies proper for judici^^y tribunals. If the court of commissioners
should allow a rode of evidence contrary to that deemed admissible by the
courts of the United States, the United States are placed in a situation as be
made chargeable with the payment of debts, which the ^^ditor could not recover
against the debtor in the ordinary cou^^^ of justice, allowing full operation
to the treaty of 1783; beside a refusal to admit such evidence in the courts of
the United States, instantly becomes a legal impediment, to be reli^^l against
by the court of commissioners, even when the d^^^^ is solvent.

It creates, in the assumption of these debts by the United States, a source of
taxation, which is alike to be borne by the innocent observer of the laws, and
the guilty infractor of il^^, without any reasonable prospect of being
reimbursed by the (...) debtors.

It omits to require, on behalf of the United States, that just set off against
these claims which the carrying away the negroes by the British, in violation
of the treaty of 1783, allowed the United States to demand.

The 7th article is fallacious and delusory. It does not re^^^^ the effects of
the British orders of November 1793, and January 1794, but allows them full
operation; and only affects (...) offer relief in cases where those orders and
the law of nations have been illegally or irregularly executed. Instead of
pursuing the principle contained in the 6th article, of disregarding the
decisions of courts, and placing the merits of the complaint before the
commissioners, it obliges the commissioners to act in obedience to the
decisions of the British courts, where those decisions have been regular and
legal. If then the law of nations and the orders of November and January have
been regularly executed by those courts, the complaints of our government are
temediless, and the true ground of those complaints abandoned by the treaty.
Besides, the stipulation was unnecessary in cases of irregul^ or illegal
condemnation, except where there was an insolvency on the part of the captors;
and therefore the article wears, upon the whole face of it, a total
relinquishment, on the part of our negociator, of the merits of our claims, and
our merchants have no right to expect one shilling of recompense for their
losses. Further, the last clause of this article, does not adhere to the
principle supported in the 6th article, but again resorts to the merits of
British complaints, and promises compensation; showing, that whenever American
demands were submitted upon the principles of equity, the British negociator
kept them in the courts for decision; and whenever their demands were urged,
our negociator abandoned that principle.

The 9th article is ambiguous, and its construction doubtful; but let that
construction be as it may, whenever, in the course of inheritance, alienage
shall stop the course of descent, the right by escheat, accruing thereby to
individual states, is taken away; and this principle may, and doubtless will,
be extended to the territorial rights of the states.

The 10th article reverses the good old maxim, 'that an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure;' and our negociator seems to have though that war first,
and confiscation afterward, was better than sequestration first and peace
afterward; since it is impossible to conceive that the greater evil, war, will
not generally, if not always, produce the lesser evil, confiscation. But the
article is destitute of all equality; Great Britain has fleets and armies,
America none. Great Britain, by means of fleets and armies, can enforce the
observance of our national duties toward her; we cannot resort to the same
means for the same ends: But the annual balance of trade between the two
countries is largely in favor of Great Britain; she has always a large amount
of property or of debts in our possession, over which, the power of
sequestration or confiscation, may be regarded as the American weapon of
defense, preventive, equally, of future spoliations and depredations on our
commerce, as of war itself. Humanity, therefore, is no less outraged by this
stipulation than every principle of policy, justice, and national right.

Thus, fir, have I endeavored to lay before you the omissions of our
negociator, as well as some of the most obvious objections to the ten first
articles, which, by the 28th articles, are all declared to be permanent. -- The
qualified ratification of the senate, rendering it probable that these ten
articles may become the entire treaty, and thus the remaining eighteen articles
^^lative to the trade and commerce between the two countries* which are all
made to depend on the 12th article, suspended by the senate, may wholly sail,
will induce, for the present, a postponement of the considerations resulting
from the latter.

The political consequences of the first article, excite the mo^^ alarming
sensations; to see, sir, a British colony established within the limits of the
United States; to see yielded and ceded to this establishment, a great and
undefined extent of our territory; to see the north western boundary of the
United States, as it were, purposely left open, in order to secure to the
British, the opportunity of future encroachment and enlargement of this colony;
to see all our present exclusive benefits of trade and commerce with the
Indians, yielded to the British without equivalent, thereby confirming their
present influence over the Indian nations, and establishing, through the means
of their new colony, a further system of intrigue and influence among all the
western inhabitants of the United States to see the principle of alienage
prostrated, affording to the British the means, by future or past pretended
purchases of the Indians, to establish a claim to a vast extent of the present
western territory of the United States; to see a participation y^^^ed in all
our posts and places on the Mississippi, extending the chain of British
influence through all western America, and drawing a back line on our frontiers
from Florida to Canada to see, sir, through all these causes, the completest
politi^^ union between Great Britain and the United States, that was ever
established between two nations, must fill the American mind with horror. To
stand in this intimate political relation with the old, corrupt, and almost
expiring government of Great Britain -- that government which stands foremost
in all the wa^^ of Europe -- which is at no time exempt from war for a per^^d
of seven years continuance -- and which ever since the establishment of her
public blessing, a funded debt, has been distinguished as the common disturber
of the peace of the world, ace^^ds not with the spirit and principles of the
free constitution and government of the United States, or with the genius,
temper, and feelings of the republican citizens of America. -- To the truth of
this assertion, you, sir, have borne ample and honor^ble testimony, in that
memorable letter to Lord Buchan, worthy to be recorded in letters of gold,
dated Philadelphia, and April 1793, in which you thus express yourself:

"My lord, the favorable wishes which your lordship has expressed for the
prosperity of this young and rising country, cannot but be gratefully received
by all its citizens and every lover of it; one mean to the contribution of
which, and its happiness, is very judiciously pourtrayed in the following words
of your letter, to be little heard of in the great world of polities; these
words, I can assure your lordship, are expressive of my sentiments on this
head; and I believe it is the sincere wish of united America, TO HAVE NOTHING
TO DO WITH THE POLITICAL INTRIGUES, OR THE SQUABBLES OF EUROPEAN NATIONS; but,
on the contrary, to exchange commodities and live in peace and amity will all
the inhabitants of the earth, and this I am persuaded they will do, if
rightfully it can be done. To administer justice to, and receive it from, every
power they are connected with, will, I hope, be always found the most prominent
feature in the administration of this country; and I flatter myself, that
nothing short of imperious necessity can occasion a breach with any of them.
Under such a system, if we are allowed to pursue it, the agriculture and
mechanical arts, the wealth and population of these states, will increase with
that degree of rapidity, as to baffle all calculations, and must surpass any
idea your lordship can hitherto have entertained on the occasion."

Whatever, therefore, sir, may have been the views and influence under which
our negociator acted, I persuade myself that he has not faithfully pursued
either your sentiments, your opinions, or your instructions.

One remaining consideration, sir, will close this address. In all great and
critical emergencies of our country, the safest, as well as wisest policy of
its administration, will, doubtless, be to resort to and confide in the advice
and opinion of the great constitutional council of the nation, composed of the
free representatives of the people in both houses of congress assembled. The
actual circumstances of the United States, in relation to the treaty with Great
Britain, present a great and critical emergency of our country, fraught with
questions as awful as any that ever agitated the American people; permit me,
therefore, sir, without reference to the past conduct of the executive on this
point, to refer you to a striking example, drawn from British history, of a
British king on a similar occasion, confiding himself to the same great
constitutional council of his nation, with a wisdom and efficacy, which merits
to be followed even by an American president. At the close of the famous seven
years bloody war between Great Britain and France, preliminary articles of
peace were signed at Paris on the 7th of November, 1762; by these articles the
political, territorial, and commercial interests of Great Britain were greatly
affected. The king laid these preliminary articles before both houses of
parliament, on the eleventh of the same month. On the thirteenth, the house of
commons addressed him, returning thanks for his gracious condescension, in
ordering the said preliminary articles to be laid before them, and declaring
that they have considered them with their best attention; and although to make
peace and war be his majesty's just and undoubted prerogative, yet knowing how
agreeable it must be to his royal mind to be informed of the sense his people
entertain of the justice and wisdom of his measures, and his unwearied
attention to their welfare, they are impatient to express their approbation of
the advantageous terms of the said preliminary treaty, and to lay before him
the applause of a faithful, affectionate, and thankful people. After this
address, on the 22d of November, 1762, the said preliminary articles were
ratified by the king, and formed the definitive treaty of peace between the two
nations. Deign then, sir, to follow this example; submit the treaty you have
caused to be negociated with Great Britain, to the consideration and advice of
the two houses of congress, before its final ratification. Receive, in so
doing, the affectionate regards, generous confidence, and grateful thank^ of
your fellow citizens of the United States, and thereby secure to yourself
another, and an unfading, plaudit to the m^^e of WASHINGTON.

CAIUS.
Philadelphia, July 21st, 1795.
Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
No. 1.
AS the embassy extraordinary to Great Britain, from the appointment of the
envoy, to the conclusion of the treaty, is unequalled in the annals of
negotiation, it becomes us, the people, who are yet the constitutional
sovereigns of the country, to consider it with attention, that it may in future
either serve as a friendly beacon to point out a secure harbor in political
storms, (...) avoided as a light perfidiously hung out to lure our unsuspecting
b^^ on ^ocks and quicksands.

It is essential to the due consideration of the advantages and disadvantages
of a treaty, to examine the contracting parties; because the same treaty may be
good under some, and bad under other circumstances; thus, when Carthage gave up
her ships, wealth, and arms in the second Punic war -- the treaty might have
been considered as good in relation to her then situation, humbled as she was
by the Roman arms, and compelled to rely for her existence, as a nation, solely
on the justice and humanity of the Roman senate; and yet a treaty of this sort
would have been considered as base and abject, if it had been made immediately
after the battle of Cannae: and their senate (venal as Carthage then was) would
not have been so lost to every patriotic sentiment as to have sanctioned its
ratification. Britain, on the day of the signature of the treaty, was involved
in a war with the bravest people in Europe; in the whole course of this war,
she had experienced continued defeats and disgraces; her treasures were wasted
upon allies that either deserted or were too feeble to afford her effectual
aid; her debt had grown to the enormous sum of three hundred millions; her navy
could only be manned by the most destructive burdens upon her commerce; her
manufactures were languishing, her fleets were unable to protect her trade,
which had suffered unexampled losses. And while she was sinking under her
burdens, her antagonist was consolidating her government, and growing so
rapidly in strength, reputation, and vigor, as to threaten her existence as a
nation. The United States were, on the other hand, in the highest prosperity;
their numbers had doubled since they had successfully measured swords with
Britain; they possessed men, arms, military stores, and an ally, who was alone
too powerful for her enemies. Sweden and Denmark, who had received insults from
Britain, were ready to make a common cause with her; and as the marine of
England and France were nearly balanced, the weight of America, had she been
forced into the war, would have turned the scale, and have completed the ruin
of the British commerce, without any other effort than that of granting letters
of marque. Independent of which, without the violation of their neutrality, by
those acts of sovereignty which no one would dispute their right to exercise,
they could involve the British trade in the utmost distress, by an additional
duty on British tonnage, by granting advantages to rival manufactures, by
retaining debts due to her merchants, till the injuries ours had sustained were
compensated. By following her example, both in the present and in the late
American war, and suffering no part of the public debt to be paid to her
citizens, till justice was done us, we could have forced her into any measure
that it was just or proper for us to ask. And indeed, so fully satisfied were
the Americans, of every party, on the superiority of our situation, that no
doubt was entertained of a favorable issue to Mr. Jay's negotiation; and all
that his friends lamented, and his enemies rejoiced in, was, that the principal
credit of them would be ascribed rather to the victories of France, than to the
address of our minister. Under these happy auspices the negotiation began: we
shall proceed to see how it concluded.

The next point of enquiry is into the objects of the negotiation; for as every
treaty is an abridgment of the natural freedom of nations, no wise state ever
enters into one, but with a view to remove some evil, or acquire some
advantage. It is upon this ground, that many of our most distinguished patriots
have been of opinion, that all commercial treaties were injurious trammels and
bargains, in which we might probably be overreached at the moment, or which
circumstances might them after render inconvenient; that America having nothing
to sell but articles of the first necessity to the nations with which (...)
deals, and affording a market to their manufactures, her ou^ trade laws were
her best treaties; since she may alter and mod^^^ them at pleasure: and,
indeed, experience has justified the^^ opinion: independent of the depredations
we have suffered fr^^ the war, our trade enjoyed every advantage that we could
re^sonably wish. A commercial treaty was not the object of Mr. Jay's mission;
the British nation in direct violation of the treaty of Paris, refused to
surrender the western posts; extended the limits of their jurisdiction, availed
themselves of their situation to possess the Indian trade, and stimulated the
savages to ravage our frontier: British officers ever accompanying them in
their incursions, it became the dignity of the nation to demand a delivery of
the posts -- reparation for the loss of trade -- a compensation for the expense
of the war the British had excited with the Indians -- a public punishment of
the British subjects who had personally appeared in arms against us, with the
remo^al from office of Lord Dorchester, who had, in his address to the Indians,
encouraged them to violate the treaty of peace. M^^ Jay was thought the
properest person to make this demand* Let us see how far he has justified that
sentiment, in fulfilling his duty with respect to this single point.

By the 2d article of the treaty, the British promise to evacuate the Western
Posts by the 1st of June, 1796. By the treaty of Paris, in 1783, they promised
to evacuate with all convenient speed, which, if we may judge by the speed with
which they have found it convenient to evacuate all their posts in France,
Flanders, Germany, Holland, and Brabant, one would have supposed must have
meant a much shorter time than eighteen months; so that all that the treaty
acquires with respect to the posts, is less than we were entitled to, by the
treaty of Paris. Surely we might expect better security than a mere promise
from a nation which has already shown, in their violation of the past, the
little reliance that can be placed on their future, engagements. By June, 1796,
it is not improbable that our situation, or that of Britain, may be changed;
what security shall we then have for the performance of the treaty? It is said,
as has been already said (by those apologists whose arguments seem determined
to find every ministerial measure right) that every treaty is a promise, and
that if we are not to rely upon a promise, there can be no treaties. -- I
answer, that it is the practice of negociators, where the character of the
nation, or other circumstances, give reason to suspect a violation of their
engagements, not to rely upon a naked promise, but to expect some guarantee or
surety for the performance; that in the present case, as the promise was
evidently extorted by the pressure of existing circumstances, we should see to
the performance while those circumstances continue to exist. It is evident,
before Mr. Jay left this country, that the British were so far from intending
to evacuate the posts, that they had determined to extend their limits; this
may not only be inferred from all the encouragement they gave to the
depredations of the Indians, but undeniably proved by Lord Dorchester's speech,
which, though disavowed by Dund^s, is now admitted to have been made in
consequence of express instructions. The promise, then, to evacuate, has been
extorted by French victories, by the humiliation of the British nation, and by
their apprehension, that we might, at last, be provoked to do ourselves
justice, while they were embarrassed with France. Surely, then, the evacuation
should have been insisted upon, while these circumstances operated with full
force; -- what was there to impede an immediate evacuation of Oswego, which is
only occupied by a lieutenant's command? what was to prevent our troops being
put in immediate possession of Niagara and the upper posts, under an engagement
to protect, for a limited time, the British property that remained there? In
one week this might have been effected, considering the situation of the posts,
upon navigable waters, as well as in one year. -- May we not reasonably
suppose, that the British still entertain a hope, that peace between them and
France, dissentions between the United States and that Republic, the seeds of
which are so plentifully sown by the treaty itself, may enable them to violate
their second, with the same impunity that they have their first engagement. If
the supposed nonperformance of the treaty of Paris (which, however, has been
so ably refuted by Mr. Jefferson in his correspondence with Mr. Hammond on that
subject; has hitherto serve them as a pretext for retaining the posts; how many
such pretense must the complexity and obscurity of the present treaty afford*
But suppose the war with France to continue, suppose they have the magnanimity
to forgive our predilection for the ene^^, suppose the spirit of our own nation
to get the better of the disgraceful stupor into which a venal system has
lulled it -- suppose the increasing imbecility of Britain shall forbid her to
(...) for impunity in a further breach of faith, will it still be a ^^ter of
little moment, whether or not she retains garrisons in the midst of our
territory for twelve months longer or not? are we not at this moment at war
with the savages? is not this (...) attended with much expense to the nation,
and much private distress? is not the blood of our citizens daily shed? these
(...) must continue as long as the posts are in the hands of the British; or a
peace, if practicable, must be purchased br^^^ United States at very
considerable expense: were we to estimate the difference in this point of view,
between an imm^^^ evacuation, and one that is to take place in June 1796, it
would certainly not fall short of one million of dollars, independen^ of the
destruction of our fellow citizens, whose lives are beyond all price. -- If to
this we add the annual profits of the Indian trade, amounting to 800, 000, it
will appear that the United States lose near two millions of dollars, by the
retention of the posts, supposing (which is at least problematical) that they
shall be surrendered at the period proposed. Those who think w^^ me, that
decision on the part of our government, and firm^^ in our minister, could not
have failed to effect an immediate restitution of our territory, will know to
what account to charge this heavy loss of blood and treasure.

But was the evacuation of the posts all we had a right to ask on that subject;
if the retention of them occasioned those expensive Indian wars which have so
often drained our treasury and thinned our ranks. -- If, for 12 years, we have
lost thereby a lucrative branch of commerce, are we entitled to no compensation
for these losses? If the honor of the nation has been insulted, both by lord
Dorchester and the subjects of Great Britain under his command, are we to
expect no reparation for these insults? Have we reason, from what we have seen
of Mr. Jay's correspondence with Lord Grenville, to presume that any has been
asked? are we not assured that none has been ob^^^ed? What, then, is the
beasted article, about which so much has already been said, which was the only
one communicated to the public, as the only one that it was imagined would bear
the light? what is it but a declaration on the part of Britain, that though she
had already stripped us of millions, though she has occasioned the death of
thousands of our fellow citizens, yet she now promises, that if we will let her
pocket another million, and pay as much more out of our own treasury for a
peace with her Indian allies, she will consent, in case the war with France
should continue, and she should be too weak to contend with us, to let us
possess our own territory. And what is our submission to these terms, and the
unrequited insults we have received, but the lowest political degradation? If
it is said that these were the best terms that could be obtained, I boldly deny
the assertion; the state of Europe, the state of England itself, their
submission to Denmark and Sweden, even to the little state of Genoa, warrant
the denial. But should it even have been otherwise, it would have been
infinitely better, both in point of honor and interest, to have waited, after
having spoken with dignity of our rights, till circumstances should have
enabled us to enforce them, than to have relinquished our well founded claim to
a compensation of at least ten millions; to have relinquished that satisfaction
which our national honor demanded; can we doubt that if we were ourselves too
weak, which I am far from supposing, that the magnanimity of France would have
permitted her to conclude a peace with England, without procuring us the
satisfaction which her guarantee of our territories entitled us to ask? I am
warranted in asserting, from the best authority, that she would not.

CATO

No. II.
THE next transaction of the treaty of Paris, for which we were entitled to
compensation, is that by which they engaged not to carry off negroes or other
property. To enforce this stipulation, the commander in chief, by the order of
congress, sent colonel Smith and Mr. Benson to New York; who, finding it
impossible to prevent property to a considerable amount from being shipped,
took an account of so much as came to their knowledge. -- What satisfaction has
Mr. Jay procured to the United States for this loss? Are commissioners
appointed by choice or by chance, for the liquidation of these accounts? Has
the British government rendered itself liable for them? When Mr. Jay was so
solicitous to secure to the British merchants every item of their demands, with
interest and damages, would it not have been proper to have reflected upon
those his country might claim?

The third demand, and perhaps the best founded of any made by a free country,
was that which rel^^ed, not merely to the violation of our flag, nor to a point
of national honor only, nor to the infraction of treaties, or the withholding
our ter^^tories, but to what is infinitely dearer than either, to the p^^sonal
liberty of our citizens. Before Mr. Jay left this country, it had been the
common practice of the British to press American seamen, not only from our
vessels at sea, but in the very harbor of London, and with such distinguished
contempt did they treat us, that the government not only winked at it, but
their judiciary, in defiance of their own laws, authorized it. A seaman having
found means (a matter of no small difficulty when in the hands of a press-gang)
to procure a habeas corp^^, the captain of the ship of war returned on the
writ, that he was a British subject; and though the seaman had certificate^ and
witnesses to prove that he was an American citizen, the judge refused to admit
them, and declared that the captain's return was conclusive evidence; from
which time to the present moment, it has been the common practice of the ships
of war, even within sight of our own harbors, to tear that valuable class of
citizens from their domestic enjoyments, from the bosom of their families, to
be subject to military discipline and imprisonment. By a tame submission to
these measures, we withhold that protection which is due to every citizen, and
which indeed is the great end of government. We man the fleets of the enemy of
our ally; disable our merchants from availing themselves of all the advantages
we might derive from our neutrality, and justify our seamen in quitting a
country in which they have no security, even for personal liberty, to seek it
in foreign service. -- Of this resource, however, Mr. Jay has endeavored to
deprive them. Surely it would have been his duty, when he was consigning such
as went into the service of our ally, to an infamous death, to have obtained
some satisfaction for the wrongs they had suffered while under the protection
of their national flag: yet upon this subject the treaty is wholly silent.
Perhaps the envoy extraordinary believed, that any stipulation in their favor,
would have derogated from his assertion, that America relied solely on the
justice and magnanimity of his Britannic majesty.

If the British merchants are entitled to the payment of those f^^e demands,
which the tyranny of their own government infabled their ruined debtors from
discharging, how much more ^^^ly may our injured seamen, forced from their
native homes, subjected to a brutal tyranny they detested, and compelled to
fight against the people they loved; how much more, I say, are they entitled to
payment for their loss of time, with interest and damages for the injuries they
have sustained? yet no commissioners are appointed to hear their demands; no
national security is pledged for their indemnification; no satisfaction is made
to the insulted honor of the nation; no officer, that has ^^traged the laws of
nature and nations, is punished or even removed from the command which he has
so unworthily exercised. On the contrary, Lord Grenville, fearful that the
people might at length be wearied with repeated insults, and resent them upon
such of their authors as daily frequent our ports and harbors, and repay our
mistaken hospitality with insults, has expressly stipulated, in the 23d
article, "That the officers shall be treated with that respect which is due to
the commissions they bear; and if any shall be insulted by any inhabitants, all
offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of the peace between
the two countries." This article not only deserves consideration, as forming a
striking contrast to our shameless indifference for the injuries and insults
our own officers and men have actually received, but as laying the foundation
for future differences with Great Britain, whenever she shall find it
convenient to deny us some stipulated right, under pretense that the treaty has
been violated. Though this article professes to be mutual, yet it is evidently
without reciprocity; because we have sew or no officers who could avail
themselves of it, while our cities are crowded with persons who boast a royal
commission: These have, upon every occasion, manifested a disposition to assume
airs of superiority and to insult our citizens; nor have they been restrained
but by the fear of perferal chastisement from lording it over us in our own
coffee houses. This article being totally undefined, will be construed by every
officer according to his own sense of the respect that he think^ "due to the
commission he bears," and every coffee house (...) must, in future, become the
subject of national discussion.

As the treaty appoints no tribunal for ascertaining the r^^^^ due to a British
commission, so also it leaves us in the dark as to the power that is to punish
the unfortunate American who fails in the respect due to the swaggering captain
of a cu^^^, or the fat purser of a frigate; as he is to be considered a (...)
orther of the peace of two nation: (to suppose either nation punish him) and he
will probably be delivered up to Great Britain to be treated as a pirate.

Let me ask Mr. Jay, what principle of justice or nece^^^ty dictated this
article? Do not the existing laws of the country protect every man? Is it not
enough that our constituti^^^ have organized courts for the special benefit of
foreigners, (...) the injury of our own citizens? Did it become us, with d^^^
examples before our eyes of the insolence and injustice of ^^tish officers, to
bury in silence the wrongs we had rece^^^ from them, and enter into special
stipulations in their favor.

CATO.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Philadelphia Address. To the President of the United States.
The Address of the Subscribers, Merchants and Traders of (...) City of
Philadelphia,
Respectfully shows --
THAT, confiding in the wisdom, integrity, and patrio^^^ of the constituted
authorities, we have forborne to (...) our opinions on the merits of the treaty
pending between G^^^ Britain and the United States; though, as merchants (...)
traders, our interests are more immediately concerned th^^ those of any other
class of men amongst us; as well on account of the indemnity therein stipulated
for past losses, as for the security we apprehend it will give to the immense
proper^^ employed, by the merchants of the United States, in th^^ foreign
commerce.

But seeing, that other citizens have expressed their opi^^^^^ upon this
important subject, and fearing lest our silence should be construed into an
acquies^^^ce in those opinions, we d^^^ it our duty, explicitly and publicly,
to avow our approbation of the conduct of the senate of the United States;
believing, that a different conduct respecting the treaty, would have subject^^
us to the imminent hazard of war, with all its concomitant evil^; and more
especially, as provision is made for the e^^^blishment of public and private
credit -- a continuance of peace with all the advantages under which our
commerce flourishes -- and the further improvement of our country, now
progressing in a degree elsewhere without example.

These are advantages and blessings, which, in our opinions greatly outweigh
all the objections to the treaty, generally; and as further negociations are
recommended for obtaining a less limited intercourse with the British West
India islands, w^ hope, that it will be rendered still more beneficial to this
country.

Such being our sentiments, we submit them freely; and in confidence, that as
they have not been hastily formed, so they will not be less deserving of
consideration.

Thomas Willing Matthew Clarkson Joseph Ball Thomas Fitzsimons Tho. M. Willing
Robert Waln Archibald M'Call Joseph Sims George Plumsted Robert Stevenson
William Sitgreaves Josiah Hewes John Steinmetz John M. Nesbitt John Nixon James
C. Fisher James Cox Samuel W. Fisher Richard Rundic Robert Morris Nathan
Sellers (...) Wharton John Miller, jun. James Pember^on John Nicholson ^^o.
Murgatroyd William M.Murtrie Peter Blight James Yard Patrick Moor^ Zacche^^
Collins Mark Prager, jun. James Crawford Joseph Anthony William Cramond J. G.
Wachsmuth Curtis Clay Philip Nicklin John Leamy Is^^^ Ha^^^^urst William
Montgomery William Newoold Henry Pratt Abraham Kintzing, jun. James Stewart
James Bar Thomas Canby John Wall Levi Hollingsworth George Latimer John Perot
Peter Mackie John Instone Robert Smith Joseph Clark William Tailor Samuel Price
Henry Drinker, jun. Thomas Shaw Israel Brown Timo^hy Parton Samuel Hodgdon
William Davis Abr^ham Dubois Jacob Baker John Morrell James Henderson John
Inskeep John Campbell Paul Beck, jun. George Pennock Elliston Perot James
Hartley James Boggs Richard Potter. William Massey John Mavbin John Stille,
jun. Jonathan Willis William ^an^^ Adam Mendenhall Chamless Allen Redmund
Byrnes Ebenezer Large John Thompson John Waddington Robert Henderson Thomas
Newhold, j^^. Anthony Tailor John Shield^ Joseph Cook Alexander E^^^^^ey
Andrew Tybour Israel Jones Henry Sheaff Robert E. Gri^^ith Samuel Pleasan^^
Mark Rodes Charles Marquedant Joseph Doonaldson John Guier Joseph Gray William
Guie^ Jacob Ba^ye William Sheaff David Evan^ George Harrison S. Sterret John N.
Hagenan John P. Sanderson Daniel Drinker John Poultney Thomas Poultney Robert
Bass Richard Wistar John Hopkins Abraham Singer Gideon Hill Wells Adam
Zantzin^^^ G^or^^ Kep^^l^ Michael Roberts ^eorge D. Thomson ^dward Thomson
^homas Roberts ^den Shotwell William Chancellor John Davis John Smith ^braham
Garrigues (...) Wiltberger William Smith ^eorge Roberts, jun. ^^^^^d Kempton
(...) Hallowell (...) Roberts (...) Reynolds (...) Davies ^^^^h Edwards ^^^am E
Maddock ^^^am Holdernesse ^^^ry Baker (...) Dorsey ^^^^ch Francis (...) Paxon
^^u^^ Thomas ^^hn Harland ^^eter W. Call^nder ^^^lam Beaven ^^^hua Cl^bbornc
^^ame, M' Crea ^ames ^acon ^o^^th L. Co^tes ^oon D. Blanchard (...) Paschall
William Wells ^amuel Wil^or ^^mos Wickertham ^obert Wharton ^aniel Ruff ^oseph
Parker William Folwell John Redman ^harles Harris John Lorain, jun. Thomas
Cumps^on Philip Wager John Melbeck Godfrey Baker John Baker Godfrey Haga John
Vaughan Thomas Coats ^rederick Boller John Jordan Samuel Mecklin Edward
Penington, jun. Joseph Hough (...) Sutter, jun. George Bickham Wilson Hunt
Abijah Dawes William Young, bookseller James Smith, jun. Richard R. Smith John
Clark David Lewis Francis West George Dougherty Jacob Shoemaker Pearson Hunt
John Simson William Lucas Nalbro' Frazier John Fraxier John B. Evans Joseph
Richardson John Sitgreaves John Travis Robert Raincy Robert Gray Robert Harwood
Israel Whelen David Lenox John Duffield Alexander Fullerton Joseph C. Fisher
John Carrell Benjamin Hornor David Lapsley John Wagner John Achley Samuel
Howell William Miller, jun. Peter Brown George Guest William L. So^^tag Israel
Pleasants Jeremiah Parker John Elmsley, jun. John Evans James Lyle Jeremiah
Warder James Ryan Joseph Waln John Ketland John Philips John C. Stocker Richard
Thompson Daniel Smith George Scott Francis Gurney Nathan Lewis William Steel
John Shalleross David Walker Joseph Russell Jonathan Robeson James Campbell
Jehn Hollingsworth, j^^. James Steel Benjamin Thomas Thomas Cuthbert John
Rudolph Richard Sweetman Seth Willis William Clark John M'Dermo^^ Isaac Lloyd
Aaron Welsh Richard Flower Samuel Read Thomas W. Francis George Sibbald
Dominick Joyce Owen Jones J. Pritchard Eli Canby Samuel Clarkson Leviu^s
Clarkson William Allibone John Skyrin Malcolm M'Docald Charles Mulvey Joseph
Lownes John Welsh Philip Reilly Thomas Bell James Paul Kearney Wharton
Alexander Tod James Greenleaf Thomas Ewing John Kaigh^ Charles Jarvis Samuel W.
Jarvi^ John Guest William Z^ne James Gallagher Henry Manly Matthi^^ Keely
Richard Hopkins Charles Pleasants Joseph Pleasants Benjamin Hornor, jun. John
Field John Stille Joseph Claypoole Joseph Anthony, jun. Josiah Twamley William
Wistar Edward Sho^maker ^awrence Seckel James Miller Caleb Lownes Charles
Shoemaker John Watson Thomas Callender George Armroyd Richard Tunis Thomas P.
Wharton John Watson John Wharton, jun. Samuel Allen William Redwood Mordecai
Lewis Alexander Anderson E. E. Maddock Peter Reeves William Poyntell George
M'Call Moses Cox Frederick Kesselman Charles Robertson Isaac Oakman James Sawer
James Steel Nathan Thomas, jun. Robert Andrews Robert C. Latimer John Miller
Samuel Cummings Samuel Murdock William Buckley John Barnes John Pinkerton, sen.
Jonathan Harvey W. B. Goldthwait James Moore Benj. W. Morris George Willing
E^^hiel King Thomas Randall William Lewis James Bringhurst, jun. William
Harland Alexander Miller Samuel Coats (...) Taggart Thomas Orr Richard S.
Footman William Mott Thomas Bradford Thomas Hockley Robert Wescott James Rees
John Fries William Dawson Thomas Shoemaker Benjamin F. West Jacob Downing
Edward Bartlett Emanuel Walker George Peter Philip Care Crook Stevenson Jacob
Clements Bankson Tailor George Meade Magnus Miller Richard Footman James Ash
John Bohlen Hugh Hodge Nathan Field Charles French Joseph Buroughs Hugh Ely
Thomas W. Smith Andrew Hodge William Drinker Samuel Spaulding William Compton
Morris Robeson William Lippe^cott Joshua Lippencott John Haworth Thomas
Clifford ^ohn Clifford Jacob Park George Fox Abraham Carlisle Joseph Ricardo
Jacob Knorr, jun. Thomas Ryerson Peter Kuhn Frederick Heisz Henry Seckel Joseph
Higbee Ephraim Clarke Charles Massey Thomas Morgan Edward Randolph Benjamin
Shoemak^^ John Paul Samuel Shaw, jun. Thomas Hammett Jacob Ridgway Samuel Shaw
William Sansom Samuel Meeker Benjamin Holland William Miller Alexander Murray
Thomas Harper Charles Ross Hugh Holmes William Yardley Patterson Hartsborne
Samuel Jackson Samuel M. Fox Thomas M'Ewen Matthew M'Connell Thomas Hale.


PRESIDENT's ANSWER.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE, with great sensibility, your address on the subject of the treaty
lately negociated between the United States and Great Britain, expressing your
confidence in the constituted authorities, and the concurrence of your opinions
with their determinations, on this highly important subject. Such sentiments,
deliberately formed, and proceeding from men whose interests are more
immediately concerned than those of any other classes of my fellow citizens,
cannot fail to strengthen that just confidence in the rectitude of public
measures, which is essential to the general welfare.

Go. WASHINGTON.

DISSENT Of a Number of the Citizens of Boston.
Boston, July 15th, 1795.
WHEREAS the votes adopted at a late meeting of this town, relative to the
treaty of amity, navigation, and commerce, between the United States and his
Britannic majesty, 0652 0698 V 2 have been represented as expressing the
unanimous sentiments of the merchants and other inhabitants upon that subject.

We, the subscribers, unwilling to be implicated in the ^^^ber of those, who
approve of the doings of that meeting, (...) reserving to ourselves the right
of expressing our opinion, in^^vidually, upon the merits or demerits of public
measures, do hereby declare our disapprobation of, and dissent from, the votes,
of said meeting:

Thomas Russe^^ William Mac^ay M^^go Mac^ay John C. J^^^ Joseph Russell Charles
Miller Samuel G. P^^ki^s David S^^^rs Theodore Lyman William Wet^^re William
Powell Francis Butle^ Edward Edes Alexander Hill Stephen C^d^^^ Henry Smith
Joseph C^^lid^e Jonathan Mason William Phi^^ip^, j^^. Charles ^ig^^^y Charles
Va^gh^^^ Stephen Maggi^^^ Wi^^^ (...) D^^^l S^^gent Thomas Amery James P^^^ion
David Surg^^^t, j^^^r. Samuel (...) Samuel P^^^ William Par^^^ Le^^^ Gar^^er
William Brown T^^^thy William; Eben Pars^^, Joseph May B. C. Cutler Garham
Parsons Henry Mewham Samuel ^^^iot Samuel Gardner M. C. Groves David P^^^rce,
jun. Sylv^^^ Gray Samuel Pain Thomas Thompson Benjamin H^^^er John Gray Joseph
H^^^d (...) ^^^cy William Bardman, j^^. Simon Elliot Joseph Foster Perrian May
John May Jonathan Merry Nathan Guadale Joseph Reby M^^^iel Goodwin Ephrai^
^^^iot E^^^im Morse Maac Davis Henry Hill Jere^^^h Khaler George D^^^ert
Jer^^^h Howard Jededi^h Parker John T. Sargen^ John Codman, David Green Allen
Crocker Joseph Laughton Joseph Pope Henry Hunter Samuel Wallis James Cutler
Benjamin B^ssey John Amory, jun. P. Conner Samuel Salish^ry Francis Amory
Mi^^^t Th^yer ^^^el Miller Thayer Joseph Ripley (...) B^lch William Richards^^
Joseph Carnes John Wins^ow Thomas Gre^^l^af Lewis Ca^^^ Edward Cu^^^ing Luke
P^ker Samuel S^^^r William Sp^^^ Thomas Br^wer Stephen Higg^^^son, j^^^. Samuel
S^li^^^ry, j^^^. Paul Revere J. B^ssey Jere^i^^ Bum^^^d, j^^^. Jo^^^ Davis,
jun. Robert Davis Jo^^^ah K^apy Edward Edes, jun. Joseph Hussy William Mackay,
jun. William Stackpole Charles Miller, jun. Lewis Hayt William Stevenson Isaac
Rand Benjamin Russell Ebenezer Lewis Samuel Smith Isaac Davis, jun. William
Dall J^siah Qu^ncy James Clark John Crease William Cravain Lemuel Hayward
Joseph Whipple Edward Tuckerman Nathaniel Curtis Ezra Whitney Ephraim May
Richard Faxon Daniel Greenleaf Ebenezer Frothingham Moses May Stephen Rawson
Samuel Davenport Samuel Sprague Moses W. Dana Isaac Vose A. L^ngford Daniel
Weld Zeva Thayer Aaron Warren David Cobb Samuel Bowen John Williams B. Butler
Thomas Dennie John M. Lean Charles Vose Rufus Davenport William Porter John
Bosson William Wood John Osborne Robert Robbins L. Edes Benjamin Fossenden,
jun. Elisha Ticknor John Kennedy Samuel Ridgway Francis Green Amos Lincoln
William Smith Thomas Curti^ John How Benjamin Sumner, jun. John Webb Checkley
Joseph Crocker Moses Eayres William Ellison Daniel Bates John Homans Jonathan
Hunnewell James Ray P. R. Dalton Henry Roby Redford Webster Thomas Hearsey
Samuel Beales Andrew Leach Samuel Dan^orth.


DISSENT Of a Number of the Citizens of Trenton and its Vicinity, from the
Proceedings of the late Town-Meeting.
Trenton, August 14th, 1795.
A PUBLICATION having appeared in the New Jersey State Gazette of the 4th
instant, containing certain resolutions disapproving of the proposed treaty
between the United States and Great Britain, said to have been adopted at a
general meeting of the citizens of Trenton and its vicinity, held the 29th day
of July, 1795 -- We, the subscribers, citizens of Trenton and its vicinity, not
having concurred in, and not approving of, the said resolutions, thus publicly
testify the same, and declare our entire saitsfaction and confidence in the
constituted authorities of our country, and our determination to acquiesce in
such measures as have been or may be finally adopted, relative to the said
treaty, by such constituted authorities.

Citizens of Trenton.
* Isaac Smith * Samuel Leake Philemon Dickinson Charles Axford * James F.
Armstrong James Ewing George Campbell, James B. Machett Maskell Ewing Samuel
Dickinson * J. Rhea B. Smith Thomas Yardly Peter Howell A. Hunt Arch-bald W.
Yard Pontius D Stelle John Guild Abraham G. Claypoole Lambert Cadwalader Aaron
Dunham George Davis William Hay John Coryell, junr. Ogden Woodruff John Riggs
Joseph Bond * An. Dn. Woodruff N Belleville Nathan Beakes Ebenezer Cowell, jun.
* A. Chambers, jun. J. Chambers Peter Teale Bernard Handlon Silvester Doyle
Jonathan Doan Benjamin Jones Robert Tailor Micajah How George Holcomb George
Beatty Mahlon Reed William Reeder Joseph Britain Job Scott Abraham Bloodgood
Rens. Williams Joshus Wright William Rippin Charles Axford, jun. Jo^iah
Appleton Thomas Rippin John Harding William Patterson John Robinson Alexander
Chambers Tretwell Wright John Musgrove Stephen Welsh James Yard Henry Pike
James Monjoy Robert Murry Isaac Yard George Rozell William Yard William
Musgrove John Hooton Anthony Biship.
Citizens of the vicinity who happened, occasionally, to be in town.
Robert Pearson, Robert Pearson, jun. William Pearson.

N. B. Those persons to whose names a^^cris^^s are placed, were out of town
before notice of the meeting was given, and did not attend said meeting; and of
the other subscribers, it is said, not more than three or four persons
attended, who totally disapproved of the said proceedings.



Proceedings at Trenton.
AT a numerous and respectable meeting of the citizens of Trenton and its
vicinity, convened on the 13th August, 1795, at the state-house, General
Frelinghuysen, one of the senators of this state in the congress of the United
States, attended, and at the request of the citizens present, consented to give
his sentiments on the treaty now depending between the United States and Great
Britain; whereupon it was

Resolved (without reference to the merits of the said treaty) That the meeting
have the fullest confidence in the honor, virtue, and integrity of Frederick
Frelinghuysen, one of the senators of this state; that this meeting are fully
of opinion that in voting for the said treaty, he was actuated by the purest
principles of patriotism; and that the thanks of this meeting be given to him
for the candor with which he has stated the reasons which induced him to vote
for the said treaty.

PROCEEDINGS Of the Boston Chamber of Commerce, at a large and respectable
Meeting, convened at the Request of a Number of the Members, and held at their
Hall, on Tuesday, August 11th, 1795, by Adjournment, to consider of, and
express their Sentiments relative to, the Treaty made by Mr. Jay, in behalf of
the United States, with Britain.
A MOTION was made to have the treaty read, which was done: it was then moved
to discuss, and pass upon, the teaty, article by article -- this motion was
objected to, because the subject had been so fully and so publicly discussed,
and the members had had so much time to study the treaty, and deliberately to
form their opinion, that every one must be ready for the question -- it was
therefore dispensed with.

A motion was then made in the words following, viz.

Resolved, as the opinion of the chamber, That the recommendation of the senate
to the president of the United States, to ratify the treaty, as amended by
them, was wise and, prudent; because it settles, in a fair and amicable manner,
points of difference between the two nations, which must otherwise necessarily
subject our country to a humiliating submission to British impositions and
injuries, or induce a war, with all its horrors and distresses, to seek
redress; and because, when considered collectively, the tendency of the treaty
must be to promote and extend, rather than to injure and restrain, our commerce.

This motion gave rise to a lengthy and free discussion of the object at large,
after which the question was put by the president, when the same was adopted
with one diffentient only.

Another motion was then made in the words following, viz:

Resolved, therefore, That the chamber cannot but lament and disapprove every
attempt to excite an opposition to the treaty, in the minds of the people, and
to detach their considence from the government of the union; because in a
government like ours, a firm reliance of the people in the wi^^^^ and integrity
of those authorities, which they have the^^ (...) constituted to manage their
public concerns, and a cheerful ^^quiescence in the decisions of rulers of
their own appoint^^^, are indispensible to secure the peace, the honor, and the
happiness of the community.

This motion was also put by the president, after a short ^^cussion, and was
adopted with one diffentient only.

Another motion was then mode in the words following, (...).

Resolved, That the president of the chamber be reque^^ to forward an
authenticated copy of the preceding resolution to the president of the United
States, and to publish the (...) in the public newspapers.

This motion was put also and passed unanimously.

The question upon the whole was then put by the president, ^^ter a few
observations, and passed unanimously in the aff^^^^.

THOMAS RUSSELL, President

RESOLUTIONS Of the Citizens of the Borough of York (Pen^sylvania) and (...)
Vicinity, at a Meeting held at the Courthouse, on Monday, the 17th of August,
1795, for the Purpose of taking into C^^^^^^tion, Measures proper to be purs^ed
upon the Subject of the Treaty between Great Britain and the United States.
AFTER a full and deliberate discussion of the subject the following
resolutions were moved, and unani^^^^ adopted.

1 st. Resolved, That although we consider it the constitution right of the
citizens of the United States to address the ^^^dent by way of petition,
memorial, or remonstrance, (...) subject, concerning which the constitution has
vested him with a negative or affirmative; yet, that there may be (...)
situations in which it would be exceedingly improper, and inconsistent with
their duty, so to do.

2d. Resolved, That we consider the present occasion as (...) of those, on
which it would be highly improper to advise the ^^^s^d^^^ not to give his
affirmative to the pending treaty, a such conduct would seem to be interfering
with the con^^^^^uted powers, which ought never to take place but in cases of
the greatest necessity; that it would betray a want of con^^idence in the
senate, and in the president; that it would ^^nd to weaken our government, and
give foreign nations a bad opinion of its wisdom and stability; and that it
would have a direct tendency to encourage animosities, factions, and divisions
among ourselves.

3d. Resolved, That we have a full and entire confidence, that the president of
the United States will never exceed his constitutional powers, and that in the
exercise of them he will combine, as he always hitherto has done, wisdom with
integrity.

4th. Resolved, That we deem the constitutional guard upon the executive as
sufficiently strong, even where less confidence is due, in requiring the advice
and consent of two thirds of the senate as an essential requisite to the
ratification of treaties.

5th. Resolved, That we cheerfully leave the Treaty between this country and
Great Britain where the constitution has directed it to be left; feeling the
most perfect reliance that the honor and interest of this country, will be
fully considered in a decision upon it.

Resolved, That a copy of the foregoing resolutions be transmitted by the
chairman of this meeting, to the president of the United States.

JOHN EDIE, Chairman.

FROM THE GAZETTE OF THE UNITED STATES.
Philadelphia, 13th August, 1795. Mr. F^nns,
MUCH has been said as to the part Mr. Thomas Pinckney, the minister from the
United States, resident with the court of London, had in the negociations which
ended in the treaty of amity, commer^^ and navigation with that court, lately
ratified be a constitutional majority of the senate of the United States; and
the author of a paragraph in the Aurora of Tuesday, undertakes to say that the
reports of Mr. P^^ckney's having approved of the treaty, were calumnious to Mr.
^^^^ney and false.

The enclosed extracts, which are sent to you for publication, will serve to
inform the public on this point, and will show the author of the paragraph in
the Aurora, that he is mistaken.

I do not suppose that any person of common sense or the smallest information,
will consider a treaty as good or but because made or approved by this or that
minister. The instrument should certainly be weighed and judged of by its own
intrinsic merits or defects. Nor do I believe that any senator who voted for
the treaty did so in blind compliance with the opinion of any other man,
however respectable the author of that opinion might be.

The integrity and true patriotism of Mr. Pinckney are above all suspicion. His
great abilities, his thorough acquaintance with, and his anxious attention to,
the interests of America will never be doubted by those who know him. What then
will the opposers of the treaty say, when they read the sentiments of a
minister whom they profess to admire, who was on the sp^^ fully acquainted with
the real situation of affairs, and the di^^culties Mr. Jay had to encounter in
the negotiation, and whose letter to the secretary of state shows, in the most
plain and unequivocal terms, the dreadful alternative, A WAR, the United States
must have encountered.

CAROLINIENSIS

Extract of a Letter from Mr. Jay to the Secretary of State, d^^d London, 19th
November, 1794.
"I OUGHT not to omit mentioning the acknowledgements due from me to Mr.
Pinckney, with whom I have every reason to be satisfied, and from whose advice
and opinion have derived light and advantage in the course of the negotiation.
His approbation of the treaty gives me pleasure, not merely because his opinion
corresponds with my own, but also, from the sentiments I entertain of his
judgment and candor.

"My own opinion of the treaty is apparent from my having signed it; -- I have
no reason to believe or conjecture, that one more favorable to us is
attainable."

Extract of a Letter from Thomas Pinckney, Minister Plenip^^tiory, to the
Secretary of State, dated London, 16th November, 1794.
"MR. JAY communicated freely with me on this subject during the course of the
negotiation; and I have witnessed the great difficulties which have occurred in
adjusting several of the articles. Although some points might have been
arranged more beneficially for us, if the treaty had been dictated entirely by
the United States, yet when it is considered as a composition of differences,
where mutual complaints had rendered mutual concessions necessary to establish
a good understanding, I think it may fairly be said, that as little has been
conceded by Mr. Jay, and as much obtained for the United States, as, all
circumstances considered, could be expected: the business, upon the whole, has
been concluded more beneficially for us than I had any hope we could obtain by
negotiation six months ago, and, in my opinion, places us in a more
advantageous situation than we should have been in by becoming parties to the
war."

RESOLUTIONS Of the Citizens of Richmond, generally convened, at the Capital in
the said City, on Wednesday the 29th day of July, 1795, for the important
Purpose of taking into Consideration the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and
Navigation, between the United States of America and his Britannic Majesty.
GEORGE WITH, Chairman.
THE citizens of Richmond, awfully impressed with the momentous crisis of
American affairs -- hold it not only their right, but their bounden duty, to
express their sentiments to the chief magistrate of the United States, on a
subject which ought to engage the mind of, and be carefully examined by, every
citizen of America -- and which, no doubt, has called forth the attention of a
great part of Europe -- we mean the proposed treaty between America and Great
Britain, as lately made public. And though they feel a secret satisfaction, in
the firm belief, that the executive of the United States coincides in opinion
with them; yet, as the situation of the head of that department, under the
particular circumstances of the present case, may wish for the general
sentiment of his fellow citizens, before an exercise of his own judgment on so
important a subject, is finally made; a judgment, not to be recalled by him or
us, without the most dreadful consequences, perhaps, ensuing; they therefore
proceed to state their opinion thereon.

Resolved, unanimously, That, considering the creaty now offered by Great
Britain to America, to be

Insulting to the dignity,

Injurious to the interest,

Dangerous to the security, and

Repugnant to the constitution, of the United States:

We, the citizens of Richmond, hold it, therefore, not only unbecoming freemen
to be silent, but that under the strong impressions, which mature reflection
has rivetted on our minds, we should deem it criminal, in the highest degree,
not to give our entire and pointed disapprobation of this instrument.

Resolved, That Dr. Fouthee, Mr. John Mayo, Mr. Richard Adams, senior, Mr.
Henry Banks, Mr. Andrew Dunscomb, Mr. Samuel M'Craw, Mr. Alexander Quarrier,
Mr. Thomas Mason, and Mr. John Stewart, be appointed a comtaittee to frame an
address to the president of the United States, on the foregoing principles, and
report to a meeting to be held at this place tomorrow afternoon at for (...)
o'clock.

Resolved, That the citizens are earnestly; requested to attend at the time and
place specified in the preceding resolution.

Test, JAMES RIND, Secretary,

August 1st, 1795. REPORT Of the Committee chosen by the Citizens of Savannah
(Georgia) convened in Christ-church, on Wednesday, July ^9th, 1795.
THE committee appointed by their fellow citizens to take into consideration
and arrange their objections against a certain treaty between plenipotentiaries
of the United States and his Britannic majesty, signed on the 10th of November,
1794, Report,

That reciprocal benefit and mutual advantage are the only proper inducements
for national negociations, and ought to be the basis of all treaties between
sovereign and independent nations.

That the objects which presented themselves for a negotiation with Great
Britain, at the time when Mr. Jay was appointed to that mission, were in their
nature truly interesting to the justice, honor and happiness, of the United
States; among which we consider the procuring a compliance with the treaty of
peace, obtaining compensation for recent spoliations on the property of
American merchants, and preventing future repetitions of such injuries, as the
most important. That, by the treaty above referred to, neither of these objects
has been accomplished, nor has any political or commercial benefit in favor of
the United States been attained; but on the contrary, a variety of concessions
have been made to Great Britain, in violation of the treaty of 1783, and of our
engagements with France and other nations, in subversion of the rights of the
people, and if ratified, to the eternal disgrace and reproach of our government.

That the said treaty is calculated to contravene the acts of banishments and
attainder, passed during the late American war, and to authorize the return of
all persons included in them, without any condition, although that power is
exclusively vested in the legulatures of the respective states.

That, by the treaty of peace, the right of property of the north western
territory within the boundaries designated therein, was vested in the United
States; and had that treaty been complied with, would, long ago, have been
disposed of for their use: that the treaty lately made, whilst it necessarily
implies an aggression, or at least a failure on the part of Great Britain,
provides, not only an indemnity, but also, at our expense, a compensation to
her subjects, and clogs the surrender of an acknowledged right, withheld for
eleven years, with provisions tending to lessen the value of such surrender.
This article and the next prove that Great Britain has so contrived the present
treaty as to part with nothing on this head, even after the 1st of June, 1796,
but the mere possession and expense of the posts in question. By the
stipulation in savor of her settlers, whether they remain British subjects, or
disguise themselves as American citizens, it is evident the profits of their
trade will center in Great Britain, and the connections and influence continue
as extensive as ever with the Indian tribes; two objects appearing to your
committee of more importance than the mere occupation of the ground; besides,
as, from the nature of this trade, and the manner of carrying it on, there will
be abundant opportunity, so there can be little doubt that (in a people so
recently leagued in war with the savages against us) there will be sufficient
inclination to des^^nd the American revenue.

That it gives to the subjects of a foreign nation the uncontrolable power and
night of passing through the territory of the United States; a privilege which
is contrary to the policy of all nations: that the navigation of the river
Mississippi, although a right of the United States which cannot be q^^stioned,
may not be brought into operation without great difficulty and expense; and
that therefore a participation of it ought not to have been stipulated for,
without some reciprocal obligation, by which the beneficial effect of this
right would have been pro^^^ed that, by our exclusion from the ports within the
limits of the Hudson's bay company, the advantages of the Indian trade will be
confined to British subjects: that it provides for the establishment of a
tribunal unknown to, and in violation of, the constitution, which will have the
power of reviewing the decisions of our courts, constitutionally made, and of
impeaching the justice and legality of those d^cisions; the fifth commissioner
is to be elected by lot, and upon this principle, we conceive it is to be
determined by chance, merely, whether the United States are to be encumbered
with the payment of large sums of money to British merchants, and to an
unlimited amount. Your committee view this article as the more unwarrantable
and un^^cessary, because they are confident that in this state no legal
impediments have been created against the recovery of de^^^ due to British
creditors since the treaty of 1783, but that, on the contrary, the courts of
the United States have for several years past been in constant and active
operation, for the purpose of enforcing the recovery of their demands, without
an^ equitable allowance for the hardships and distresses of the war, or even
for losses wantonly occasioned by the government and subjects of that nation.
That, on the other hand, legal impediments have been created against the
recovery of debts (...) American citizens in Great Britain, of which the
celebrates case, Nut versus Wright, is one among many instances which might be
cited.

It is entirely silent on that important subject, the restoration of negroes,
and other property carried from this continent by the British troops, in direct
violation of the treaty of 1783, is the disappointment, and, in many instances,
ruin of the unfortunate citizens of the United States, who have suffered by
this unwarrantable measure; whereas the British government and courts of law,
where attempts have been made to recover by that means, have repeatedly held
out assurances of compensation.

We consider that part of the treaty which makes provision for compensating the
losses sustained by citizens of the respective parties, by means of illegal
spoliations, as manifestly and grossly unequal and partial, and that, so far as
it respects American citizens, it is altogether ineffectual, on their pa^^s no
application can be made to the commissioners until it shall have been
ascertained, by going through a tedious course of judicial proceeding, whether
any remedy can be obtained in that way: then the applications and proofs must
be produced in Great Britain; whereas British subjects may apply immediately it
home, and r^^eve compensation, although the courts of admiralty of the United
States have been, and are constantly open to compel restitution where it is has
appeared that captures of British property have been illegally made.

It provides for the subjects of his Britannic majesty of every description,
without regard to banished persons, to hold lands in the territories of the
United States in like manner as if they were natives; and at the same time
holds out that American citizens may do the same in her dominions, where it is
well known that, by the English laws, aliens are incapacitated from holding
real estates; and the comparative quantity of lands held by the citizens of the
one power and subjects of the other, bears no manner of proportion.

The privilege offered by this treaty of trading to the West Indies is so
limited as to the burden of vessels, that it can afford little or no benefit;
it leaves all the advantages subject to the control of existing and future
legislative restrictions and prohibitions: Even this paltry privilege is
rendered of very small use to American merchants, by their being positively
restricted from exporting the produce of the West Indies to any part of the
world in their own vessels; and, in exchange for this pretended advantage, the
treaty has relinquished the right of exporting cotton, the growth of our own
soil, and one of the most important staples of the southern states, in American
vessels to foreign ports.

Your committee deem it necessary to observe fully on the article relating to
the West India trade, although its operation is suspended by the senate; and
they cannot forbear to remark, that this article, so far as it respects the
privilege of trading with small vessels, is the only one in that treaty which
contains the smallest appearance of benefit to the United States.

It therefore appears to your commit extraordinary that the representatives
of the people in senate, instead of rejecting this unequal and unrighteous
contract altogether, have ratified every part except the 12th article, in
consequence of which, every other article may be enforced, and this may be
^^llifiea, whereby the object of the West India trade will be put entirely out
of view.

It appears to your committee that the clause which restrains the congress of
the United States from increasing the tonnage of British vessels, is calculated
to suppress the American revenue, is an infringement of a constitutional right,
and will induce the necessity of straining the obnoxious measure of direct
taxation to an impolitic degree.

We find that the said treaty, instead of preventing any further spoliations,
on our property by the British, contains (...) provision calculated to promote
repetitions of those injuries.

That it authorizes the capture and detention of our vessels even on suspicion,
and carrying the same into British ports, whenever met by British vessels,
without any stipulation that compensation shall be made for unnecessary or
unsounded (...) tentions: That it authorizes searches of American vessels in
every instance: That these stipulations are contrary to the general law of
nations, interfere with the engagements between the United States and France,
and expose American seamen (...) arrest and de^ention by British vessels.

It enumerates and acknowledges as contraband of war, various articles which by
all our treaties with other nations are acknowledged not to be so, and invests
Great Britain with (...) power of declaring what articles shall be considered,
in future, as contraband. It enables that nation to defeat all the advantages
which otherwise might accrue to the United States fr^^^ a state of neutrality,
during the existence of European (...) and also is calculated to deprive a
sister republic of all the advantages to which she is entitled by existing
treaties with us.

It violates a natural right inherent in every freeman, by p^^venting the
citizens of these United States from expatria^^^ themselves, when they deem it
necessary, and engaging (...) foreign service.

It contains stipulations relative to the right of bringing a^^^ed vessels and
prizes into our seaports, which are incompatible with our engagements to
France, made at a time when we were under the most solemn and strict
obligations to that nation, which, instead, of being impaired by acts of
ingratitude and perfidy, we are anxious to have continued and confirmed by good
faith and friendly offices.

There is no object contained in this treaty that we conceive will warrant the
secret manner in which the whole progress of it has been conducted, and lament
that it did not receive a more, open and public discussion, in which case it is
presumable that the present embarrassment and agitation of the public mind
might have been averted.

Your committee, deeply impressed with the weight of these objections, and with
a sense of the many injuries which would result to the United States from a
final ratification of the said treaty, considering that it is a prostitution of
the sovereignty of the United States and a wanton sacrifice of the rights of
this free nation. -- DO recommend that an address be prepared, and transmitted
to the president of the United States, acconpanied with the objections above
stated, by which it may be requested that he will not ratify the said treaty.

Resolved, That Mr. Habersham, Mr. Clay, and Mr. Noel, he a committee to
prepare an address on the above subject to the president of the United States.

Mr. Habersham, from the committee, reported an address, which was agreed to.

Ordered, That two copies of the address be engrossed, and that Mr. chairman do
sign the same in behalf of the citizens present, and cause the report, address,
and proceedings, to be transmitted, both by land and water, to the president of
the United States, with all possible expedition.

Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be given to Messrs. Brown,
Bloodworth, Butler, Burr, Jackson, Langdon, Martin, Mason, Robinson, and
Tazewell, who were a minority in the senate in opposition to the said treaty,
for their virtue, integrity, and patriotism.

Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be given to the chairman, and
gentlemen composing the committee, for their atention to, and faithful
discharge of, the trust to which they were appointed.

Ordered, That the proceedings of this meeting be published and attested by the
secretary, and that the chairman do cause the same to be distributed in the
several counties of this state.

I certify that the foregoing is a true copy taken from the original.

PETER S. LAFFITTE, Sec'ry.

RESOLUTIONS Of the Inhabitants of Bordenton, Crosswicks, Blackhorse, and
Reckless Town, and their several Vicinities, adapted August 8th, 1795.
THE treaty with Great Britain, negociated by Lord Grenvilie and Mr. Jay, being
duly read and considered, the following resolations were proposed, and
conanimously adopted, viz.

1st. Resolved, That the very preanible of the treaty sills us with
mortification and astonishment, in as much as it abandons the high claims, the
positive losses, and that honorable reparation demanded throughout the union,
and so explicitly declared by our chief magistrate, as necessary to be insisted
upon, and which were held up to the people as justly to be expected, o^ his
appointment of an envoy extraordinary, to Great Britain, for that purpose, only.

The memorial of the citizens of Philadelphia, dated the 25th ultimo and signed
by Wilham Shippen, junior, as their chairman, having been, on motion, read,

2d. Resolved, That the said memorial expresses our sense of the separate
articles, and general tendency of the said treaty, a^ they respect our
commerce, our common interest, our ho^^^, and our safety.

3d. Resolved, Tha^ we do not comprehend the policy wh^^ leads us from the love
and protection of a sincere, powerful, and friendly nation, into the arms of an
old, inveterate, un^^terable foe; from ^^om we have received nothing but
injury, dupl^city, and insult.

4th. Resolved, That so long as the government of Great Britain continues
hostile to the rights of man, to the independence of other nations, and to
those very principles on which we have formed our respective governments, we
conceive their open comity much less dangerous than their pretended friendship,
and that their secret influence is more to be dreaded th^^ their declining
power.

5th. Resolved, That it be recommended to our fellow citi^^^ to consider of
some speedy remedy, by which that part of the federal constitution, which
empowers twenty senators, under a less virtuous executive, to sacrifice the
interest, honor, and the existence of these states, either through pride,
ignorance, vanity, or corruption -- to consider whether it be not necessary for
our common security, against future attempts to lay us prostrate at the feet of
our natural enemy, that two-thirds of the house of representatives, as well as
the senate, shall consent to the forming or ratifying treaties with foreign
nations; and whether the constitution ought not to open the doors of the
senate, ^^cept on some extraordinary occasions, or during a war.

6th. Resolved, That Stephen Thompson Mason is entitled to the thanks of this
meeting, and of every good citizen, and real friend to the constitution of the
United States, for (...) patriotic and independent conduct in rending the veil
of se^^torial secrecy, and thereby disclosing to the world the treaty, lately
concluded by John Jay and the minister of the king of Great Britain, ^ouching
the dearest rights, and most essential interests of a free people.

On motion, Resolved, That the proceedings of the present meeting be
immediately transmitted, by the chairman, to the president of the United States.

By order of the meeting, JOSEPH KIRKBRIDE, Chairman. State of New Jersey,
Bordentown, August 10, 1795. Attest, NATHAN ROCKHILL, Secretary.

FROM THE (BOSTON) CHRONICLE. An Essay on Jacobinical Thinkers.
Messrs. Adams and Larkin,
I SAY the treaty is a good one, Messrs. Printers, and all those are fools and
Jacobins that do not say so. I say so, not because I think so, for I do not
think about it, and there is none but your Jacobins who think any thing
respecting it. I say they are all Jacobins that presume to think any thing
about this subli^^^^ instrument. For what did we choose the senate for, and
send ^^^m to Philadelphia, but to think for us. To save the trouble of thinking
upon such things, we chose them, and gave them the exclusive right of thinking
upon them; and did they not accept that ^rust, whereby it became a bargain,
which the people have not now a right to violate? I say it was a bargain, a
sacred contract, that they should think for the people, and that the people
should think all their thinkings right and proper, and sound and just. He,
therefore, that dares to think on those matters, which we have given the senate
the sole, exclusive right to think on, is an Antifederalist and a Jacobin; and
I am surprised that any good Federalist should think otherwise. Is not this
what that trumpet-tongu'd asserter of the people's rights, Mr. Hamilton, I as
unweariedly been preaching up? Has he not proved it again and ^gain, as clear
as the sun in the late hot weather? I am amazed then the people should be
pryi^^ and searching and peeping into things they have no busi^^^ with. This
very thing, Messrs. Printers, has been the curse (...) all governments, and I
fear it will prove the bane of ours. Th^^ occasioned continual tumults in old
Rome; the Roman sen^^ could, and doubtless would, have governed the people
(...) enough; but the people would always be questioning and p^^posing their
whys and wherefores, which kept the senate from governing the state as they
would. Just so it was in France; a^^ if this cursed inquisitive temper had
never infected the g^^^ people of America, we might have avoided all the
horro^^ (...) our late bloody and cruel war. It was this restless temper, (...)
drove the king of England to pour his battalions into our co^^try, and spread
desolation through the land; all the evils (...) an eight years war, were
brought upon us by the same inquisitive and meddling disposition, which for
some time has been and in spite of Mr. Hamilton's admonitions, still continues
a raise its gorgon head among us. It is strange the people will (...) learn
wisdom by such bitter experience, but even while sma^^ing under the English
lash, of the last war, will still indulge ^^e same disposition which then
brought it upon them. They (...) still listen to the siren voice of those very
Jacobins, who his died the flames of the last war, as if they had already
forgott^n the miseries it had involved us in. "Let the people" th^^ remember,
that it is their sacred right to submit and obey; and that all those who would
persuade them, that they have a right to think and speak on the sublime,
mysterious, and to them incomprehensible, affairs of government, are factious
Democr^^^ and outrageous Jacobins.

Let us then with one voice say, we will not think, but pay passive obedience
to those twenty senators who are paid, and well paid, for thinking for us.

It is a troublesome business to be always thinking upon our rights and
liberties; let then Mr. Pit, and Mr. Grenville, and Mr. Jay, think and do for
the United States; and I think, by putting the burden of thinking on them, we
make a good bargain; and upon those principles I am in favor of the treaty.

PASSIVE OBEDIENCE and NON-RESISTANCE.
August, 1795.
Remarks on the IId Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
BY the 2d article of Mr. Jay's treaty, the settlers and traders within the
precincts or jurisdiction of the posts, now held by the British within the
boundary lines of the United States, may remove, with all their effects; they
may sell their lands, houses, or effects, or retain the property thereof, at
their discretion. Such of them as shall continue to reside within those
boundary lines, may remain British subjects if they choose, or become citizens
of the United States -- in the latter case they are bound to take the oath of
allegiance.

The enemies of the treaty have endeavored to excite an alarm, under the
pretense, that as the limits of the precincts or jurisdiction of those posts
are not defined, the same may reach to vast extents of country, throughout
which are or may be planted, even colonies of people devoted to the interest of
Great Britain. But nothing can be more unfounded.

The posts withheld, contrary to the treaty of peace, are two on Lake
Champlain, in the state of Vermont; one perhaps at Oswegatchie; and those of
Oswego, Niagara, Detroit, and Michilimackanac.

All these posts are military stations, either without any British settlers
about them, or with but a few families, except the post of Detroit. Detroit was
originally settled by the French. The attention of the inhabitants was devoted
to the Indian trade; and consequently they cultivated very little land. By the
peace of 1763, Detroit, with all Canada, was ceded to Great Britain. Since that
time a few American, English, Scotch, and Irish settlers and traders, have
joined the old French inhabitants: but Detroit still remains an inconsiderable
village. The settlers within its jurisdiction are chiefly planted along the
border of the river: but their settlements are of such small extent, and so
little land has been cultivated, that they have not been able to furnish a
surplus of provisions sufficient to seed its small garrison of two or three
hundred men. For the consumption of these few troops, flour has been sent from
the United States and Lower Canada, and pork from Ireland.

What, then, can be the "jurisdiction" of this post? Common sense would suppose
it of very small extent; that it was co-extensive with the settlers; and, in
the utmost latitude, comprehended no more of the land at and about Detroit,
than belonged to them at the signature of the treaty. The rest of the country
belongs to the Indians; who, though hitherto under the influence, can in no
sense be said to be within the jur^sdiction of Detroit.

To form a just idea of the possible extent of the landed property of these
people, ^t will be necessary to recur to the tr^aty of peace between us and
Great Britain. By that treaty, D^troit became a part of the United States; and
had we then gamed possession of it, its inhabitants would doubtless have been
considered as citizens. Or if any preserved remaining British subjects, they
must have been debarred all the privilege* of ^ship. But whether citizens or
British subjects, the tr^aty of peace secured to them all their ^^nded and
other property, and Mr. Jay's treaty does no more. Will it be said, that since
the treaty of peace they may have purchased immense tracts of land of the
Indians; and that these also will be held under Mr. Jay's treaty? The idea is
perfectly groundless.

By the 1st article of the treaty of peace, Great Britain cedes and
relinquishes to the United States, "all claim to the government, propriety and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof," consequently, the
lands of the British subjects within the precincts or jurisdiction of Detroit,
and any other British posts within the territory of the United States, can be
of no greater extent now, than they were at the treaty of peace. If the king of
Great Britain, or any of his governors of officers, have since made grants of
lands within the boundaries of the United States (a thing not probable) such
grants are mere nullities. The lands so attempted to be granted, being by that
treaty the absolute property of the United States, the British subjects could
not afterward acquire any property in them; and consequently they cannot hold
them by Mr. Jay's treaty.

One word concerning the inhabitants of Detroit. They are chiefly French, with
whom it is to be presumed we shall find no difficulty in fraternizing; and of
the others, whether originally Americans or English, Scotch or Irish, many, and
probably the majority, are already well disposed toward the United States, and
eager to enjoy all the advantages of our free government and citizensh. (...)
small remnant; some of them man (...) the British side of the line; and other
(...) the purposes of trade at Detroit. These cannot possibly excite
uneasiness, any more than the British subjects, whom, for the like purpose, we
freely admit into all our seaports.

A FREEHOLDER
Phil^^^^phia, August 19, 179^.
[No. III.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CARFY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- SEPTEMBER 4, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. CATO, No. III. Page 147 2. -- No. IV. Page 152 3. -- No. V. Page 156 4. --
No VI. Page 162 5. -- No. VII. Page 169 6. Camillus, No. IX. Page 174 7. -- No.
X. Page 181 8. -- No. XI. Page 191 9. Resolutions of the Inhabitants of Christ
Church Parish, South Carolina, July 24th, 1795 Page 20^ 10. Baltimore Address
to the President of the United States Ibit 11. Resolutions, Petition and
Remonstrance of the Inhabitants of Morris County, New Jersey, August 15th, 1795
Page 203 12. Remarks on the VIIth Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty Page 206 13. True
Statement of the Proceedings at Tr^nton, August 13th, 1795 Page 207 14.
Resolutions of the Inhabitants of Powhatan, Virginia, July 21st, 1795 Page 212
15. Protest of Captain Osborne, at Jeremie, July 14th, 1795 Page 21^ 16. Letter
from the British Consul at Rhode Island to Governor F^nner Page 215 17. Letter
from the Commander of the British Ship Africa to the British Consul at Rhode
Island Ibi.
Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 122.]

No. III.
HAVING touched upon the demand, which, under the treaty, we are entitled to
make for the loss of property carried off, I have since examined official
documents, to wit, the letter of the commander in. chief, and the report of our
commissioners, from which it may be fairly estimated, at about one million of
dollars. As this was the first infraction of the treaty, and made without the
slightest pretense, there can be no doubt of the justice of our demand, as well
for interest as principal, which would raise the aggregate amount to about one
million seven hundred thousand dollars. Is it not very extraordinary that Mr.
Jay should neglect an object of so much moment, while he was so sedulous in
loading the United States with the private debts of British merchants? If
(which there is the best founded reason to deny) there is really any thing due
on that score, surely no better fund can be conceived for its discharge than
this well-authenticated claim upon the British government. What makes this
omission the more extraordinary, is, that the president, while commander in
chief, congress in the year 1783, and at various periods since, and Mr.
Jefferson very lately, have uniformly treated this article as very important,
insisted upon its fulfillment, and procured such authentic documents of its
amount, as to leave Britain without the smallest apology for its inexecution.

The next object of Mr. Jay's negotiation was to obtain satisfaction for the
insults our national flag had sustained, and redress for the injuries done our
trade in violation of the laws of nations. These may be divided into two
classes, 1. Acts authotized and ordered by the court of St. James's. 2. Acts
done by individuals under color, but in abuse, of those orders.
The first class must, necessarily, govern the decisions of their maritime
courts, which, though professing to be ^aled by the laws of nations, always
take the direction of the sovereign as the expositor of those laws. Thus, when
Mr. Pit seized, in time of profound peace, all French vessels, and thereby
outraged every principl^ of natural law, the British courts of admiralty found
no difficulty in condemning them. When, in the same was, to pr^ve^^ the Dutch
from availing themselves of their neutrality, to acquire the carrying trade, he
made prize of every ship loaded with French produce, the courts of admiralty
condemned them without hesitation, and justified their conduct by the orders
they had received. Indeed it would be a solecism to say, that the king ca^
^rame instructions, and give orders for making prizes, and that his courts have
power to overruled those orders, and punish the subject that obeys them; since
it must often happen, that the interest of the state may justify a breach of
the code of nations, without its being proper to communicate to the ordinary
courts the principles upon which this justification is formed. Accordingly, we
find it the constant practice what a new edict is issued, to send it to the
maritime courts as (...) rule for their conduct in determining of prize or no
prize. And the courts of appeal in prize cases consist of commissioners of
appeal, of whom a majority must be privy counselors (22 Genesis II. chap. 3.) the
reason for which is, that their decisions, as judges, may conform to the
instructions they give as privy counselors. The second class of injuries,
arising from abuses committed by individuals under color of such orders and
instructions, are always corrected (not, however, without a great expense and
delay) by the inferior courts of vice-admiralty i^ the first instance, or by
appeal, if their decisions are erroneo^^ This distinction will be important in
discussing the 7th article of the treaty. Let us now examine the causes of
complaint (...) the subject of the detention or capture of vessels and cargo^^
as arising under both these.

1st. Orders were issued for detaining our vessels going to France, loaded with
provisions, even before the war broke out; and we were compelled to part with
our property at such prices as the British market afforded, though a better one
was open to us in France.

2d. They issued orders to take all our vessels going to France with
provisions; and shortly after, in the most perfidious manner, without any
notice, without even publishing their intention in England, lest we should
learn it from thence, instructed their armed ships in the West Indies, to make
prizes of all neutral vessels sailing, either to or from the French island.
These several cruel and unprovoked attacks upon our commerce, cannot be
palliated by any law of nations, however obsolete, and were attended with the
following serious evils to this country, for which we are entitled to a
national compensation.

1. It dishonored our flag, which is a serious evil to us as a commercial
nation; since it is the firmness we manifest i^ maintaining the respect due to
that, which must make the basis of our carrying trade; for who will trust their
merchandise to ^^ips which may be violated with impunity? -- Who employ vessels
from which his property may be ravaged, without the most distant hope, that the
sovereign under whose protection he has placed it, will vindicate his rights?

2. The loss of that property which the country would have acquired, had not
many been deterred by these measures from entering into this branch of
commerce. -- As this cannot be ^^ated as the loss of an individual, it must be
considered as a general loss by which the whole community is affected, and for
which, therefore, the whole community were entitled to a recompense in damages.

3. The actual loss of property, first by the detention and limitation of the
price of the articles taken, and the still greater loss by condemnation of
ships and cargoes, for which nothing was paid.

4. The individual loss of seamen who were discharged from their ships,
compelled by force, or reduced by absolute want, to enter into the British
service in the West Indies, where great ^^mbers of them died of the diseases of
the climate, and the ^^^sage of their oppressors. I have already observed that
the treaty makes no kind of provision for these worthy and unhappy citizens, or
for the families of those that have perished; disgraceful and unfeeling
omission! Besides this loss, for which the individual was entitled to a
compensation, the nation might demand exemplary damag^^ ^^r the indignities and
actual loss of strength in the death o^ ^^^oval of many valuable citizens, and
the loss of many v^^sel, at a time, when by their employment, so great a profit
would have resulted to the community.

The above enumerated evils were the effect of the express act, and emanated
from the special authority, of the British government. In addition to this, we
suffered losses under the unauthori^^^ acts of individuals, who, in some
^nstances, plundered and procured the condemnation of vessels that were not
liable to capture by the special instructions to which I have alluded. But the
number of these were comparatively small; and for these courts of adjudication
were always open; and yet, by a most extraordinary fatality, Mr. Jay overlooks
all these flagrant injuries committed by the British king against the United
States as a nation, and for which they are without remedy, but by a national
compensation, and neither asks nor procures any redress.

The nature of Mr. Jay's application is explained in his courtly note to Lord
Grenville. This contains no complaint of any of the instructions I have alluded
to, or any other, expressive of the injury that one nation had done to the
other, but merely in the case of individuals. His words are, that great and
excessive injuries have, under color of his majesty's commission and
authority, been done to a numerous class of American merchants, (not to the
American nation) the United States can, for reparation, have recourse " only to
the justice, authority, and interposition of his majesty." Through the whole of
this note, he speaks of nothing further than individual compensation for
individual injury, leaving the two nations entirely out of sight as nations;
and indeed if he had intended any thing more, if he had had the instructions I
have mentioned, in view, it would have been impossible for him to have made use
of so many p^^^egyrics on the justice and h^^anity of his Britannic majesty. In
speaking of our seamen (which he does with such pathos as (...) lead us to hope
for some spirited demand in their favor) he contents himself with only
requesting, that they may be libera^^^l, and unmolested in future, without a
word of compensation for the past. -- The reply of Lord Grenville is in the
same (...) Not a word of the instructions, not a word of apology to (...)
American nation, not a word of compensation, except for (...) irregularities
committed by individuals, etc. The British (...) i^ supposed in all these
proceedings, to be immaculate. Now (...) us examine the article, and see how
completely Mr. Jay su^^^t that he was envoy for a great nation, and sunk into
the (...) solicitor of some merchants, whose cause he has managed so (...) as
to leave them in a much worse state than he found the^^ since he took from them
the protection of their own gove^^ment, to leave them the chicanery of courts
in which the (...) instructions that occasioned their losses, must be admitted
(...) laws sufficiently valid to justify them.

The 7th article exactly pursues the principles established in the note, to
wit, that the United States are entitled to no recompense; that the government
of Great Britain has done us no injury, and that "diverse merchants and others"
only have to complain of the irregularity of some captures and condemnations,
which it supposes the courts of admiralty are, for the most part, competent to
decide upon. But that if it should happen, that there are any losses for which
adequate compensation cannot be obtained, provided that the party claiming has
been guilty of no neglect or delay, such compensation shall be ascertained by
commissioners, and his Britannic majesty engages to pay them. As this article
says nothing about opening the courts, it must have been understood by both
parties, that they were necessarily open, independent of the treaty; so that
all the advantage, if any, that may result from appeals, were rights that
individuals in every civilized nation may claim, and which many had exercised
before Mr. Jay's mission. In this respect, then, nothing was effected by his
negotiation, unless it was, that the time for bringing appeals is said to have
been enlarged; but of this, the treaty says nothing; this too, must therefore,
depend upon the will of the king of Great Britain, or on the rules his courts
choose to establish. All that Mr. Jay has then done in this important business,
that involved the honor of his country, the great interests of its commerce,
the rights and liberties of its citizens, and the property of individuals, many
of whom have been ruined by the loss of their capital, is to obtain a promise
of compensation in such cases as are so singularly circumstanced as not to be
within the reach of legal redress. When we come to view this article, stripped
of its unnecessary verbiage, it will appear to mock with delusive hopes, the
men that it affects to relieve. Let us enquire what is to be the business of
the commissioners, and of what nature and kind the causes that are to come
before them.

They are not to relieve against captures under the order of April, November,
or January. 1st. Because neither of these are complained of, and the preamble
of the article expressly re^^es to the ^njuries "diverse merchants and others"
complain of having sustained by irregular captures or condemnations of their
vessels and other property under color of authority and commission, etc. Now
it would be absurd to suppose, that this can have any reference to what is done
by the express order of the sovereign, or to any act but such as is an abuse of
that order and authority; but these abuses make but a small part of our cause
of complaint (which goes to the order itself) and are besides necessarily
relievable in a court of appeals, without the intervention of a minister
extraordinary; and were so before the treaty. The great cause of complaint, the
instructions, which are the laws of the court of admiralty, not being
complained of, all condemnations fairly made under them, must be confirmed by
the treaty. What then are the commissioners to do? They are not to revise the
decisions of the courts; they are not (...) interfere where the injured party
has neglected to appeal. The decrees of the courts are to be absolute with
respect to them; nor can they, as far as their powers may be collected from the
treaty, bind the crown of Great Britain in any case whatever, in which the
party claiming the benefit of their decision does not first show that he has
commenced and carried through his suit in the British court of appeals, that
their decree was in his favor (for without doubt their judgment is meant to be
conclusive, or else the commissioners would only be a second court of appeals,
which would be a solecism not even hinted at in the treaty or preceding
negociations) that the captor is insolvent; that his securities have been
prosec^^^ (...) judgment, and that they are also insolvent, in this case; a^^
this appears to me the only possible case in which the comm^^^oners may ^ind
the crown to pay what has been recove^^^ its courts.

Now I would ask any man who reflects a moment (...) delays of the British
courts, and on the maze of law, whi^^ must be had, before a single cause can be
brought before (...) commissioners, whether the whole article is not a moc^^^
justice, whether any cause can be ready for this tribunal in (...) years,
though by the limitation expressed, the claims m^^^ entered within eighteen
months, and whether it would (...) much cheaper for the United States to pay
the sew person^^^ may possibly be relieved by this mode, the amount of their
^^^ses, than load themselves with the expense of so useless a ^^^mission?

CATO

No. IV.
HAVING stated, in the preceding numbers, the ^^^ing national points, which
were supposed to m^^^ object of Mr. Jay's negotiation; having shown that the
(...) leaves the greatest part of them untouched, and seals a (...) of
indisputed rights, in order to procure, in return, a (...) for the surrender of
our own territory at a distant day, (...) nugatory engagement for compensation
to a few sufferers, (...) cases may be peculiarly situated; while the rights of
the (...) the great mass of the merchants, and the whole body of men are
shamefully abandoned; I proceed now to cons^^^ treaty in a commercial point of
view, in which I am (...) say, we shall seek in vain for some advantages to
comp^^^ these disgraces; some proof to testify the assertion of our e^^^ that
"the United States confide in his majesty's justice (...) humanity." The same
gloomy features distinguish every pa^^^ it, whether it is seen in a commercial
or economical view: (...) merchants, our seamen, our manufacturers, our
citizens, (...) allies, our government, and our honor, all are treated (...)
equal contempt. But one interest seems to have been atten^^ to, throughout the
whole negotiation -- the interest of the B^^^nation; such setters are put upon
our own, that our envoy ^^tainly intended that our ministers should hereafter
say, wi^^ truth, what he had only intended as a proof of his p^^^ ^ddress,
"that the United States can, for reparation, have ^ecourse, only, to the
justice, authority, and interposition of his majesty." Little means, alas! will
be left them for the ex^^ise of their own authority, if this treaty should ever
become (...) law of the land.

In considering the commercial articles, I shall begin with the ^^dian trade,
after having submitted a few rules, to the force of which every well-informed
man will readily subscribe.

1st. That, all things else being equal, that trader who has the greatest
capital, most knowledge of trade, an established set of customers, and the most
extensive acquaintance with the dealers in the commodities he buys and sells,
will be able to maintain himself against any rival merchant that does not enjoy
these advantages.

2d. That if, in addition to this, he has advantages in the transportation of
his goods -- in the sale of the commodities he purchases -- and in the
establishment of factories -- he must ruin all competitors. By the treaty of
peace, our boundaries are fixed, and the British are to evacuate our territory
without any stipulation, whatever, in favor of British merchants or traders; by
this treaty, therefore, so much of the fur and peltry trade, at least as lay
within our own territory, was necessarily and exclusively ours; as we possessed
all the posts at which the trade had been carried on for a century past, and
most of the portages. As our communication from the sea was much easier than by
the St. Lawrence, we could furnish English goods cheaper, and, of course, would
have continued the Indian trade in its usual channel, even from the British
sides of the lakes, nor could ^^^y, by any means, have prevented it, without
giving such disgust to the Indians as would have made them dangerous neighbors.

Lord Grenville's treaty with Mr. Jay stipulates, that the British traders may
continue to live at our posts; to hold the property they possess; to trade in
every p^rt of our territory as ^^^ly as our own citizens; and to navigate our
rivers from the s^^ as high as our own citizens may, that is, to the highest
port of entry, and from thence to navigate our inland waters. It must follow,
then, that under these cirumstances, they stand exactly upon the same footing
with our own citizens. It will also be admitted, that having been for twelve
years in the exclusive possession of the Indian trade -- having, in general,
much larger capitals -- having an extensive acc^^^aintance among the Indian
nations, and with the Canadians, who are the general carriers in that country,
American traders will not be able to maintain a competition with them, even if
they had no other advantages than those I have enumerated. But this, unhappily,
is far from being the case; first, they have, of course, a right to settle
factories in every part of their own territory; their factors being always upon
the spot, and cultivating an acquai^^ance with the natives, will certainly be
able to command the trade of their country, and thus render absolutely useless
the stipulation which admits American traders to travel into that territory;
for it is observable, that the navigation act, 12 Charles II. chap. 18, which
is preserved in full force, by the 14th article of the treaty, prevents our
establishing any factory (...) trading house, or residing as merchant-factors
within the ^^^tish territories, out of Europe; while the treaty permits the
British to reside in any part of the United States; to hire and possess houses
and warehouses for the purpose of commerce, etc. so that while, by this means,
they have an exclusive trade in their own territory, not withstanding the
apparent grant of a right to us, they have all the advantages our citizens
enjoy (...) ours, with those they have acquired from large capitals, knowledge
of the trade, etc. Our trader may, indeed, travel, like a pedlar, through their
country with his shop upon his back; but cannot have any fixed residence at
which to open a sto^^. Were not Mr. Jay a chief justice, I should be tempted to
believe that he did not know of the provision of the act of 12th Charles II.
chap. 18, which he has kept in full force by (...) 14th article of the treaty.

This exclusive trade in their own country, by means of the factories they may
establish, gives them another considerable advantage; it is well known to
merchants, that the more ^^tensive any branch of commerce is, the less liable
to interruptions, the more profitable it must be, and of course, the be^^^ it
enables the trader to undersell his competitors. If then ou^ merchants can only
trade in our territories, and there with, ^o advantage over the British -- and
if the British merchant can trade with equal advantage in our territory, and
superior in the British territory -- the last can employ a greater capital in
his commerce; and as the Indian trade is liable to frequent interruptions by
wars and bad seasons, which may prevail in our country, while that of the
British is unmolested, the whole capital of our trader remains inactive, while
a considerable part of that of the British trader is employed. This again must
reader the competition very unequal.

A writer who has shown much more anxiety to maintain, than candor in defense
of, the treaty, has overlooked all these circumstances which will effectually
prevent our traders from contending with the British, and which, i^ fact,
amount to as absolute surrender of this important branch of commerce, and
consoles us with the hope of being able to find a market for East India goods,
through the intervention of this treaty. I must confess, that I have yet to
learn, that any East India articles consumed by the Indians, on the north of
the lakes, will exceed one hundred dollars a year; perhaps the writer means,
that the inhabitants of Canada will receive them through this channel; if we
should even admit this, which, however, we shall be able to show is highly
improbable, yet it would appear a very insignificant advantage, when we reflect
that the whole number of inhabitants in Canada, and Labrador, as appears by a
census, taken by General Haldiman, amounted, in 1784, including Upper Canada,
to only 123, 082 souls: but few of these are in the habit of drinking any tea,
and all are too poor to consume any but the coarsest articles; so that the
whole consumption of Canada, in India goods, if we had a monopoly of that
trade, would fall short of what is consumed in the little state of New Jersey;
and we should certainly make a miserable exchange, if for this we sacrifice a
branch of commerce of such immense importance, as the Indian trade.

But what can be more absurd than to suppose that articles which come duty-free
from Britain (a drawback being allowed on exportation) and are carried into the
heart of the settled parts of Canada in the same vessels that bring them from
Europe, cannot be sold cheaper than the same articles, subject to a heavy duty,
and carried an immense distance by land, and an expensive inland navigation?
this indeed may not apply to the upper posts; but who are the consumers of East
India articles in those cold, poor, and barren regions?

In short, the more any one considers this article, the more fully he will be
convinced, that it contains a complete and absolute surrender of the fur trade,
the greater part of which we might have exclusively possessed under the treaty
of peace, had not Lord Grenville prevaried on Mr. Jay, to introduce a rival who
will always be too powerful for us. And what renders this circumstance the more
peculiarly oppressive, is, that this article is to be permanent; Lord Grenville
was too sensible of its importance, to permit any time or circumstances to
unloose these galling fetters.

This article is not less exceptionable in a political, than in a commercial,
view. We know from sad experience, the cost and danger of Indian wars; we know,
too, from the same experience, that they can be, and have been, fomented by
Britain, whenever her interest or her malevolence prompted her to distress us.
By permitting the British ^^der^ to remain amongst the Indians, and to extend
themselves to every village, we add to their influence; and by the terms of the
26th articie, are prohibited from expelling them, even in case of war with
Britain herself, unless their conduct should render them suspected, and not
even then in less than twelve months from the publication of the order. What
but the blindest infatuation could induce our minister to stipulate that a
secret, nay, even an open enemy should remain without restraint among savages,
whom the slightest circumstance stimulates to war? Did we not know what we
formerly should suffer from a few Canadian priests and traders residing among
the Indians, and how many endeavors were used by the government, to get the
Six Nations to (...) them? It will be said, this article is reciprocal, and
that (...) their agents remain within our lines, ours remain also wi^^^ theirs:
this, however, is not the fact; for if at any time a war should break out, our
traders (if we should have any, which I much doubt) will, for their own safety,
retire from places (...) remote as the British territories; besides that, not
having any right, as I have before shown, to reside within the British
^^ritories, out of Europe, which is expresely prohibited by the (...) vigation
act, and no such right being given by the treaty -- (...) must follow, that no
American merchant or trader, not set^^^ in Europe, can have the least benefit
by this provision; wh^^ hundreds of British emissaries may, under the pretense
of tra^^ maintain the most dangerous stations in the heart of our country.
What, fir! Is it not sufficient to have abandoned our ^^^ men without having a
compensation for their injuries? (...) the unhappy farmer, when the care and
attention due (...) growing family compels him to relinquish the charms of
foo^^^^ and retire to labor and solitude in distant forests, must (...) pains,
too, be aggravated by your treaty? Must artful emissaries, even of an open
enemy, be permitted to stimulate savages, too ready of themselves, to bloody
deeds? Must every land as well as every sea, witness the apathy with which the
liberty and lives of our best and bravest citizens are abandoned?

CATO.

No. V.
I AM at some loss to understand what is intended by the following word in the
3d article -- "And in like manner, all goods and mere^ (...) whose importation,
into the United States shall not be (...) prohibited; may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same, in manner aforesaid, by his
majesty's subjects; and the same shall be subject to no higher, or other
duties, than would be payable by the citizens of the United States on the
importation of the same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said
states." The manner aforesaid, alludes to the former part of the article, which
gives the British a right to navigate our rivers from the sea to the highest
ports of entry for foreigners, and from thence by land into the Indian country.
The only natural construction of these words, is, that the British shall have a
right to import into the United States upon the same terms as Americans; and
yet I can hardly conceive that Mr. Jay could intend, in the face of a law of
the United States (Act making further provision for the payment of the debts of
the United States, chap. 39. sec. 2.) which imposes an additional duty of ten
per cent. on articles imported in vessels not of the United States; I say, I
should hardly conceive that he should presume to enter into such stipulation
directly in the face of a law of the United States, and that, too, in favor of
a nation whose navigation act is at war with our commerce; did it not breathe
the same spirit with the 12th, 14th, and 15th articles, all of which strike
directly at the navigation of these states. Nor do I know any other
construction that can possibly be put on the words, which I have stated at
large, that every reader may judge for himself. It is, however, possible, that
Mr. Jay may have intended (for never was a public instrument drawn with less
precision than the one before us) that this provision should only extend to
goods brought in for the purposes of the Indian trade; yet how the words can be
made to bear this co^^^ruction, I am at a loss to conceive. But should even
this be admitted to be the true meaning, it will again prove the extreme
solicitude of the framers of the treaty, to secure to the British the whole
benefit of the Indian trade; without this article, goods might be purchased of
our merchants, for the purpose of this commerce, which would, on account of the
ten per cent. difference, have been imported in American vessels; but this
slight advantage, it seems, was deemed too much for the sacrifice of the whole
profits of the Indian trade. It is therefore stipulated, that the British shall
navigate our rivers to the highest port of entry for foreign vessels, and that
upon this construction they shall pay no foreign duty for the articles they
import; so that all that the British merchants will have to do, will be to
establish factories at the ports of entry, and under pretense of the Indian
trade (if it should be thought that the words should be confined to that)
import in British bottoms, upon the same terms as we d^^^ in our own ships: and
as by the 15th article, our vessels at to pay a duty, which is to countervail
the duty paid here b^ the British, that is, ten per cent. every article
imported th^^ way, as Indian goods, will yield ten per cent. more profit to the
British merchant, taking the outward and homeward voy^^ into consideration,
than it will to the American, and the avenue law be eluded. But supposing it
possible to prevent the^^ goods so imported into New York, for instance, and
there ^^^ on board river vessels, and from thence carried by land and by inland
navigation for a considerable distance, from being (...) before they get into
the western territory; yet even then this provision must operate as a bounty on
British vessels, in p^eser^^ce to all other foreigners, and as an encouragement
of ten per cent. in favor of the British merchant, who carries on the Indian
trade, to the prejudice of our own commerce and (...) own revenue. Thus, to
make myself more fully underst^^^, a British merchant sends in his own ship,
articles intended (...) the Indian trade, or indeed any other, under that
pretense; be has a right to enter them without paying any other duty th^^ the
American does; and his return cargo pays no duties is England. The American
merchant ships in his own vessel the same articles, on the same terms; but by
the general operation of the 15th article, Britain has a right to lay on the
return (...) go a duty of ten per cent. The words of the article are, "(...)
the British government reserves to herself the right of impos^^g on American
vessels, entering into the British ports in Eu^^^^, a tonnage duty equal to
that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of America, and
also such duty as may he adequate to countervail the difference of duty-now
payable (...) the importation of European and Asiatic goods, when imported into
the United States in British or American vessels." If, then, against all
obstacles, the American merchant should carry on the Indian trade, will he not,
by this circumstance, be compelled to import and export in British vessels? By
the 12th article, British vessels may import into the United States from their
islands, without paying greater duties than the Americans; this again is in
direct opposition to a law of the United States above cited.

By the same article, our boats of 70 tons, which his majesty consents (for it
seems this article is a gift and bounty of his majesty, and not, like the rest,
matter of agr^ement) are also to pay an equal tonnage duty in the islands with
that the British pay here. Now I would ask, if it is possible to devise a more
effectual way to put the whole West India trade into hands of the British?

1st. They pay only American duties. 2d. As the American must pay in the
islands, what tonnage the British pay here, the tonnage would be exactly even;
but as the American vessel also pays a tonnage duty in our own ports of 6
ce^^^, which the British do not pay in their own islands, it must follow, that
the British carrying on the West India trade, will pay 6 cents less tonnage
upon the whole out and return voyage, than the American; and as four voyages
may be made in a year, the American will pay in the course of the year, 24
cents per ton more than the British ship, though the ship is unlimited as to
sue, which we know to be an important circumstance in the cheapness of
navigation; that our minister should not be content to put the British upon a
par with the American, in the ^ice of existing laws, and laws too that cannot
be altered, because they are pledged for the discharge of the funded debt,
seems so monstrous a misdemeanor, that it will hardly be believed even by those
who have read the treaty over with attention.

I therefore transcribe the very words; "and the said American vessels shall be
subject there to no higher tonnage, duties or charges, than shall be payable by
British vessels in the ports of the United States." Now British vessels pay a
tonnage in our ports of 50 cents, which, according to the express words of the
^^eaty, we must pay in their ports, in addition to which, by our own laws, our
vessels are subject to a tonnage of six cents; so that when the British pays
fifty the American will pay fifty-six cents per ton upon his outward and
homeward voyage, that is, fifty under the British law, and six under our own.
If, in addition to this, i^ is considered that the British are empowered to
settle as factors or merchants in all our ports, and not even to be molested in
case of a war, and on the other hand it is expressly prohibited by the British
navigation act, for Americans to settle or establish a trading house -- if it
is also considered, that any British ship having carried out her cargo, may be
governed by circumstances, and go where she chooses for a better market, while
the American must necessarily return to our ports -- it will follow, that the
whole trade of the British West Indies must be carried on in British bottoms,
and our merchants either be precluded from this trade, or consent to act the
humble part of factors to British merchants: the vessels formerly employed in
this trade, must necessarily ^ot at our wharves, and our seamen be turned over
to Great Britain, to support her commerce, and, whenever she thinks proper, to
plunder and distress our own. It may be said, that we have at present no West
India trade but by permission; -- but it should be recollected, that that
permission grows out (...) the necessities of the islands; that it always
existed in s^^^ shape; that during the war their ports must be open to us, a^^
probably for two years after, till the wan^s, occasioned by the war, are
supplied; so that this article extends only to the vert period in which we may
presume with certainty upon th^^ commerce on fair and equal terms. -- Were it
even otherwise as it is now notorious that the islands cannot subsist without
us, by prohibiting their ships from carrying articles that they cannot do
without, it would necessarily follow, that they wo^^ be compelled to open their
ports to us, upon our own terms But at all events, we must be very considerable
losers by thi^ treaty; for supposing that trade would, independent of the
treaty, have been carried on in British bottoms, we then gained, at least the
10 per cent. the foreign duty on their import which duty would operate as a
bounty upon our trade wi^ other foreign West India islands, as well as similar
articles imported from the East Indies, and thus contribute to extend (...)
navigation and commerce in one quarter, while it restrai^^^ i^ in another; we
should, indeed, by this means, have less of the produce of the British islands,
but more of the produce (...) other countries; our exports to the British
islands would ^^^^nue as they were, because they could not do without the^ our
imports from them would diminish, and the foreign ^^^kets from which we
supplied the deficiency of British s^^^^ etc. would afford an additional market
for exports. But al^ the evils of this article do not even stop at the point I
have mentioned. By this treaty, we are not only to lose the bene^^^ of the
trade with the British, but also with the French i^^^^^ who now kindly open
their ports to us; by the second article of our treaty with France, we mutually
agree, that neither will "grant any particular favor to other nations, in
respect (...) commerce and navigation, which shall not immediately bec^^^
common to the other party, who shall enjoy the same save freely, if the
concession was freely made, or on allowing (...) same compensation, if the
concessions were conditional." The French, then, the moment this treaty is
ratified, have a right ^n case they admit ^s to visit their islands with
vessels of seve^^ ^ons, to come to our ports, free of foreign duty upon the
^^^les they import, and may also impose a tonnage duty of (...) ^^^^s on our
vessels, and of course navigate to and from o^^ (...) cents cheaper than our
own vessels; and can (...) after the causes of disgust which this treaty will
gi^^ th^^, that they will delay a moment to exchange our free trade (...)
^^ands, into that ^^me ^^omm^^ce which we me^^^, accept as a bounty from
Britain? Lord Grenville, however, conceiving that the transfer of our whole
West India trade and navigation, was not sufficiently ruinous to our commerce,
asks and obtains from our polite envoy, in return for his majesty's
condescension in accepting so great a part of our trade, that we would also
prohibit the exportation of melasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa, or cotton, in
American vessels, either from his majesty's islands, or from the United States,
to any part of the world, reasonable sea-stores excepted. The few apologists
that the treaty has yet found, affect to believe, that the restriction is to be
confined to such of the above articles as are imported only from the British
islands; but the words are express, "that the United States will prohibit and
restrain the carrying any (not any such) melasses, etc." and the reason they
will urge in defense of the only true and obvious construction, would be, that
as one cask of coffee cannot be distinguished from another, if any was
exported, that which came from their islands would be exported; and thus we
would, in this circuitous route, acquire a certain proportion of the carrying
trade. That this is a part of a general system for the ruin of our navigation
(Britain always having dreaded us as a rival) will appear from the instructions
for armed ships, of the 8th of January, 1794, which remain unrevoked, and, as
far as we have yet learned, uncensured by Mr. Jay. By that their armed vessels
are instructed "to bring in for lawful adjudication all ships with their
cargoes that are laden with goods, the produce of the French West India
islands, for any port of Europe." How then stands our trade as to the
exportation of those important articles? 1st. We are not to ship them from the
French islands 2d. We are not to ship them from the British islands. 3d. We are
not to ship them from the United States. From the East Indies we cannot ship
them; because the East India cargoes being assorted for our markets, must first
land here, after which, by the tenor of the treaty, we are not to re-ship them;
nor can we even ship the cotton which is the product of our country; the
prohibition being express, that we shall not export any. Now let us see the
amount of the exports, and determine how far it is wise to lay ourselves under
these humiliating restrictions.

From the 1st of October, 1791, to the 30th of September, 1792.
Cotton exported 138, 328 lbs. Coffee 2, 136, 742 Cocoa 6, 000 Brown sugar 1,
122, 156 Loaf duto 21, 760 Melasses 12, 340 gals.
Humiliating as this article is, when I come to consider the 14th and 15th
articles, it will appear, that neither this nor the loss of the Indian trade,
are the severest blows aimed by this treaty, at the commerce and navigation of
the United States.

CATO.

No. VI.
HAVING had occasion to show, in considering the treaty in a mere commercial
view, that it contained an express relinquishment of the Indian trade; that it
placed the West Indian commerce upon so disadvantageous a footing, as to render
foreign nations our carriers, not only in that trade, but in the exportation of
many articles (as sugar, cotton, coffee, cocoa) that we might import from the
West Indies, or raise among ourselves; I proceed now to show, that our vessels
will become equally useless in the European trade, if the treaty goes into
effect. By the simple operation of her navigation laws, Britain had possessed
herself of almost the whole of the carrying trade between the United States and
her dominions. From October 1789 to September 1790, both inclusive, the amount
of ou^ exports to Britain and her dominions were of the value of (...) millions
three hundred and sixty-three dollars; and our imports from thence, upwards of
fifteen millions two hundred thousand dollars; making, together, upwards of
twenty-four millions five hundred thousand dollars, on which commerce we paid
Britain a balance of near six millions, while we gained from hence a balance of
more than two millions and one half; yet this immense trade with Britain only
employed 43, 580 tons of American vessels, while the trade to France employed
116, 410 tons, though our trade with her was less than one-fifth of our trade
with Britain. The extreme injury the United States sustained by thus suffering
a foreign nation to run away with their carrying trade, and, of course, cutting
the sinews of their commerce and maritime strength, was urged as the best
argument for the formation of the federal government; as, by that means, we
should acquire the means of making restrictive laws upon the commerce of
nations that oppressed ours. We accordingly find, that very early after the
formation of our government, tonnage duties were imposed upon foreign vessels;
and the immediate effect of them was to add new vigor to our navigation; it
will appear by the present state of our tonnage, compared with that I have
given, that, under the operation of this law, we were progressing so fast to a
considerable degree of rank among maritime nations, as to incur the jealousy of
that ambitious and selfish people, who fancy themselves the lords of the ocean,
and consider every other that attempts to navigate it, as intruders upon their
rights. To this cause we must attribute, in part, the various attacks that they
have, from time to time, made on our commerce; it remained, however, to give it
the fatal and final blow, which should put it out of our power to carry for
ourselves or others: and the honor of effecting this was reserved for our envoy
extraordinary, and a majority of that body to whom the states had confided our
dearest rights. I have already observed, that the 12th article, taken together
with the instructions of the 8th of January (at this moment in force)
effectually precludes us, not only from the carrying trade of British or French
islands, even though France has generously admitted us to carry from hers on
the most favorable terms, but has actually cut off the carriage of our own
commodities and certain others, of foreign and domestic growth, from our own
states; and that the trade of India-goods is so managed also, as necessarily to
fall to the share of Britain, to the exclusion of ourselves. Let us now see on
what footing our European trade will stand: 1st. In time of peace, and next,
when Britain shall be at war. By our tonnage and revenue laws, our ships had an
advantage in the trade to Britain, of 44 cents the ton; and the discriminating
duty of near 10 per cent. operated as a premium upon our own shipping; yet even
this by no means countervailed the effect of the navigation law, and other
restraints upon our commerce. But still under the operation of these statutes
of the United States, our trade and navigation flourished, and was increasing;
and as we reserved a right in our own hands, in case of new burdens, to impose
further duties upon those that injured us, we had the most perfect security
against any further legal attacks upon our commerce. Because, such was the
nature of our commodities as to be essential to the nations with whom we dealt;
while a variety of markets could furnish upon nearly equal terms, those that we
wanted. To Britain we paid an annual balance of near six millions of dollars:
which she must necessarily, and perhaps for ever, have lost, if, by a
commercial warfare, she diverted it into any other channel. What, however, she
did not dare to attempt openly by her laws, she has fully effected by her
treaty.

By the 14th and 15th articles, we agree, that she shall impose upon our
American vessels, a tonnage duty, equal to what her ships pay here; that the
shall also impose a duty which shall countervail the foreign duty on American
vessels. At first vie^; this appears to be just; for why, say the apologists of
the treaty, should she not impose upon your trade the restrictions you impose
on hers? Does not France reserve a right to do the same? Undoubtedly; had the
article stopped at this point, it would have been perfectly just; and the
navigation of each nation would have then depended upon the means they
respectively had of building, victualling, and sailing their ships, which is
exactly the case between us and France. But unfortunately the articles referred
to, while they affect to be reciprocal, leave in full force the British
navigation act, and all their other re^^^^tive laws, by this artful appendix to
the 14th article, to (...): "But subject always, as to what respects this
article, to the laws and statutes of the two countries respectively." Had the
matter even rested here, it might again have been recip^^^^^ (though extremely
unwise on our part) since, while it lest the British trade laws in force, it
also lest ours in equal force. But this was not the intention of the
contracting parties. Wor^s of reciprocity were very well to make a parade with;
they would deceive the ignorant and super^cial reader; but the greatest p^i^t
was, while it preserved to Britain the navigation and co^^^^cial acts, by which
they have raised their commerce at the ^^pense of other nations, to beat down
the barriers with which we fenced ours, and even to take from us the means, by
(...) future arrangements, of preventing the ruin of our trade.

Mr. Jay, therefore, agrees, in the 14th article, that all (...) laws, as well
as those of Britain, shall remain in force; but in the 15th article he evades
the provision so far as respects us, and expressly stipulates, that we shall
lay no additional charge upon Britain to contervail her navigation and other
restrictive laws; but that she may, while she preserves them in full force,
impose a tonnage and other duties to contervail those we had imposed, in order
to enable us to bear up against them. I ask them in what this article is
reciprocal? Britain had alrendy gone as far as she dare go, in oppressing our
trade, and now consents, if we will permit her to continue all the burdens she
has imposed upon us, and at the same time agree to let her lay such others as
she thinks equivalent for our having presumed to relieve ourselves, that she
will agree with us that no further partial curies shall be imposed by either.
Let us enquire into the effect of these articles upon our commerce and national
character.

1st. As it is obvious, that the present flourishing state of our navigation,
is, in a great measure, owing to the operation of the laws I h^ve m^n^^oned; it
must follow, that whatever countervails the (...) of those laws, must (...) it
back to the state in which it was. Now, as the profits of every voyage are
calculated on the outward and homeward voyage, if we pay in the British
dominions exactly what they pay here, the charge upon the whole voyage is the
same. If then, previous to the passing our tonnage laws, the British, by the
operation of their navigation laws, had such advantage over us, in our own
commerce, as to employ two hundred and thirty thousand tons of their shipping,
as they did in 1789; while the whole of American shipping employed in the trade
with Britain and its dominions, amounted, in the same year, to only 3, 580
tons, less than one-sixth part of the whole quantity engaged in the interchange
of commodities between the two nations -- it must follow, that we shall again
be reduced, in consequence of the treaty, to our former humiliating situation;
our seamen must go into the service of the nation that is again to navigate for
us; and our ship-builders, and the numerous trades connected with them, must
starve, or seek some other employment, since our merchants will no longer have
occasion for ships, and the British merchants are not permitted to use those we
build. It is observable, too, that the tonnage duty, which Britain is to lay,
is not a countervailing duty, like that on goods imported, but is to be, in the
words of the article, " equal to that which is payable by British vessels in
the ports of America." Now foreign vessels pay 50 cents here; of course, 50
cents may be imposed on our vessels in Britain; but our own vessels also pay
six cents a ton at home, so that on every voyage to the British dominions, and
home again, they will pay 56 cents, while the British pay only 50; and as the
voyage may be performed three times a year, the American ship will pay on the
whole, 18 cents a ton annually more than the British; and it may be a question,
whether we have any right to repeal the law laying the home duty, as it was
imposed and enacted when the treaty was made and ratified, and as the repeal
would put the British vessels in a less advantageous situation than they were
in at the time the treaty was made. But the discour^^ement does not rest here,
except so far as our trade may be co^sined to the city of London; for in every
other port we pay an ^^tra light money of 1 s. 9 d. sterling a ton, which is
about 39 cents; so that an American vessel going to Bristol, Liverpool, etc.
and returning, will pay (besides the 50 cents the British are to impose^ 6
cents American tonnage, and 39 cents extra light money, that is, 45 cents more
a ton than a British vess^^^ (...) same voyage, and which in three voyages, or
one year, will amount, on a vessel of 400 tons, to 540 dollars, extra charge on
American vessels. Thus then we give an annual and no inconsiderable bounty to
British vessels, to the prejudice of our own navigation. I believe that this is
the first instance in the history of nations, in which a commercial one has
given greater encouragement to foreign ships than to her own. But the evil d^^
not stop here; equalizing duties are to be imposed, what these are to be, is
not ascertained by the treaty; but as the power to impose them is reserved to
the British parliament, what is to prevent their exceeding their just measure?
But supposing they are really inclined not to go beyond the right reserved by
the treaty, what is to be the rule of that right? The duties we impose upon
their commodities amount to 12 per cent. on the India, and, at the average, to
about 10 per cent. on other ^^icles. Are they to lay a duty which will amount
to a mean of the relative quantities of these articles? if they are, how i^i^
to be found, as the relative proportion between the importa^^ of these articles
is continually fluctuating? or is the coun^^vailing duty to amount to as much
on the whole of the arti^^^ imported from the United States, as the whole duty
paid a^ foreign articles imported in British ships into the United St^^^^? this
seems to be the true construction of the article. If so, (...), as our imports
from the British dominions, exceed our exp^^^ to them by more than one third,
and supposing the average of the duty they pay here to be 10 per cent. the duty
upo^^^ exports, if carried to any of the British dominions, in Ame^^^ vessels,
must amount to 15 per cent. otherwise the whole ^^y will not be equalized. The
advantage that this will give to ^^tish ships over ours, particularly when they
bring our cheap and bulky articles, or such as pay no duty, is too obvious to
(...) upon. But this is not the only effect of this equalizing d^^; as Britain
has a right to choose the articles on which she may impose it, she has in some
sort the regulation of our trade, so far as it may be carried on in American
vessels; thus, suppose she should put the greatest part of this equalizing duty
upon the most bulky articles, it would necessarily follow, that those articles
must either rot on our hands, seek another market, (...) go in British ships,
which would pay no duty at home. Could a more effectual way be devised to
exclude us absolutely from carrying our own commodities? It may be said, that,
independent of the treaty, Britain might have imposed these duties; true, and
independent of the treaty, we might have met her with other duties.

2d. As the British must necessarily be the principal carrie^^ between us and
their dominions; so they will be, in a great measure, the carriers between us
and foreign nations: because, while by their navigation act they absolutely
forbid us to enter their ports with any commodities not the growth and
manufacture of our own country; they bring the commodities of other nations
upon the same terms as those might by whom they were raised; and they can take
back a return cargo to Britain, or its dominions, with greater advantage, than
we can carry our own produce, by the whole difference of the tonnage, and
countervailing duties, with six cents more added, if they return to London, and
45 cents if to any other port in the British dominions; and from thence again
return with British commodities to the original port. It is evident, that the
benefits attending such privileged ships, must give their owners great
advantages over others; and as they can only be held by British subjects, who
are by the terms of the treaty to be in every respect upon a footing with our
own merchants, while they enjoy all those additional advantages as British
subjects, it requires no great foresight to discover, that the whole trade of
America must be engrossed by them. Nor does it require much more, to see that
the leading objects of this treaty are, to establish the navigation and
commerce of Britain upon the ruins of our own -- to fill the Atlantic ports,
and the western territory, with British merchants and factors -- to establish a
certain degree of rank for British officers, whom the humiliated American is
directed, under pain of being "confidered as a disturber of the peace of both
nations, to treat with the respect due to his commission;" -- to put such
setters upon our legislature as would for ever bind them to the will of that
imperious nation -- to disgust our republican allies, and leave us only to the
justice and humanity of the man who has urged our slaves to cut our throats --
savages to murder our women and children -- Barbarian pirates to enslave our
mariners -- and his own banditti to profane our churches, burn our dwellings,
and rob, plunder, and massacre our citizens. If we compare this treaty with
many speeches, made about the period of Mr. Jay's appointment, with the support
he has avowedly received from the British faction, with the warmth with which
he engaged in the controversy between our government and the French minister --
if we add the readiness that ardent or vindictive men feel, to suppose every
thing right, which strengthens their party -- we shall be less surpised at the
treaty contravening the existing laws of the country, where they bore hard upon
the British, or its giving them such additional encouragement as should induce
them to pour in their myrmidons to support and strengthen the hands of
government, against native Americans, and the friends and well-wishers to
foreign and domestic republics -- whom the courtiers have dared to calumniate
with the names of antifederal and jacobin.

Mr. Pinckney informs us in his letter to Mr. Jefferson, that Lord Grenville,
in stating the principles on which they had issued the instructions of the 8th
of January, 1794, made use of these terms, "the second was one, that he [Lord
Grenville] could not mention to me officially, but that he still thought it
right I should be apprised of, that no misconception of their motives might be
entertained; that he was aware of the delicacy of speaking to a foreign
minister, concerning the internal state of his country; neither could he expect
an answer from me on the subject. But that the second reason was, to take away
every pretext from evil-disposed persons among us [the citizens of the United
States] who, according to the intelligence he had received, were endeavoring
to irritate our people against Great Britain, as well as to oppose the measures
of our own government, and in short, to reduce us to the present situation of
France." It is evident from this communication, that Lord Grenvi^e supposed
that all those persons in America, who felt for the (...) of their country --
who were irritated at the piracies of the British, and the insults and injuries
we had suffered -- which, I believe, included every native American not holding
an office, a seat in Congress, or money in the funds, were the oppos^^ of our
own government.

As the instructions alluded to, directed the taking our (...) going from the
French West Indies to any port in Eu^^^^ Lord Grenville must have conceived,
that the way to strengthen the hands of our government, was to destroy our
commerce-imprison our seamen in unhealthy climates, and lessen our ^^nection
with France; the whole was evidently thrown out (...) Mr. Pinckney, to induce
him to enter into conversation with him on the subject of such a convention
between the two governments, as should engage America in a war with France,
permit Britain to plunder our trade, and in return lend her aid for the support
of our government. -- The whole speaks this plain language, "the friends of
Britain in America, are the friends of your government; the enemies to British
depredations are the enemies of your government, and Jacobins who love the
French; let us make a common cause of it; we can mutually assist each other."
Mr. Pinckney was too prudent to enter into any discussion with Lord Grenville
on this delicate subject; I hope Mr. Jay has been equally so.

That the cause of the treaty, and the cause of Britain, have gone hand in hand
in this country, will not, however, be disputed, by those who know the birth,
patronage, and affections of its advocates; and as this dangerous instrument
has a tendency to destroy our connection with France, to cut the sin^^ of the
national strength, to compel us to rely on Great Britain, and to import
supporters of our government from thence. we cannot doubt its being the
offspring of a preconceived system.

CATO.

No. VII.
"THERE shall be," says the 14th article, "between all the dominions of his
majesty in Europe, and the territories of the United States, a reciprocal and
perfect liberty of commerce and navigation," etc. I am a little surprised that
the words reciprocal had not smote Mr. Jay's conscience, when the very sentence
in which he uses it, holds forth partial advantages to Britain, and none to
America. Why must all the territories of the United States be laid open to
British merchants; whilst ours are confined only to the spot precisely on which
they find no interest in settling? Were we permitted to settle and carry on
trade in the East or West Indies, on the footing of natives, many would find an
interest in availing themselves of it. But what American merchant will think of
establishing a mercantile house in England, unless in partnership with a native
of that country? in which case the article is useless to him. Is it not
evident, that this is part of the system I hinted at in my last? It will be
still more so, when we reflect, that several modes of retaliation were proposed
by Mr. Jefferson, as the means of compelling Britain to treat us as we merited,
in return for the great benefit we permitted her to derive from our commerce.
Among others, he suggests, "that where a nation refuses permission to our
merchants and factors to reside within certain parts of their dominions, we
may, if it should be thought expedient, refuse residence to theirs, in any or
every part of ours, or modify their transactions."

The framers of the treaty apprehended, that in the course either of commercial
or political events, such prohibition, or some partial restraint, might become
necessary: they, therefore, without any equivalent, bound the hands of this
country; while the only restraints which Britain would ever find it expedient
to impose, were left in full force. -- It is remarkable, that all the means
that have ever been proposed for counteracting the restrictive laws of Britain,
either by individuals, by states, and by congress ^^se^f, have been carefully
examined by our negoc^^tor; not to advance them by his treaty, but precisely to
take from his country the means of carrying them into effect. The several
importing states, prior to the orga^^^tion of the federal government, thought
it necessary, by p^^tial laws on the British trade, to force her to put ours
upon a better footing; in this opinion, the popular branch of congress twice
agreed. It was determined by this treaty to put it in future out of our power;
and we bind ourselves to let the British continue their restrictions, but to
impose none. Congress agree to a tonnage and duty which is to give the
^^^^^tion of the United States some advantage over that of foreigners. Mr. Jay
agrees (in consideration, I suppose, of the (...) treatment we have received
from that nation) that though these regulations shall affect others, they shall
be of no avail against Britain. It has been proposed to make the British debts
^^swerable for British depredations. Mr. Jay (fearful that ^^ter should not be
left for another embassy extraordinary) (...) sure again to bind our hands; and
all this without any (...) of equivalent. Can any body suppose that these
extraordinary stipulations were accidental? Is any man so blind, as (...) see
in them the acts of a party determined to strengthen themselves by a foreign
alliance, and to wrest from the hands of their antagonists the weapons by which
their ally might be annoyed? In a royal government, and where the population
amounts to ten or twelve millions, a few scattered merch^^^^, with very limited
capitals, are of no moment, and cannot have the slightest influence upon the
government: but is this the case in a republic, where the population is thin,
where wealth creates almost the only distinction, where the sea (...) give the
tone to the politics of the country? Will any (...) say, that circumstances may
not arise in such a country, i^ which it would be extremely imprudent to permit
the whole commerce to be carried on by foreign merchants, whose ^^^itals will
probably be infinitely larger than our own, and even suffer them to remain with
us (as the treaty does) when we are at war with their native country? I would
not be understood to advocate the removal of any class of men, while (...)
danger is to be apprehended from them: but it would be certainly unwise to
deprive ourselves of a right to do it, and to prevent the admission of too
numerous a band of them, if political or commercial circumstances should render
it proper. Why, with so much greater cause of apprehension than Britain, should
we be more fearless? She does not permit the citizens of the United States to
reside for the purposes of trade in any of her dominions out of Europe. She
certainly does this, either because she supposes that they may be dangerous, or
because she wishes to secure the trade to her own subjects; and should either
of these motives operate with less force on us?

This article concludes with the following words, "But subject always as to
what respects this article, to the laws and statutes of the two countries
respectively;" this must mean subject to the laws which existed at the time of
the signature or ratification of the treaty; for otherwise, either party might,
at will, defeat the provisions it contained, and render the whole a dead
letter, which is too absurd to suppose. -- In order to see, then, how far this
provision is reciprocal, we will examine what laws, relative to the commerce of
the two countries, were in force at that or this time.

1st. We impose upon British vessels, in common with other foreigners, a
tonnage duty of 50 cents, that is, 44 beyond what our citizens pay; -- this,
however, is more than countervailed by the clause in the 15th article, which
permits them to lay an equal tonnage upon our ships.

2d. We impose extra duties which may average 10 per cent. on the cargoes of
foreign ships; this, however, is countervailed by the right the British
reserve, to impose an equivalent duty. It must follow, then, that their
commerce with us is absolutely free, and stands upon the same ground, as that
of our own citizens. If then our commerce with Britain is equally free, the
article is reciprocal; if, on the other hand, our trade is shackled by the laws
which are left in force, then the article is not reciprocal.

1st. Then, Britain prohibits our trade with several parts of her dominions,
except in British vessels. 2d. She imposes near 40 cents extra light money, a
ton, upon our vessels, except in the port of London; this, with the 50 cents
tonnage we have given her a right to lay, and the 6 cents our own vessels pay
at home, make a premium on her vessels, or a duty on ours, equal to 46 cents a
ton, to the disadvantage of our own navigation. 3d. She compels us, in our
trade with her, to navigate only with American seamen, which is a peculiar
disadvantage to a nation which, like ours, is always receiving useful hands
from other countries. 4th. She does not permit her citizens to make use of
American-built vessels; that is, she discourages our ship-builders; while, by
the treaty, we encourage hers. 5th. She does not permit American vessels to
bring her any commodities, except such as are the growth and manufacture of our
own country, while we permit her to bring us the commodities of every country.
6th. She prohibits our carrying articles from one of her ports to another;
while she may carry from one of our ports to another, subject to an extra
tonnage duty, of 44 cents. 7th. She prohibits the exportation of many articles
to this country from her European dominions. 8th. She prohibits the importation
of salted fish, bacon, salt provisions, whale-oil, etc. and even grain, for
home consumption, except when the price of wheat is above 50 s. sterling the
quarter. 9th. She lays a very heavy duty upon a variety of the articles of this
country, tobacco and rice, particularly; while we lay none upon her but such as
by the treaty we have allowed her to equalize. 10th. She does not permit our
citizens to settle for the purposes of commerce, in any part of her dominions
out of Europe.
All these restrictions, and some slighter ones that might be mentioned, are
imposed on us by laws, which, by the 14th article, we have preserved in full
force; at the same time, that we have agreed, that the only two checks we had
placed on her commerce and navigation, shall be done away; for a countervailing
duty, or a repeal of the duty, amounts exactly to the same thing; except so far
as the repeal would affect the revenue, that no new ones shall be imposed.
Would not any body have imagined, that this long list of burdens would have
made Lord Grenville blush to ask, or Mr. Jay to grant, countervailing duties,
when all we had done, was already countervailed, at least ten fold. Where is
the reciprocity of this article? What could be our envoy's inducement to enter
into it? Were we afraid, that our merchants would not be suffered to settle in
Britain without it? Was it an object of any moment if they did not? was he
fearful that they would lay new burdens upon us? was not the catalogue of
oppression as full as it could be? had not Britain herself already acq^^esced
near six years in the justice of our imposing a duty upon her shipping and
merchandises? has she stipulated for qualizing duties with other nations, on
whom she has imposed similar burdens, and who in return have taxed her trade?
is the^e a nation in the world, from whom she derives so many advantages as
from us, or who burdens her trade so little? and have we no right to any return
for all this? could the British court have objected, if we were to treat on the
^^^^ing of reciprocal advantage^, if M^. Jay had stated each of these
restrictions, and demanded an equivalent for it, if it would break in too much
on their system to remove them? Lord Grenville (...) ow^^ to meet them by
similar (...) that if we (...) to do so, it was from a spirit of conciliation,
and because that we believed, that the equivalent might be settled by treaty to
mutual advantage. But to submit to all, to ask no equivalent, to relinquish the
right of doing ourselves justice, was a most unheard of desertion of the
interests of our own country. It was one which no other nation in the world
would suffer to pass with impunity, and which I grieve to think a single native
of America can be found to justify.

It is true, that this article proposes, that two years after the present war,
the contracting parties may treat for the equalization of the duties, etc. but
that in the mean time it is to remain on the footing the treaty places it. Upon
what ground was this discussion postponed? if Mr. Jay was sent to make a
treaty, why did he not make it, but leave it open to future discussion? is it
probable that at the end of the war (which may last several years, and two
years after, that is, when Britain has had time to recruit her strength and her
finances, she will be more moderate in her views, than at this moment, when she
is overwhelmed with calamities? Is it probable, that at that period our trade
will be of more consequence to her than now, that she has lost two important
branches of it, Holland and France? It should be recollected, that the
exportations from the British dominions to the United States, taken on the
medium of two years, 1784 and 1785, exceed one-third of all her manufactures
exported to all the rest of the world.

At that time, Holland, which, next to America, is their best customer, had not
declined their market. At present it will not be extravagant to allege, that
the United States consume two-fifths of all the British manufactures that are
exported to foreign nations. The distress that a rupture with us, or any
interruption of our commerce, would occasion in England, is beyond calculation.
This, then, was the moment to treat upon the most advantageous terms, or to
exert our inherent right to do ourselves justice by our own laws. It is in
knowing how to take advantage of such circumstances, that true policy consists.
Every one remembers how much the president's foresight was commended in having
seized upon this moment to send a special envoy. But this envoy, it seems,
thought differently from the president, and agrees formally, that we shall take
no advantage of the ground on which we stand; but that, when Britain may have
recovered what she has lost, then we will treat.

Is there any kind of connection between the present war and our commercial
regulations with Britain? If not, why have any reference to the war, in setting
the time for making our arrangements? Why but to give Britain still greater
advantages than she dare to ask now? If the present arrangement will as I have
shown, oppress our commerce and destroy our ^^^igation -- if it banishes our
seamen, and starves our ship car^^^ters -- if it puts our whole trade into the
hands of foreign^^^ even for a time -- how many years will it take, under the
wi^^^^ and best arrangements, to recover the ground we had lost? -- Every thing
must be re-created; and the discouragement (...) must then give to foreign
navigation, after having lost our own, must create a temporary distress, which
will be felt by every order of people. This distress will again be the argument
for new humiliations, and our subjugation to Britain be re^d^^^^ perpetual. Is
the present moment was (contrary to the g^^^^^ sentiment) that in which we
could not treat to advantage, why treat at all? Why relinquish every thing, to
gain nothing?

CATO.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
No. IX.
IT was my intention to have comprised in two numbers, the examination of the
2d article; but on experiment, it was found expedient to add a third. I resume,
for a moment, the subject of indemnification for the detention of the posts.

As an inducement to persist in this claim, we are assured, that the
magnanimity of France, would have procured for us, its establishment. In the
first place, this supposes that we we^^ to have become a party in the war; for
otherwise it would be silly to imagine, that France would, on our account,
embarrass herself with a difficulty of this sort. In this case, and supposing
the object accomplished, still the injuries, losses, and expenses of war would
have greatly overbalanced the advantage gained. But what certainty have we,
that France will be able to dictate terms, even for herself? Could we expect or
rely, after the terrible and wasting war, in which she has been engaged, that
she would be willing to encumber the making of peace, with additional
obstacles, to secure so trifling a point with us? Would it be even humane, or
friendly in us, to ask her to risk the prolonging of her calamities, for so
trivial an object? A conduct like this, with reference either to France, or to
ourselves, ^^uld resemble that of the gamester, who should play millions
against farthings. It is so preposterous in every sense, that the
recommendation of it, if sincere, admits of but one construction, namely, that
those who recommend it, wish our envoy to have acted not as if he had been sent
to make peace, but as if he had been sent to make war, to blow and spread the
desolating f^ames of discord and contention.

There is a marked disingenuousness, running through the observations, which
are made to the prejudice of the treaty: they endeavor constantly to have it
understood, that our envoy abandoned, without effort, the claims which have not
been established. -- Whence is this inferred? Is it from the silence of the
treaty? Surely we can only expect to find there what was agreed upon, not what
was discussed and rejected. The truth is, that as well on this point of
indemnification, for the detention of the posts, as on that of compensation,
for the negroes carried away, our envoy urged our pretensions, as far, and as
long, as he could do it, without making them final obstacles to the progress of
the negotiation.

I shall now enumerate and answer the remaining objections, which have appeared
against this article. They are these: 1. That the posts to be surrendered,
instead of being described in general terms, should, for greater certainty,
have been specially enumerated; that now the uncertainty of a part of the
boundary line, may furnish a pretext for detaining some of them. 2. That the
expressions "precincts and jurisdictions," which are excepted from our right of
settlement, previous to the surrender, are so vague and indeterminate, as to be
capable of being made to countenance encroachments. 3. That it was improper to
have stipulated, for the inhabitants, the option of residing and continuing
British subjects, or of becoming American citizens: that the first was to
establish, by treaty, a British colony, within our limits; the last to admit,
without the power of exception, bi^ter enemies of the country, to the
privileges of citizens. 4. That the securing to those inhabitants, the
enjoyment of their property is exceptionable, as being a "cession without
equivalent of an indefinite extent of territory." This is the character given
to it by the meeting at Philadelphia.

The answer to the first objection, is, that the enumeration proposed might
have included the very danger which is objected to the provision as it stands,
and which is completely avoided by it. The principal posts occupied by the
British, are known and might easily have been enum^^ated; but there is a
possibility of there being others not known, which might have escaped. Last
year there started up a post, which had not been before hea^d of, on the
pretense of an old trading establishment. Who knows with absolute certainty,
how many similar cases may e^^^ in the vast extent of wilderness, as far as the
lake of the Wo^d^^ which, for several years past, has been inaccessible to us?
If our envoy's information could have been perfect, at the time of his last
advices from America; between that period and the signing of the treaty,
changes might have taken place, that is, trading houses might have grown into
military posts, as they did in the case referred to; a case, which, in fact,
happened after the departure of our envoy from the United States. Was it not
far better than to hazard an imperfect specification, to use terms so general
and comprehensive, as could not fail, in any circumstances, to embrace every
case? Certainly it was; and the terms "all ports and places," which are those
used in the treaty, are thus comprehensive. Nothing can escape them.

Neither is there the least danger that the uncertainty This uncertainty, it is
to be observed, results not from the late treaty, but from the treaty of peace.
It is occasioned by its being unknown, whether any part of the Mississippi
extends far enough north, to be intersected by a due west line from the lake of
the Woods.
of a part of the boundary line, can be made a pretext for detai^^^ the posts,
which it was impossible to enumerate. This (...) appear from an inspection of
the map -- The only uncertain p^^^, of the boundary line (except that depending
on the river. St. Croix, which is on a side unconnected with the position of
the posts) is that which is run from the lake of the Woods to the Mississippi.
-- The most western of our known posts, is at Michillimackinac, at or near the
junction of the lakes Huron and Michegan, eastward near eleven degrees of
longitude of the lake of the Woods, and about ten degrees of longitude of that
point, on the Mississippi, below the falls of St. Anthony, where a survey, in
order to a settlement of the line, is to begin. Moreover, our line, by the
treaty of peace, is to pass through the lake Huron, and the water communication
between that (...) and lake Superior, and through the middle of lake Superior,
and thence westward through other waters, to the lake of the Woods; that is,
about half a degree of latitude more northward, and about eight degrees of
longitude more westward, than any part of the lake Michegan. Whence it is
manifest, that any closing line, to be drawn from the lake of the Woods to the
Mississippi, must pass at a distance of several hundred miles from
Michillimackinac. If the British, therefore, should be disposed to evade the
surrender, they will seek for it some pretext more plausible than one which
involves a palpable geographical absurdity. Nor can we desire a better proof of
the ignorance or disingenuousness of the objectors to the treaty, than their
having contrived one of this nature.

The general terms used, were to be preferred, for the very reason, that there
was a doubt about the course of a part of the boundary line; for, if there
should chance to exist any post now unknown, so near the line as to render it
questionable, in the first instance, on which side it may fall; the moment the
line is settled, the obligation to surrender will be settled with it.

The second objection loses all force, when it is considered, that the
exception can only operate till the first of June next, the period for the
surrender of the posts; and that, in the mean time, there is ample space for
settlement, without coming to disputable ground. There was, besides, real
difficulty in an accurate definition. What the precincts and jurisdictions of
the posts are, is a question of fact. In some instances, where, from there
being no settlements, over which an actual jurisdiction had been exercised, a
good rule might have been, the distance of gun shot from the fortifications,
which might have been settled at a certain extent in miles, say three or four.
But in some cases an actual jurisdiction has been exercised, under
circumstances which created obstacles to a precise definition. The case of
Caldwell's manor, in the vicinity of Dutchman's point, is an example. There, a
mixed jurisdiction has been sometimes exercised by the British, and by the
state of Vermont, connected with a disputed title to that manor; one party
claiming under an ancient French grant, and the other under the state of
Vermont. Detroit and its vicinity would also have occasioned embarrassment.
From the situation of the settlements, and of a number of dispersed trading
establishments, a latitude was likely to have been required, to which it might
have been expedient to give a sanction. In such situations, where a thing is to
last but a short time, it is commonly the most eligible course, to avoid
definition. It is obvious, that no ill can result from the want of one, if the
posts are surrendered at the time agreed; if not, it is equally plain, that it
can be of no consequence, because the whole article will be void.

The third objection becomes insignificant, the moment the real state of things
is adverted to. This has been described in a former number for another purpose,
but will now be recapitulated, with one or two additional facts. The first
posts, beginning eastward, are, Point-au-fer and Dutchman's point, on like
Champlain. The whole number of persons in this vicinity, over whom jurisdiction
has been claimed by the British, may amount to an hundred families. But the
claim of jurisdiction here, has been only occasionally and feebly urged; and it
is assorted in addition, by well informed persons, that the ab^^^mentioned
families have been, for some time, regularly represented in the legislature of
Vermont, the ordinary civil jurisdiction of which state has, with little
interruption, been extended over them. At neither of the other posts, to wit,
Osweg^, Niagara, the Miami, Detroit, Michillimackinac, is there any settlement,
except at Detroit, where, and in the vicinity of which, there may be between
two and three thousand persons, chiefly French Canadians, and their
descendants. It will be understood, that I do not consider as a settlement, two
or three log houses for traders.

It follows, that the number of persons who can be embraced by the privileges
stipulated, is too inconsiderable to admit of attaching any political
consequences whatever to the stipulation* Of what importance can it possibly
be, to the United States, whether two or three thousand persons, men, women and
children, are permitted to reside within their limits, either as British or
American subjects, at their option? If the thing was an object of desire to
Great Britain, for the accommodation of the individuals con^erned, could it
have merited a moment's hesitation on our part? As to residence, it is at the
courtesy of nations at peace to permit the residence of the citizens of each
other within their respective territories. British subjects are now free by our
laws, to reside in all parts of the United States. As to the permission to
become citizens, it has been the general policy and practice of our country to
facilitate the naturalization of foreigners. And we may safely count on the
interest of individuals, and on that desire to enjoy equal rights which is so
deeply planted in the human breast, that all who resolve to make their
permanent residence with us, will become citizens.

It is true, that there may be a few obnoxious characters (though I do not
recollect to have heard of more than two or three) among the number of those
who have acquired by the stipulation, a right to become citizens of the United
States. But would it ever have been worthy of the dignity of the national
wrath, to have launched its thunders against the heads of two, or three, or
half a dozen despicable individuals? Can we suppose that, without a
stipulation, it would have been thought worth the while to make a special
exception of their cases out of the operation of our general laws of
naturalization? And if this had not been done, would they not have found means,
if they desired it, after the lapse of a sh^rt period, to acquire the rights of
citizens? It is to be observed, that citizens of our own, who may have
committed crimes against our laws, not remitted by the treaty of peace, would
find no protection under this article.

Suppose the stipulation had not been made, what would have been the probable
policy of the United States? Would it not have been to leave the handful of
settlers undisturbed, in quiet enjoyment of their property, and at liberty, if
British subjects, to continue such, or become American citizens, on the usual
conditions? A system of depopulation, or of coercion to one allegiance or
another, would have been little congenial with our modes of thinking, and would
not, I am persuaded, have been attempted.

If, then, the treaty only stipulates in this respect, what would have been the
course of things without it, what cause for serious objection can there be on
this account?

The matter of the fourth objection can only derive a moment's importance from
misapprehension. It seems to have been imagined, that there are large tracts of
land, held under British grants, made since the peace, which are confirmed by
the part of the article that gives the inhabitants the right of removing with,
selling, or retaining their property.

In the first place, it is to be observed, that if such grants had been made,
the stipulation could not be deemed to confirm them; because our laws must
determine the question, what is the property of the inhabitants; and they would
rightfully decide, that the British government, since the treaty of peace,
could make no valid grants of land, within our limits. Upon the ground even of
its own pretensions, it could not have made such grants. Nothing more was
claimed, than the right to detain the posts as a hostage. The right to grant
lands pre-supposes much more, a full right of sovereignty and territory.

But in the second place, it has always been understood, and upon recent and
careful enquiry is confirmed, that the British government has never, since the
peace, made a grant of lands within our limits. It appears, indeed, to have
been its policy, to prevent settlements in the vicinity of the posts.

Hence the stipulation, as it affects lands, does nothing more than confirm the
property of those which were holden at the treaty of peace; neither is the
quantity considerable; and it chiefly, if not altogether, depends on titles
acquired under the French government, while Canada was a province of France.

In giving this confirmation, the treaty only pursues what is a constant rule
among ^ivilized nations. When territory is ceded or yielded up by o^e nation to
another, it is a common practice^ if not a special condition, to leave the
inhabitants in the enjoyment of their property. A contrary conduct would be
disgraceful to a nation; nor is it very reputable to the objectors to the
treaty, that they have levelled their battery against this part of it. It is a
reflection upon them too, that they employ for the purpose, terms which import
more than is true, even on their own supposition, and are, therefore,
calculated to deceive; for the confirmation of property to individuals, could
be at most a cession only of the right of soil, and not of territory, which
term has a technical sense, including jurisdiction.

Let it be added, that the treaty of peace, in the article which provides "that
there should be no future confiscations nor prosecutions against any person or
persons, by reason of the part which he or they might have taken in the war;
and that no person should, on that account, suffer any future loss or damage,
either in his person, liberty or property," did substantially what is made an
objection to the treaty, under consideration. It will not, I believe, be
disputed, that it gave protection to all property antecedently owned, and not
confiscated. Indeed it is a question, whether the stipulations cited, would not
have effected, with regard to other rights than those of property, a great part
of what is regulated by the last treaty. Its provisions, in this particular,
were, perhaps, in the main, unnecessary, further than to obviate a doubt which
might have arisen from the suspension of the treaty, by the withholding of the
posts.

Thus have I gone through every objection to the second article, which is in
any degree colorable; and I flatter myself have shown not only that the
acquisition made by it, is of great and real value, but that it stands as well
as circumstances permitted, and is defensible in its details. I have been the
mo^^ particular in the examination, because the assailants of the treaty have
exerted all their ingenuity to discredit this article, from a consciousness, no
doubt, that it is a very valuable it^^ of the treaty; and that it was important
to their cause, to envelope it in as thick a cloud of objection as they were
able to contrive. As an expedient of party, there is some merit in the
artifice; but a sensible people will see that it is merely artifice. It is a
false calculation, that the people of this country can ever be ultimately
deceived.

CAMILLUS.

No. X.
THE object of the third article is connected with that of the second. The
surrender of the posts naturally drew with it an arrangement, with regard to
inland trade and navigation. Such an arrangement, convenient in several
respects, appears to be in some respects necessary. To restrain the Indians on
either side of the line, from trading with the one party or the other, at
discretion, besides the questionableness of the right, could not be attempted
without rendering them disgusted and hostile. The truth of this seems to have
influenced the conduct of Great Britain and France, while the latter was in
possession of Canada. The 15th article of the treaty of peace of Utretcht, in
the year 1713, allows free liberty to the Indians on each side, to resort for
trade to the British and French colonies. It is to be observed, too, that the
Indians not only assist on a right of going to trade with whom they please, but
of permitting whom they please to come to trade with them, and also to reside
among them for that purpose. -- Thus, the southern and south-western Indians
within our limits, maintain a constant intercourse with Spain, established on
the basis of treaty -- nor has their right to do it, been hitherto contested by
the United States. -- Indeed, on what clear principle of justice could this
natural right of trade, of a people not subject to our ordinary jurisdiction,
be disputed? This claim, on their part, gives a corresponding claim to
neighboring nations, to trade with them. Spain would think the pretension to
exclude her inadmissible -- And Great Britain would have thought the same, if
she had found it her interest to assert the right of intercourse; views which
would always be seconded by the Indians from regard to their own interest and
independence. It was a point, therefore, which it much concerned the
preservation of good understanding between the parties and with the Indians, to
regulate on some equitable plan; and the more liberal the plan, the more
agreeable to a natural course of things, and to the free participation of
mutual advantages, the more likely was it to promote and prolong that important
benefit.

In the second place, the expediency of some arrangement was indicated by the
circumstance of the boundary line between the parties, running for an extent of
sixteen hundred miles through the middle of the same rivers, lakes, and waters.
It may be deemed impossible from the varying course of winds and currents, for
the ships of one party to keep themselves constantly within their own limits.
without passing or transgressing those of the other. How, indeed, was the
precise middle ^^^e of those great lakes to be always known?

It appears evident, that to render the navigation of these waters useful to,
and safe for, both parties, it was requisite that they should become common.
Without this, frequent forfeitures to enforce interdictions of intercourse
might be incurred -- and there would be constant danger of interference and
controversy. It is probable, too, that when those waters are better explored in
their whole extent, it will be found that the best navigation of those lakes is
sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the other, and that common convenience
will, in this respect, also be promoted by community of right.

Again -- It is almost always mutually beneficial for bordering territories to
have free and friendly intercourse with each other -- This relates not only to
the advantages of an interchange of commodities, for the supply of mutual
wants, a^^ to those of the reciprocal creation of industry, connected with that
interchange, but also to those of avoiding jealousy, collision, and contest, of
preserving friendship and harmon^. -- Proximity of territory invites to trade
-- the bordering inhabitants, in spite of every prohibition, will endeavor to
carry it on; -- if not allowed, illicit adventures take place of the regular
operations of legalised commerce -- individual interest leads to collusions to
e^^de restraining regulations -- habits of infracting the laws are produced --
morals are perverted -- securities, necessarily great, in proportion as they
counteract the natural course of things, lay the foundation of discontents and
quarrels. Perhaps it may be safely affirmed, that freedom of intercourse, or
violent hatred and enmity, are the alternative in every case of contiguity of
territory.

The maxims of the United States have hitherto favored a free intercourse with
all the world. They have conceived, that they had nothing to fear from the
unrestrained competition of commercial enterprise, and have only desired to be
admitted to it on equal terms. Hence, not only the communication by sea has
been open, with the adjacent territories, on our continent, as well as with
more distant quarte^^ of the globe; but two ports have been erected on lake
Champlain for the convenience of interior commerce with Canada: and there is no
ristriction upon any nation, to (...) by the M^^^^^^pi to the only port which
has been established for that (...) the union. These arrangements have created
neither blame nor critism.

Our envoy, therefore, in agreeing to a liberal plan of intercourse with the
British territories in our neighborhood, (...) conformed to the general spirit
of our country, and to the general policy of our laws. Great Britain, in
acceding to such a plan, departed from her system of colonial monopoly, a
departure which ought to be one recommendation of the plan to us; for every
relaxation of that system paves the way for other and further relaxations. It
might have been expected, also, that a spirit of jealousy might have proved an
obstacle on the part of Great Britain; since, especially if we consider the
composition of those who inhabit, and are likely to inhabit Canada, it is
morally certain, that there must be, as the result of a free intercourse, a far
greater momentum of influence of the United States upon Canada, than of Canada
upon the United States. It would not have been surprising, if this jealousy had
sought to keep us at a distance, and had counteracted the wiser policy of
limiting our desires by giving us possession of what is alone to us truly
desirable, the advantages of commerce, rather than of suffering our wishes to
be stimulated and extended by privation and restraint.

New ideas seem of late to have made their way among us. The extremes of
commercial jealousy are inculcated. -- Regulation, restriction, exclusion, are
now with many the favorite topics -- instead of feeling pleasure, that new
avenues of trade are opened, a thousand dangers and mischiefs are pourtrayed
when the occasion occurs. Free trade with all the world seems to have dwindled
into trade with France and her dominions. The lovesick partisans of that
country appear to regard her as the epitome of the universe, to have adopted
for their motto, "All for love, and the world well lost."

These new propensities toward, commercial jealousy, have been remarkably
exemplified with respect to the article immediately under consideration. Truly
estimated, it is a valuable ingredient in the treaty; and yet there is,
perhaps, no part of it which has been more severely reprobated. -- It will be
easy to show that it has been extremely misrepresented, and that what have been
deemed very exceptionable features, do not exist at all.

We will first examine what the article really does contain, and afterward
what are the comparative advantages likely to result to the two countries.

The main stipulation is, that "it shall at all times be free to his majesty's
subjects, and to the citizens of the United States, -- and also to the Indians
dwelling on either side of the boundary line, freely to p^s^ and re^^^, by land
and inland navigation, into the (...), and countries of the two parties on the
con^^^ent of A^^^^ (...) the limits of the Hudson's Bay company only excepted)
and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and waters thereof, and freely to carry
on trade and commerce with each other."

The subject matter of this stipulation is plainly inland trade and commerce,
to be carried on by land passage, and inland navigation. This appears, 1st,
from the terms of the article. The subjects and citizens of the two parties,
and also the Indians dwelling on each side the boundary line, are freely to
pass and repass. In what manner? by land and inland navigation: to what places?
into the respective territories and countries of the two parties, on the
continent of America (the country of the Hudson's Bay company only excepted).
They are also to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and waters thereof, and freely
to carry on trade and commerce with each other. This right to navigate lakes,
rivers, and waters, must be understood with reference to inland navigation;
because this gives it a sense conformable with the antecedent clause, with
which it is immediately connected, as part of a sentence; because the right to
pass and repass, being expressly restricted to land and inland navigation, it
would not be natural to extend it by implication, on the strength of an
ambiguous term, to passage by sea, or by any thing more than inland navigation;
because the lakes and rivers have direct reference to inland navigation,
showing that to be the object in view; and the word "waters," from the order in
which it stands, will most consistently with propriety of composition, be
understood as something less than lakes and rivers, as ponds, canals, and those
amphibious waters, to which it is scarcely possible to give a name; and because
the waters mentioned are "waters thereof," that is, waters of the territories
and countries of the two parties on the continent of America; a description
which cannot very aptly be applied to the sea, or be supposed to include
navigation by sea to the United States, or from them to the British
territories. It is true, that nations, for various purposes, claim and exercise
jurisdiction over the seas, immediately adjacent to their coasts; yet this is
subject to the common right of nations, to the innocent use of those seas for
navigation; and it is not, prima facie, presumable, that two nations, speaking
of the waters of each other, would mean to give this appropriate denomination
to waters, in which both claimed some common right. -- The usual description of
such waters in treaties is, "the (...) near the countries," etc. -- But were it
otherwise, still the ^^^^gating from the (...) s^^ into those waters, could not
be (...) and might be (...)

The above construction is confirmed by the general complexion of the treaty.
It is the manifest province of the eighteen articles, which succeed the first
ten, to regulate external commerce and navigation. The regulations they
contain, are introduced thus, by the 11th article: "It is agreed between his
majesty and the United States of America, that there shall be a reciprocal and
entirely perfect liberty of navigation and commerce, between their respective
people, in the manner, under the limitations, and on the conditions specified
in the following articles." -- Then follow articles, which provide fully and
distinctly for trade and navigation between the United States and the British
West Indies, between the Asiatic dominions of Great Britain and the United
States; and lastly, between the European dominions of Great Britain and the
United States. These eighteen articles properly constitute the treaty of
commerce and navigation between the two countries. Their general scope, and
some special provisions which they contain, prove that the object of the third
article is local and partial; that it contemplates exclusively, an interior
commerce, by land and inland navigation (except as to the Mississippi) and
particularly that it does not reach at all our Atlantic ports. An instance of
one of the special provisions alluded to, will be cited in the further
examination of this article.

In opposition to this construction, much stress is laid upon the provisions
which immediately succeed the clauses that have been quoted. They are in these
words: "But it is understood, that this article does not extend to the
admission of vessels of the United States into the seaports, harbors, bays, or
creeks of his majesty's said territories, nor into such parts of the rivers in
his said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona side between Montreal
and Quebec: nor to the admission of British vessels from the sea, into the
rivers of the United States, beyond the highest ports of entry for foreign
vessels from the sea!" The last, it is said, contains an implication, that
under this article, British vessels have a right to come to our highest ports
of entry for foreign vessels from the sea, while we are excluded from the
seaports of the British territories on this continent.

But this is altogether an erroneous inference. The clauses last cited are
inserted for greater caution, to guard expressively against any construction of
the article, by implications more or less remote; contrary to the actual
regulations of the parties, with regard to external commerce and navigation.
Great Britain does not n^^ permit a trad^ by sea to Nova Scotia and Canada. She
therefore declares that the article shall not be deemed to contravene this
regulation. The United States now permit soreign vessels to come to certain
ports of entry from the sea, but exclude them from other more interior ports of
entry, to which our own vessels may come. An example of this is sound in the
state of New York. Foreign vessels can only enter and malade at the city of New
York: vessels of the United States may ^^ter at the ^^ty of Hudson, and unlade
there and at ^l^^y.
It is therefore declared on their part, that the article shall not be
construed to contravene this regulation. This was the more proper, as the right
of inland navigation might have given some color to the claim of going from an
outer to an inner port of entry. But this negative of an implication (...)
which might have found some color in the principal provasion, can never be
construed into an affumative grant of a very important privilege, foreign to
that principal provision. The main object of the article, it has been seen, is
trade by land, and inland navigation. Trade and navigation by sea, with our sea
ports, is an entirely diflerent thing. To inser a positive grant of this
privilege, from a clause which says, that the right of inland navigation shall
not be construed to permit vessels coming from the sea, to go from the ports of
entry, to which our laws now restrict them, to more interior ports, would be
contrary to reason, and to every rule of sound construction. Such a privilege
could never be permitted to be founded upon any thing less than a positive and
explicit grant. It could never be supported by an implication drawn from an
article relative to a local and partial object, much less by an implication
drawn from the negative of another implication. The pretension, that all our
ports were laid open to Great Britain by a covert and side-wind provision, and
this without reciprecity, without a right of access to a single sea port of the
other party in any part of the world, would be too monstrous to be tolerated
for an instant. The principles of equity between nations, and the established
rules of interpretation, would unite to condemn so great an inequality, if any
other sense could possibly be found for the terms from which it might be
protended to be deduced. It would be in the present case the more inadmissible,
because the object is embraced and regulated by other parts of the treaty on
terms of reciprocity.

The different mode of expression, in the clause last cited, when speaking of
the British territories, and when speaking of the United States, has furnished
an argument for the inference which has been stated. But this difference is
accounted for by the difference in the actual regulations of the parties, as
described above. The object was on each side to cust an implication interfering
with those regulations. The expressions to effect it were commensurate with the
litte of the fact on each size; and consequently do not warrant any collateral
or special infer^nce.

The only positive effect of these clauses is to establish, that the navigation
from Montreal to Quebec, shall be carried on in what are called "small vessels,
trading bone side between Montreal and Quebec." In determining their sense, it
merits some o^servation, that they do not profess to except from the operation
of the general provisions of the article, the sea ports, etc. of the British
territories; but declare, that it is understood that those provisions do not
extend to them. This is more a declaration that the antecedent provisions were
not so broad as to comprehend the cases, than an exception of the cases from
the operation of those provisions.

Those who are not familiar with laws and treaties, may feel some difficulty
about the position, that particular clauses are introduced, only for greater
caution, without producing any new effect; but those who are familiar with such
subjects, know, that there is scarcely a law or a treaty which does not offer
examples of the use of similar clauses; and it not unfrequently happens, that a
clear meaning of the principal provision is rendered obscure by the excess of
explanatory precaution.

The next clause of this article is an exception to the general design of it,
condfirming the construction I have given. "The river Mississippi shall,
however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
which soever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesly in Great
Britain."

If the general provision gives access to all our ports, which must be the
doctrine, if it gives access to our Atlantic ports, then it would equally have
this effect with regard to the Mississippi. But thus ^^^use ^^^^ly im^^^ the
contrars, not only by introducing a special provision for the parts of the
Mississippi, but by introducing it expressly, as a farther or additional
agreement; the words are, "it is further e^y^^." etc. and these ports are to be
enjoyed by each party, in as ample a manner as any of the ^^^^tle ports or
places of the United States, or any of the parts or ple^^^ his ma^^ly in G^^at
Britain. This reference to our Atlantlc p^rt^, (...) them with the ports of
Great Britain, shows that the Mississippi ports are to be regulated by a rule
or standard different from the ports for that inland navigation, which is the
general object of the article; else, why that special reference? why not have
stopped at the words "used by both parties?" If it be said, that the reference
to our Atlantic ports implies, that they are within the purview of the article,
let it be observed, that the same argument would prove that the ports of Great
britain are also within its parview, which is plainly erroneous; for the main
provisious are expressly consined to the territories of the parties on this
continent. The conclusion is, that the reference is to a sa^^ard, out of the
article, and depending on other parts of the treaty.

It may be useful to observe here, that the Mississippi ports being to be used
only in as ample, and not in a more ample manner, than our Atlantic ports and
the ports of Great Britain, will be liable at all times to all the regulations,
peivileges, and restrictions of the ports with which they are assorted.

The next clause is a still further refutation of the construction which I
oppose.

"All goods and merchandise, whose impertation into his majesty's said
territories in America shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States; and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to ^s higher or other duties than would be payable by his majesty's subjects on
the importation of the same from Europe, into the said territories: and in like
manner, all goods and merchandise, whose importation into the United States
shall not be wh^lly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be
carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, subject to no higher or other
duties than would be payable by the citizens of the United States, on the
importation of the same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said
States: and all goods not prohibited to be exported from the said territories
respectively, may, in like manner, be carried out of the same by the two
parties respectively. paying duty as aforesaid."

The words, "in the manner aforesaid," occur twice in these clauses, and their
equivalent, "in like manner" once. What is the meaning of this so often
repeated phrase? it cannot be presumed, that it would have been inserted so
frequently without having to perform some office of consequence. I answer, that
it is evidently the substitute for these other words of the main provision, "by
land (...) inland navigation." Th^^ is "the manner ^^^^sind." -- This is the
channel, through which goods and merchandises passing, would be subject to no
other or higher duties than would be payable in the British territories by
British subjects, if imported from Europe; or in the terriories of the United
States, by citizens of the United States, if brought by American vessels into
our Atlantic ports. No other reasonable use can be found for the terms. If they
are denied this sense, they had much better been omitted, as being not only
useless, but as giving cause to suppose a restriction of what, it is pretended,
was designed to be general -- a right of importing in every way, and into all
parts of the United States, goods and merchandise, if not entirely prohibited,
on the same duties as are payable by our own citizens when brought in our own
^^ssels.

These words, "whose importation into the United States shall not be entirely
prohibited," is a further key to the true sense of the article. They are
equivalent to these other words, "whose importation, into all parts of the
United States shall not be prohibited." -- The design o^ this clause is to
prevent importation, through the particular channels contemplated by the
article, being obstructed by a partial or by any other than a general
prohibition. As long as certain goods may be introduced into the United States
through the Atlantic ports, they may also be brought into them through the
channels delignated by this article, that is, by land and inland navigation.
The making a prohibition in the given case to depend on a general prohibition,
is conclusive to prove, that the article contemplates only particular channels.
On any other supposition, the clause is nonsense. The true reading, then, of
this part of the article, must be as follows: "Goods and merchandise, whose
importation into all parts of the United States shall not be prohibited, may
freely, for the purposes of commerce, be carried into the same, in manner
as^resaid, that is, by land and inland navigation, from the territories of his
majesty on the continent of America."

There are still other expressions in the article, which are likewise an index
to its meaning. They are these, " would be payable by the citizens of the
United States, on the importation of the same in American vessels into the
Atlantic ports of the said states." This reference to a rate of duties, which
would be payable on importation into the Atlantic ports, as a rule or guide for
the rate of duties, which is to pre^an in the case meant to be comprehended in
the article, is full evidence that importation in the Atlantic ports is not
included in that case. The mention of importation in American vessels, confirms
this conclusion as it shows that the article itself contemplates, that the
discrimination made by our existing laws may continue.

But the matter is put out of all doubt by those parts of the fifteenth article
which reserve to the British government the right of imposing such duty as may
be adequate to countesvail the difference of duty, now payable on the
importation a European and Asiatic goods, when imported into the Unites States
in British and American vessels; and which stipulate, that "the United States
will not INCREASE the now subsisting difference between the duties payable on
the importation of any articles in British or American vessels."

This is a demonstration, that the treaty contemplates, as consistent with it,
a continuance of the present difference of duties on importations in American
and British vessels; and consequently, that the th^^d article, which stipulates
equal duties, as to the cases within it, does not extend to importations into
our Atlantic ports, but is confined to importations by land and inland
navigation. Though this article be of temporary duration, yet as an evidence of
the sense of the parties, it will always serve as a rule of construction for
every part of the instrument.

These different views of the article establish, beyond the possibility of
doubt, that, except with regard to the Mississippi, inland trade and navigation
are its sole objects -- that it gra^^ no right or privilege whatever in our
Atlantic ports -- and that with regard to the ports of the Mississippi, it only
establishes this principle, that Great Britain shall always enjoy there the
same privileges which by treaty or law she is allowed to have in our Atlantic
ports.

I remark incidentally, for a purpose which will appear hereafter, that as far
as this article is concerned, we are free to prohibit the importation into the
United States at large, of any British article whatever, though we cannot
prohibit its importation partially, that is, morely from her territories in our
neighborhood, by land or inland navigation; but we may prohibit the
importation by (...) from those territories; (...) i^ there any other part of
the (...) this is prevented.

The remaining clauses of t^^ article ^^^^lish the following points: "That no
duty of entry (...) by either party on pe^tries brought by land (...), into the
respe^^^ve terri^ories;" that (...) with their own goods, ^^^ll, (...) or duty
upon them; but goods in bale^, or other (...), unusual among Indians, shall not
be con^idera^ (...) their (...); that toils and (...) paid by natives -- that
no duties shall be paid by either party on the mere transit of goods acress
portages and carrying places from one part to another of the territory of the
same party; that the respective governments will promote friendship, good
neighborhood, and amicable intercourse, by causing speedy and impartial
justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to all who may be
concerned therein.

I shall conclude this paper with an observation or two on the meaning of the
terms, inland navigation. These terms have no technical meaning defined in the
laws of either country, nor have they any precise meaning assigned by the law
of nations. They, however, ex vi termini, exclude navigation from the sea; and
as a general rule, I should say, that inland navigation begins there, where sea
navigation ends. Where is this? I answer, at the ports of entry from the sea.
By the laws of Great Britain and of the United States, all rivers are arms of
the sea as far as the tides flow -- It would be a consequence of this
principle, that sea navigation would reach to the head of tide water. But some
more obvious and notorious rule ought to govern the interpretation of national
compacts. The ports of entry from the sea are conceived to be the proper rule.

In the case under consideration, the general spirit of the article may
require, that all the waters which divide the territories of the parties should
be in their whole extent common to both. -- As to other communicating waters,
accessible under the article, the reciprocal limit of the right will be the
ports of entry from the sea. This is to be understood with the exception of the
Mississippi, to the ports of which, access from the sea is granted under the
qualification which has been pointed out.

CAMILLUS.

No. XI.
THE foregoing analysis of the third article, by fixing its true meaning,
enables us to detect some gross errors, which have been principal sources of
prejudice against it. -- One of these is, that the article gives to the other
party a right of access to all our ports, while it excludes us from the ports
of the British (...) in our neighborhood. -- It has been clearly shown, that
it gives no right of access to any one of our Atlantic ports, and that it gives
only a qualified and conditional access to the ports which we may have on the
Mississippi, to be regulated by the privileges at any time allowed by law or
compact in our Atlantic ports, and liable to cease with the cessation of those
privileges. -- The charge, therefore, of want of reciprocity in this
particular, vanishes, and with it all the exceptionable consequences which have
been the fruit of the error. Such is the assertion of DECIUS, that a British
trader may set out from Canada, traverse our lakes, rivers and waters to New
York, and thence to Philadelphi^, while we are precluded from the navigation of
the St. Lawrence, and other British rivers lower than the highest ports of
entry from the sea. It would be an indulgent construction of the article, not
to st^p the British trader at Hudson, as the highest port of entry from the
sea, and the boundary of inland navigation; but he could certainly have no
claim of right under it, to go from New York to Philadelphia, because ^e must
necessarily go by sea to arrive at the first place, and no such permission is
stipulated by the article. Such, also, is the assertion of CATO, that Great
Britain is admitted to all the advantages of which our Atlantic rivers are
susceptible. The rivers, upon which no part of their territory borders, and
which their vessels can only approach by sea, are certainly excepted.

Another of the errors referred to, is this, that goods and merchandise may,
under this article, be imported into any p^rt of the United States, upon the
same duties as are now payable when imported by citizens of the United States,
and in vessels of the United States. It has been clearly proved, that there is
no pretense for this position, and that equality of duties c^ly applies to
importations from the British territories, in our neighborhood, by land and
inland navigation.

CATO, DECIUS, and other writers against the treaty, have fallen into this
strange error, and have founded upon it much angry declamation. The first,
however, embarrassed in his construction, by the provision which reserves to
Gr^^t Britain the right of laying countervailing du^ies, endeavors to escape
from it by distinguishing between goods imported for Indian trade, and those
imported for other uses. Whatever may be the case with regard to the latter,
the former, he is convinced, are certainly entitled to admission into our
Atlantic ports, on the privileged rights of duty; though he is very naturally
perplexed to see how the discrimination could be maintained in practice. But
where does he find room for this distinction? Not in the provision (...) in the
clause of the third article, to which he gives the interpretation, for that is
directly against his distinction. The goods and merchandise, for the privileged
importation of which at provides, are restricted to no particular object --
have no special reference to Indian more than to other trade: on the contrary,
they are expressly to be imported for "the purposes of commerce" at large; so
that in the cases in which they are privileged, they are equally so, whether it
be for a trade with our citizens or with Indians. The distinction therefore,
only proves the embarrassment of its inventor, without solving the difficulty.
A curious assertion has been made on this article of duties. It has been said,
that while we are obliged to admit British goods on the same duties with those
paid by our own citizens, or importation in our own vessels, Great Britain,
under the right to lay, countervailing duties, may incumber us with an
additional ten per cent. Can any thing be more absurd than the position, that
the right to lay countervailing duties exists in a case, where there is no
difference of duty to countervail? The term is manifestly a relative one, and
can only operate where there is something on our side to be countervailed or
counterbalanced, and in an exact ratio to it. If it be true, that a very high
law character is the writer of CATO, we cannot but be surprised at such extreme
inaccuracy.

Other errors, no less considerable, will appear in the progress of the
examination; but it will facilitate the detection of these, and tend to a more
thorough understanding of the article, to state in this place some general
facts, which are material in a comparison of the advantages and disadvantages
of the article, to the respective parties.

1st. The fur trade within our limits is, to the fur trade within the British
limits, as one to seven, nearly; that is, the trade with the Indians, on the
British side of the boundary line, is about seven times greater than the same
trade on our side of that line. This fact is stated as the result of repeated
enquiry from well informed persons for several years past. It will not appear
extraordinary to those who recollect how much the Indians on our side are
circumscribed in their hunting-grounds, and to what a degree they are reduced
in numbers by the frequent wars, in which they have been engaged with us: while
the tribes on the British side of the line are not only far more numerous, but
enjoy an immense undisturbed range of wilderness. The more rapid progress of
settlement on our side than on the other, will fast merease the existing
disparity.

2d. Our communication with the sea is more easy, safe, and expeditious, than
that of Canada, by the St. Law^ence. Accordingly, while our vessels ordinarily
make two voyages in a year, to and from Europe, the British vessels, in the
Canada trade, are, from the course of the seasons, and the nature of the
navigation, confined to one voyage in a year. Though hitherto, from temporary
circumstances, this difference has not made any sensible difference in the
price of transportation; yet in its permanent operation, it is hardly possible
that it should not give us a material advantage in the competition for the
supply of European goods to a large part of Canada, especially that which is
denominated Upper Canada. The city of Hudson, distant 124 miles from the city
of New York, is as near to the junction of the river Cataraquy and lake
Ontario, as Montreal, which last is near four hundred miles distant from the
mouth of the St. Lawrence. When the canals, now in rapid execution, are
completed, there will be water communication the whole way from the city of
Hudson to Ontario.

3d. The supply of East India goods to Canada, is likely to be always easier
and cheaper through us, than in any other way. According to the present British
system, Canada is supplied through Britain. It is obvious how much the charges
of this double voyage must enhance the prices of the articles, when delivered
in Canada. A direct trade between the East Indies and Canada, would suppose a
change in the British system, to which there are great obstacles; and even
then, there are circumstances which would secure to us an advantageous
competition. -- It is a fact, which serves to illustrate our advantages, that
East India articles, including teas, are, upon an average, cheaper in the
United States than in England.

The facts demonstrate that a trade between us and the British territories in
our neighborhood, upon equal terms as to privilege, must afford a balance of
advantages on our side. As to the fur trade, for a participation in one eighth
of the whole, which we concede, we gain a participation in seven-eighths which
is conceded to us. As to the European and East India trade, we acquire the
right of competition upon equal terms of privilege with real and considerable
advantages of situation.

The stipulation with regard to equal duties, was essential to the preservation
of our superiority of advantages in this trade, while it would not interfere
with the general policy of our regulation, concerning the difference of duties
on goods imported in our own and in foreign bottoms; because the supplies which
can come to us through Canada, for the reasons already given, must be
inconsiderable -- because, also, di^tance would soon coun^^^^^^, ^n ex^^^^ses
of transportation, the effect of the defference of duties in our market -- and
because, in the last place, this difference is not very sensible, owing to the
large proportion of goods which are imported in the names of our own citizens.
I say nothing here of the practicability, on general grounds, of long
maintaining with effect this regulation.

Is it not wonderful, considering the real state of the trade, as depending on
locality, that the treaty should be charged with sacrificing the fur trade to
the British? If there be any sacrifice, is it not on their side: when the fact
is, that the quantity of trade in which they admit us to equal privileges is
seven times greater than that in which we admit them to equal privileges?

The arguments against the treaty on this point, are not only full of falsity,
but they are in contradiction with each other.

On the one hand, it is argued that our communication from the sea, with the
Indian country, being much easier than by the St. Lawrence, we could furnish
English goods cheaper, and of course could have continued the Indian trade in
its usual channel, even from the British side of the lakes; nor could they have
prevented it, without giving such disgust to the Indians, as would have made
them dangerous neighbors. -- On the other hand, it is argued, that from
superiority of capital, better knowledge of the trade, a better established
connection of customers, the British will be able to supplant us, even in our
own territories, and to acquire a monopoly of the whole fur trade.

Propositions so opposite cannot all be true. Either the supposed faculty of
supplying English goods cheaper, which, it is said, would give as a command of
the Indian trade, even on the British side of the lakes, not in the power of
the British to prevent, overbalances the advantages which are specified on the
other side, or it does not -- If it does not, then it is not true, that it
could draw to us the trade from the British side of the lakes -- If it does,
then it is not true, that the British can supplant us in the trade on either
side the lakes; much less that they can obtain a monopoly of it on both sides.

Besides, if it be true that the British could not prevent out trading with the
Indians on their side, without giving them such disgust as to make them
dangerous to their neighbors; why is it not equally true, that we could not
prevent their trading with the Indians on our side, without producing a similar
effect? -- And if they have re^^y a sup^^^^tity of advantages, why would they
not, on the principle of this argument, attract and divert the trade from us,
though (...) right to trade with the Indians in each other's territories had
not been stipulated?

The difficulty of restraining the Indians from trading at pleasure, is an idea
well founded, as has been admitted in another place. -- But there result from
it, strong arguments in favor of reciprocation of privileges in the Indian
trade, by treaty. One of them, its tendency to preserve peace and good
understanding, has been already noticed; another arises from the consideration,
that it will probably be the policy of the British to maintain larger military
establishments on their frontier, than we shall think eligible on ours, which
will render it proportionably more easy to them to restrain their Indians, than
it will be to us to restrain ours. This greater difficulty of excuting
restraints on our side, is a powerful reason for us to agree, mutually, to
throw open the door.

It will not be surprising, if, upon some other occasion, the adversaries of
the treaty should abandon their own ground, and instead of saying the treaty is
faulty, for what it stipulates on this point, should affirm, merely that it has
no merit on this account, since it only does what the disposition of the
Indians would have brought about without it -- But it is always a merit to
divest an advantageous thing of cause of dispute, and to fix, by amicable
agreement, a benefit which otherwise would be liable to litigation, opposition,
and interruption.

As to relative advantages for carrying on the trade, the comparison ought to
be made with caution. That which has been stated on our side, namely, greater
facility in conveying the materials of the trade from Europe to the scene where
it is to be carried on, is a real one, and in process of time may be expected
to make itself to be felt; yet hitherto, as before observed, it has had no
sensible effect.

Of the advantages which have been stated as belonging to the other side, there
is but one which has substance, and this is previous possession of the ground.
But even this, from the very nature of it, is temporary -- With our usual
enterprise and industry, it will be astonishing if we do not speedily share the
ground to the full extent of our relative advantages.

As to superiority of capital, it amounts to nothing. It has been seen, that
the capital requisite for the whole trade is small. From a hundred to a hundred
and fifty thousand pounds sterling would be a high statement. -- The whole of
this, if we were to monopolize the entire trade, could not create a moment's
embarrassment to find it, in the opinion of any man who attends to the great
pecuniary operations which are daily going on in our country. But that very
capital which it represented as our rival, could be brought into action for our
benefit in this very trade. The solution is simple. Our credit will command it
in obtaining the foreign articles, necessary for the trade, upon as good terms
as the British merchants who now carry it on. The same objection of superiority
of capital may with as much reason be applied to any other branch of trade
between us and Great Britain. Why does it not give her a monopoly of the direct
trade between her European dominions and the United States? The argument, if
valid, would prove that we ought to have no commerce, not only with Great
Britain, but with any nation which has more commercial capital than ourselves.

As to superior knowledge of the particular branch of business, there is still
less force in that argument. It is not a case of abstruse science or
complicated combination. And we are in no want of persons among us, who are
experimentally acquainted with the subject.

As to customers for the proceeds of the trade, we should stand upon as good a
footing as the British merchants. What we did not want for our own consumption,
might be sent upon equal terms to the very markets to which they send theirs;
and to others which might be found preferable, because less well supplied with
the kind of articles.

As to whatever may depend on enterprise, we need not fear to be outdone by
any people on earth. It may almost be said, that enterprise is our element.

It has been alleged, that our trade with the Indians would be interrupted by
bad seasons and occasional wars, while that of Great Britain would be steady
and uniform. As to the casualties of seasons, it is evident they must fall upon
Great Britain as much as upon us, unless we suppose the elements in conspiracy
against us; and as to wars, the possession of the posts would essentially
change our situation, and render it peculiarly advantageous for preventing or
repressing hostilities; so that with equally good management, our territories
would not be more exposed than the British.

But the intrigues of the British traders residing among our Indians, would
excite them to hostility. It could not be the private interest of the traders
to do this; because, besides being amenable to punishment, if discovered --
besides, that both the traders and the Indians within our limits, by the
possession of the posts, would be under our control -- wars interrupt of
course the hunting of the Indians, and so destroy their means of trading.

As to Great Britain, she never could have had but one interest to prompt
Indian hostilities, that was, to induce the United States to relinquish a part
of their boundary. The restitution of the posts will put an end to this
project. In regard to trade, she and her traders will have a common interest
with us, and our traders, to keep all the Indians at peace, for the reason
assigned above. This interest will be the stronger, because the best
communication even with her own Indians, will be partly through our territery;
and it would be impossible that it should not be impeded and interrupted by the
operations of war between us and the Indians In fact, under the circumstance of
common privileges, there is every possible link of common interest between us
and Great Britain in the preservation of peace with the Indians.

In this question of danger to our peace by the British participation in the
trade with our Indians, the difficulty of restraining the Indians from trading
with whom they please (which is admitted by the argument of both sides) is a
very material consideration. Would there not be greater hazard to our peace
from the attempts of the British to participate in a trade from which we
endeavored to exclude them, seconded by the discontents of the Indians, than
from any dispositions to supplant us, when allowed a free competition, when as
cause of dissatisfaction was given to the Indians, and when it was certain,
that war must interfere with their means of carrying on the trade? The security
for our peace appears to be much greater in the latter, than in the former
state of things.

A suspicion is also suggested, that Great Britain, without exciting war, will
indirectly trammel and obstruct our trade. To objections which suppose a want
of fair dealing in the other party, it is very difficult to answer. All that a
treaty can do, is to establish principles which are likely to operate well, if
well executed. It is no objection to its merits, that the benefits aimed at may
be frustrated by ill faith. The utility of any compact between nations must
presume a sincere execution. The reverse may disappoint the best conceived
plan: and the security against it must be the mutual interest to perform, and
the power of retaliation. If Great Britain acts with infidelity or chicanery
toward us, we must retract the privileges granted on our side.

Another objection which is made, is, that while the British would have a right
to reside among us, to hire houses and warehouses, and to enjoy every
convenience for prosecuting the trade systematically, we should not be entitled
to similar privileges with them, having only a right to pass "like pedlars with
our shops upon our backs." These are the expressions of CATO.

The position is founded on that clause of the British act of navigation, which
forbids any but a natural born or naturalized subject to exercise the
occupation of a merchant or factor, in any of the British dominions in Asia,
Africa and America.

In the first place, it is to be observed, that as far as the article under
discussion is singly concerned, there is no pr^^ence to say, that one party has
greater rights as to r^^id^^^ce than the other. If, therefore, Great Britain
can prevent our citizens residing in their territories in our neighborhood, we
are free by this article to apply to them a similar exe^^sion. And any right of
residence which may be claimed under any other part of the treaty, will be
temporary.

In the second place, the prohibition of residence in the act of navigation,
proceeds on the ground of excluding foreigners from carrying on trade in the
territories to which it extends. But the third article expressly gives us a
right freely to carry on trade and commerce with the British territories on
this continent, a right which necessarily includes the privilege of residing as
merchants and factors. For wherever an END is granted, the usual and proper
means of enjoying it, are implied in the grant. Residence is a usual and
necessary mean of freely carrying on trade. Without it, the right to trade
becomes essentially nugatory. This reasoning has peculiar force in relation to
inland trade. And it agrees with decisions at common law, and with the opinion
of Lord Coke, who tells us that "of an house for habitation an alien merchant
may take a lease for years, as incident to commerce; for without habitation be
cannot merchandise or trade." This, among other things, he informs us, was
resolved by all the judges assembled for that purpose, in the case of sir James
Crossed, in the reign of queen Elizabeth; and we learn from it, that the right to
hire houses and warehouses is derived from the right to trade, as its incident.
The same principle, in t^^, has been recognized in other cases.

The whole of the article is an innovation upon the British act of navig^tion.
Being abrogated as to the principal thing, there is no difficulty in supposing
it so as to incidents; on the other hand, to pretend to exclude us from the
right of residence, could not be deemed a fair execution of the article. Hence
we find, that the want of reciprocity in this particular, also fails, and with
it the supposed disadvantage on our side in the supposed competition for the
trade.

CAMILLUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
RESOLUTIONS Unanimously agreed to, at a general Meeting of the Citizens of
South Carolina, in Christ Church Parish, on Friday, the 24th of July, 1795,
convened for the Purpose of discussing the impending Treaty of Amity, Commerce,
and Navigation, between his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America.
RESOLVED, That this meeting do lighly approve of the conduct of their fellow
citizens in Charleston, in opposing the impending treaty between Great Britain
and the United States, and do most heartily concur in the report of their
committee on that subject.

Resolved, That the chairman of this meeting do transmit this proceeding to
John Mathews, Esquire chairman of the meeting in Charleston.

JOSHUA TOOMER, Chairman.

Baltimore Address.
To the President of the United States.
WE, the undersigned citizens of the United States, inhabitants of Baltimore
town, beg leave respectfully to represent, that the treaty lately negociated
with Great Britain, and announced to us through the public prints, has excited
in our minds the most serious apprehension and alarm for the interest and
safety of our commerce, the rights of our fellow citizens, and the dignity of
our government. Under these impressions, convinced as we are, of your
unremitting concern for the interest and happiness of America, we think it our
duty to disclose to you, freely, our sentiments on the subject, lest our
silence might be interpreted into an approval of the act, and to prevent, as
far as the influence of our opinions may operate, a ratification of it.

A treaty that professes to establish a firm, lasting, and inviolable peace,
and sincere friendship between the contracting parties, without referring to
their respective complaints, and as far as may be, removing them, wants that
evidence of a pacific disposition which is necessary to give it effect; and
leaves room for doubts and jealousies incompatible with its object: -- In this
respect, the treaty with Great Britain appears essentially defective: our
complaints are not redressed, nor is such effectual provision made for removing
them, as might have been under every circumstance of the case; and which
justice and good faith required should have been made. -- Our territory and
frontier posts, the subject of frequent reclamation, and held in riolation of a
former treaty, are to be surrendered at an unnecessarily distant period -- a
remote hope of recovery, after much expense and perplexity in the usual mode of
legal proceedings, and much injury from the depreciation of their capitals, is
the only compensation procured for our suffering merchauts, who have been
unjustly depreived of their property in the prosecution of a fair trade; nor
has any effectual provision been made to remedy the evil or prevent future
spoliations of our commerce, under like frivolous pretexts. -- No restitution
whatever is made or contemplated to be made, for a large amount of property,
carried off from the southern states, contrary to the late treaty of peace. --
Our seamen, citizens of the United States, arbitrarily and unjustly take from
our ships and detained on board British ships of war are not restored; nor is
any security contemplated against future aggressions of the same kind. Proper
concessions on these points, and provisions of adequate remedy for these evils,
would have been indicative of a just and friendly disposition, and ought, we
conceive, to have accompanied the act of ratification.

But we have other objections to the treaty. It contemplates an inconsistent
establishment or colony of men within the territory and jurisdiction of the
United States, enjoying some of the most important privileges of citizens, but
exempt from the burdens, and owing no allegiance to its government. Many
mischiefs, we conceive, might result from such an establishment; among which,
from the evident want of reciprocity, in the advantages of navigation ceded in
the lakes, and other western waters, may justly be apprehended, the monopoly of
a lucrative fur trade, by this description of settlers. From the admission of
British ships to be the carriers of our bulky products, on terms of perfect
equality with our own, we anticipate a material loss in the value of our
shipping; and consequently, a great injury to a numerous class of people
employed in ship-building, and in the manufacture of cordage, iron, and other
articles, necessary to this extensive branch of business; and we fear what is
contemplated as an equivalent for this important sacrifice, will not be found
such in fact.

We cannot view but with the most lively concern and regret, that article of
the treaty, which authorizes the seizure of enemies' property in neutral ships.
This is a cession of vast importance to America as a trading nation. Situate as
she is, remote from the powers of Europe; pacific in the temper and disposition
of her citizens, and in the principles of her government; she is not likely to
be embroiled in wars. The advantages, then, that would result from her being
the carrier of property for the contending nations, are too evident to require
elucidation, and too important to be given up without an equivalent. The
principle of free ships making free goods has been formally acknowledged by the
government of the United States to other neutral powers, when she was engaged
in war -- It has been granted to her by treaties with different nations: it has
long been contended for, and has been acknowledged by several of the
respectable powers of Europe. By giving up this point, to a nation so
frequently engaged in wars, we give our consent to the most vexatious and
injurious restrictions on our commerce, and of our national rights as a neutral
nation, without any thing that can be called an equivalent.

America is not in a condition, to benefit by the apparent reciprocity in this
article of the treaty; nor likely soon to be in a situation that will require
it.

We have doubts of the policy, on our part, of agreeing to that article which
precludes the United States from entering into treaties, inconsistent with some
of its provisions, whereby America would be prevented from a renewal of her
beneficial treaties, existing with the French Republic, and other European
powers; and from making such other treaties at any future period, as may be
deemed advisable.

To enumerate minutely, the many evils which may be apprehended from a treaty,
so partial and unequal in is provisions, and wherein man^ of our just
complaints are entirely unnotic^d, would be unnecessarily trespassing on your
time; and to point out defects which we are persuaded will not have escaped
your notice. We, therefore, content ourselves with the observations we have
already made; adding only, that we retain the most grateful remembrance of your
steady, enlightened patriotism, which has saved our republic from impending
ruin, on many memorable occasions; and that we look to you as our only hope of
deliverance from the evils we anticipate in an adoption of the proposed treaty;
earnestly entreating you to withold the sanction of your name, from a compact
evidently so unjust, and so derogatory to the interest and dignity of America.

Morris County Proceedings.
Resolutions, Petition and Remonstrance of the Inhabitants of Morris County,
(New Jersey) respecting the pending Treaty between the United States and Great
Britain.
ON August 5th, 1795, a respectable number of people, from various parts of the
county, met together in Morris Town, by previous notice, for the purpose of
considering whether it would not be expedient to call a general meeting of the
county, in order to deliberate upon the treaty of commerce, etc. pending
between the United States and Great Britain, and to take the sense of the
people, then assembled, on sa^d treaty.

The treaty was read, a number of forcible objections were made to it, and it
was agreed, one voice dissenting, that a general meeting of the county should
be called on Saturday the 15th instant. A commit of nine was appointed, and
requested to draw up such address to the president of the United States, as
would be most suitable to the occasion, to be presented at the ensuing meeting,
for the approbation of the people. The moderator and clerk were requested to
give notice of said meeting by advertisements in the county, and in the Newark
and Elizabeth Town papers.

Agreeably to the aforesaid notice, on August 15th, the people assembled at the
court house of the county, and proceeded to elect a moderator and clerk; the
treaty was read and considered -- objections were stated, and no reply was made
in contradiction to them: the committee then handed forward their report, which
was read and considered, and is as follows. --

The committee previously appointed for taking into consideration the treaty of
commerce, etc. between the United States and Great Britain, as agreed t^^^
their respective ministers, report the following resolution (...) proper to be
adopted on the present occasion. --

Resolved, That it is the duty of the citizens of these States to watch with a
jealous eye, and carefully to guard against every attempt to destroy and
infringe the right^^ liberties, and privileges of the good people of this
coun^^^ which they have recently obtained at the expense of so ^uch blood and
treasure; whether such attempt to wrest them from us, be by an open and avowed
act of violence, or by the insidious arts of our enemies, or by the corrupted
or misguided judgment of considential or professed friends.

Resolved, That, in discharge of this duty, and in the exercise of the
privilege of freemen and friends to the liberties of our country, the moderator
of this meeting do, in the name and behalf of the people of this county, at
their county meeting assembled, as soon as possible, subscribe, and transmit to
the president of the United S^ates, the substance of the following remonstrance
and petition.

To the President of the United States of America.
The Petition and Remonstrance of the Inhabitants of the County of Morris, in
New Jersey,
Shows --
THAT your petitioners having maturely considered the treaty of amity,
navigation, and commerce, proposed (...) be established between these United
States and Great Brit^^^, do humbly conceive the same is not founded on those
principle of equal justice and reciprocity, that ought to be the basis of all
national contracts, and which alone can lay a lasting and permanent foundation
for mutual satisfaction and peace betw^^^ the two countries.

We apprehend it would be an unnecessary intrusion on the time and patience of
the president, to enumerate and state, p^^ticularly, all the objections that
occur in reading and considering this extraordinary diplomatic instrument,
especially as the m^^^ of them have been designated, and as we are informed,
been already presented to the president from various parts of the continent.

We cannot, however, but observe in general, that the argument urged by the
advocates of the treaty appears to ^s ^^founded, viz, That the unequal
concessions and sacrifices made therein by America to Great Britain, are the
necessary price of peace with her. If this position were true, it remains a
doubt whether the price would not far exceed the purchase. We would farther
observe, that on the ratification of this treaty, we have no other security for
the delivery of the western p^^^ in June, 179^ than we had for the evacuation
of them with all convenient speed, as stipulated in the treaty of peace of
1783. But suppose they were actually given up, agreeable to treaty, what do we
obtain thereby but the privilege, if it may be called one, of keeping garrisons
there at our own expense; wh^^^, by ^he ag^eement, the British have the entire
monopoly of the fur trade, and that through our territory; with this singular
advantage of keeping a colony of British subjects within our jurisdiction, not
bearing allegiance to our government, which, to our frontier settlement, may be
of more serious consequences than at first view is apprehended; and who can say
that an insurrection like the one lately suppressed in Pennsylvania, among such
privileged subjects of Great Britain, would not terminate in an open rupture
with their sovereign? Nor do we conceive, that we shall by this treaty be more
secure in our commerce than neutral vessels were by the law of nations under
the recognition of our independence; nor can we extend our credulity in the
faith of that nation so far, as to suppose that our naval commerce will be less
abridged by them, or our seamen less exposed to insult than heretofore, unless
we wholly relinquish all trade with her enemies a^ndall others, where it may
interfere with her interest. But we ought to remember, that the nation which
will suffer her honor to be insulted, or her natural rights to be invaded with
impunity, will not long have either the one or the other to lose.

If the horrors of war, which we sincerely deprecate, are to be set in
competition with the loss of our natural rights and privileges, we are not able
to distinguish the advantages to be derived from a treaty which submits them,
rather than to have them taken from us without. The latter seems to us
preferable; as in that case, whenever we thought fit and proper, and
circumstances were favorable, we might assert our right without being stared in
the face by a treaty that had previously resigned them. Besides, stipulations
so manifestly unjust and unequal (though the temper and circumstances of the
moment may procure a ratification) will not fail to be a continued source of
dissatisfaction and complaint, and produce mutual infractions of the treaty,
and most probably will accelerate rather than retard hostilities between the
contracting parties.

From our present view of this ^^^ct, and with a sincere desire to serve and
promote the best ^^^est of our country, in full confidence that the president
of the United States will exercise that prudence and precaution with which his
command and exalted administration has ever been distinguished, we entreat that
he will at least suspend the final ratification of the said treaty with Great
Britain, until the people of the United States shall assemble in congress by
their representatives, and by them be advised on a matter so interesting and
important.

No objections being offered against the above report, it was Unanimously
resolved, That the people do approve of said report, and enjoin it upon the
moderator of this meeting to perform the resolution, therein contained, of
having the same speedily conveyed to the president of the United States.

It was then moved and

Resolved, without a dissenting voice, as the sense of the meeting, That the
gratitude and applause of the people of the United States are justly due to
those members of the senate who voted against the ratification of the said
treaty, and also, that the particular thanks of this meeting are hereby
acknowledged to S. T. Mason, one of the senators from Virginia, who first
publicly disclosed the aforesaid act, which is pregnant with consequences the
most interesting to every class of citizens of this country.

By order of the Meeting, ALEX. CARMICHAEL, Moderator. WILLIAM CAMPFIELD,
Clerk.


Remarks on the VIIth Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
Extract of a Letter from Virginia, dated August 14, to a Gentleman in the City
of Philadelphia.
EVERY time I read the treaty, new objections occur, or old ones penetrate
deeper into the subject. Did you ever observe the effect of the latter clause
of the 7th article, as it asserts a claim on the part of the United States
against France for whatever shall be paid under it to Great Britain? In Mr.
Jefferson's letter to Mr. Genet, he says "Unless vessels captured as the 7th
article states, shall be restored, if the United States make compensation for
them, they will consider the sums paid as autho^^^ing a claim on the part of
the United States against France." It is remembered, that Genet asserted a
right on the part of France, to arm privateers in our ports, under the French
treaty. This dispute has never been adjusted between the United States and
France; when then the treaty surrenders to Great Britain an equivalent for the
captures made by French vessels, in order to charge France with the amount of
that equivalent, not to apprize our friend and ally, that such a circumstance
was meditated before it was agreed to, is an unjust procedure toward France,
and tends to involve us in a disagreeable altercation with that nation.

Proceedings at Trenton.
Trenton, August 20th, 1795.
AS various misrepresentations have already been made respecting the vote taken
at the town meeting, held at the state-house in Trenton, on Thursday the 13th
inst. and though the account thereof [See page 128.] so far as it goes,
contains the truth; yet not the whole truth, it is deemed proper to publish the
following as a true and incontrovertible statement of the proceedings which
took place with regard to the resolution adopted at the meeting. --

At a numerous and respectable meeting of the citizens of Trenton and its
vicinity, assembled on the 13th August, at the state-house,

Aaron Woodruff in the chair,

General Frederick Frelinghuysen, one of the senators of this state in the
congress of the United States, attended, and, at the request of the citizens
present, consented to give his sentiments on the treaty pending between the
United States and Great Britain.

The following resolution was then moved by the Rev. Mr. Armstong, and seconded
by Mr. C. st

"Resolved, That this meeting have the s^llest confidence in the honor, virtue
and integrity of the said Frederick Frelinghuysen -- that this meeting are
fully of opinion, that in voting for said treaty, he acted on the purest
principle of patriotism; and that the thanks of this meeting be given to him,
for the candor with which he has stated the reasons which induced him to vote
for the said treaty."

This resolution was objected to by Mr. Mott and Mr. Throckmorton, upon the
principle, that it might be deemed by the public as an implied contradiction ^o
the vote of the former town meetings, disapproving of the said treaty -- which
contradiction it was evident this meeting did not mean to make; that all that
was intended, was to acquit Genesis Frelinghuysen of the implication (which, it
was conceived, had been conveyed by the resolution of the former town meeting)
of a want of independence, integrity, and patriotism; and so far, and no
farther, was this meeting willing to go.

It was answered by Mr. R. Stockton, that nothing more was meant or intended;
and that, from a view of the resolution, it could not possibly be taken to be a
contradiction of the vote of the former meetings, in disapprobation of the
treaty. -- Mr. Craft, in particular, declared, that if he could imagine that it
could be construed in any manner to contradict the vote of the former meeting,
he should hardly have been so inconsistent with himself as to have seconded the
motion; and that he would still vote against it with all his heart; for that
Genesis Frelinghuysen had not convinced him that he was wrong; and he believed
that every person present remained of his former opinion -- but he did not
think the resolution carried the implication held up -- it went no further than
to acquit the General of an imputation (which nobody ever meant to make) that
he had voted for the treaty under an undue or improper influence.

In reply, it was observed, that if nothing more was intended, there could be
no reason against stating the resolution in such terms as to avoid all doubt
about the meaning.

But it was insisted on by Mr. R. Stockton, and several others, that the
question should be put upon the resolution a^ it stood.

The question was accordingly put by the chairman, and lost by a very large
majority.

Whereupon it was moved by Mr. Throckmorton, and seconded by Mr. Craft, that
the resolution be amended so as to read as follows, viz.

Resolved (without reference to the merits of the said treaty) that this
meeting have the fullest confidence in the honor, virtue and integrity of the
said Frederick Frelinghuysen -- that this meeting are fully of opinion that in
voting for the said treaty, he was actuated by the purest principles of
patriotism, and that the thanks of this meeting be given to him, for the candor
with which he has stated the reasons which induced him to vote for the said
treaty.

And the question being put upon the resolution, as amended, it was agreed to.

After this statement of facts (which no person of candor can contradict) the
public are left to judge of the truth of the representations which have been
made, with regard to the proceedings of the meeting; and what would have become
of the only vote that the friends of the treaty thought proper to attempt, had
it not been for the conciliating disposition manifestly discovered by two or
three of the very persons most strenuously opposed to the treaty, of which
description of persons, it is believed, there was a majority of four to one.

PROCEEDINGS AT TRENTON.
Trenton, August 20.
WHEREAS at a general town-meeting of the citizens of Trenton and its vicinity,
convened at the state-house, on Wednesday the 29th July, 1795, pursuant to
public notice given, "for the purpose of taking into consideration measures
proper to be pursued upon the subject of the pending treaty between Great
Britain and the United States," it was, among other things, unanimously
resolved, "That it is the constitutional right and patriotic duty of the
citizens of the United States, to express, on every important occasion, the
public sense of public measures." It was further resolved (without a dissenting
voice) "that it is at this time, in a peculiar manner, the bounden duty of
every friend to his country, to express the public opinion upon an instrument,
so extraordinary and momentous in its nature as the treaty of amity, navigation
and commerce, lately projected between lord Grenville, on the part of Great
Britain, and John Jay, envoy extraordinary, on the part of the United States;
-- degrading to the national honor -- dangerous to the public interest -- and
destructive of the agricultural and commercial views of the United States." --
It was further resolved (without a dissenting voice) "That the citizens of
Trenton and its vicinity, having heard a full discussion upon the subject of
the treaty, do, upon the most cool and dispassionate consideration, disapprove
of the said treaty, and hope, by this public expression of their sentiments, to
prevent, as far as possible, its ratification by our Supreme Executive." And
whereas a publication has appeared in the New Jersey State Gazette of last
Tuesday, See page 127.
insinuating to the world, that the said resolutions were not adopted at a
general town-meeting; and testifying, that the subscribers to the said
publication "did not concur in, and did not approve of, the said resolutions;
and declaring their entire satisfaction and confidence in the constituted
authorities, and their determination to acquiesce in such measures as have
been, or might be finally adopted, relative to the said treaty, by such
constituted authorities," thereby casting a necessary implication, that those
persons who attended the said town-meeting, and concurred in the said
resolutions, would not submit to such measures of government as might be
finally adopted, with regard to the said treaty.

NOW, WE, the subscribers, citizens of Trenton and its vicinity, while we
lament that, on an occasion of this nature, means should have been taken to
prevail on unguarded individuals to unite in that public testimonial, contrary
to their known sentiments -- DO, in this public manner, declare and make known
to the world, that we conceive it to be a right established and confirmed to us
by the constitution, peaceably to assemble together and make a public
expression of our sentiments on all public measures; a right which ought to be
relinquished by freemen, only with their lives. And, WE DO ALSO thus publicly
testify and declare our concurrence in, and entire approbation of the said
resolutions of the general town meeting of the citizens of Trenton and its
vicinity, herein before stated, with regard to the pending treaty: But while we
are making this public declaration of our sentiments, as well with ^^gard to
our interest and constitutional rights, as with regard to the s^^d treaty, we
do in the same manner declare to the world, as we have heretofore uniformly
done, that we shall consider it our duty, and the duty of every good citizen
and friend to his country, to acquiesce in such constitutional measures as may
be finally adopted, by our representatives, not only with regard to the present
treaty, but all other the acts and doings of government.

Moore Furman James Mott Joseph Milnor Joseph Brearly Randle Rickey Gershom
Craft J. W. Vancleve Smid. Hill Ell^^t Howel John Potts Jeremiah Woolsey J.
Bellenjean George Henry Joseph Butler Nathan Wright Joseph Brumley David
Snowden Henry Drake Joseph Disorow Edward Baker Barzilla Braman Joseph Cowell
James South Peter Brown Obadiah Howell, junior Jonathan Cook Robert Beatty John
Parks Joseph Wiggins Edward B^me John Mu^^^^ David M^^^^^an ^^njamin Hibbs
Absalom Hay J. Sumption John Hay Thomas Hall Zebulon Chambers Frederick Long
John Crone James James Jacob Herbert John D. Pinkerton George Jobs Will^^m
Baber Anthony Cook William S. Moore David Tailor Paul Haughey John Hughes
George Miller, junior John Deppold Jos. Davis John Tucker William Gran R. W.
Furman John Morton Benjamin Laurence James Kirkpatrick Joseph Palmer James
Hankinson Israel Heart Nicholas Rednor Jos. McCreight Nicholas Ju^^^^s John
James Benjamin Vancleve Joseph L. Bascom Richard Throckmor^o^ Thomas Atkinson
Jonathan Bryant William Tindall Joseph Morgan John Rozell, junior Aaron Howell
Samuel Tailor E. H. Gordon Edmund Burk John McCollum Flisha Cook Ezekiel Howell
Jesse Roscow Lewis Morford Mildred Priest Richard Hankins David Wrighter Job
Moore Ephraim T. Silver Robert Alexander John Cox John Brown Robert Russell
Ephraim Howell Amos Howell Francis Clacker Robert Hos^er Robert McN^el^ Lewis
Evans T^^^o^h^ Tit^ David Rhea Aaron Dollas Asher Co^^nan Daniel Carp enter
Robert Chapman Peter Merthor ^manuel Coryell, junior George Fly Matthias Day
John Wiggins William Dougl^ss John Merris Michael Bettenger, junior William
Potts John Moody Joseph Jeakins junior John Sutterly Thomas Scott Thomas Yard
James Phillips George Beatty Ralph Heart John Sanderland Asher Heart Raiph Heart,
junior Asher Temple Benjamin Heart, junior Joseph Mathes Iaac Morford James
Bowen Jesse Burrows John Water Benjam'n Yard John Dean William Cannon John
Can^pheil John Yare Henry Hany John Keenes David Waters John Tailor Joab
Mershon Francis Wit Erael Hunt ^^iah Smith Samuel Cook Richard Hudnut Joseph
Tindall John Paradise Samuel Cornell John Campbell John Maxwell James Conlon
John Lawrence John Hunt, janor Robert Updike John Clann Thomas Ashmore Phillip
M Laughlin Abraham Voerneis Robert Heming Robert Shaw Barni^ Hagaman James
Mattrus, junior Wilson Appleton Thomas Britton Richard Brown Miles Donavan
Alexander M'Cloud John Clunn, junior John Howell Samuel Beakes Samuel Titus
John Drake, semior John Vancleve (major) Jos. Moor Timothy Heart Patrick
Dougherty Rynler Quick Alexander Smith Thomas Claridge Jethro Yard John Coleman
Stephen Fricker Phineas Atkinson John Felter Josiah Ferrers Thoma^ Clarke
Joseph Moore Peter Nevius, junior Nathaniel Temple Benjamin Hendrickson Elijah
Hendrickson Jacob Dean Benja. Hendrickson, jun. Samuel Lanning Joseph Lanning
Israel Hendrickson Jacob Hendrickson Henry Drake (capt.) Andrew Stout John Hunt
Ralph Hunt Augustine Moore Foster Heart Benjamin Merrill William Merrill Richard
Tobin Henry Reed Jenathan Muithead Joseph M'Cully Nathaniel Borough, Thomas
Wiggins Aaron Heart Charle; Willing Charle, Holy Andrew Titus George Simmins
Jacob Hise Richard Hudnut Andrew Hoff Cornelius Hoff John Marshall Andrew Smith
Amos Heart Job Phillips Albermarle Collins Septimus Evans Joseph Gee Enoch
Anderson Jeremiah Buzhart Lot Howell James Hooper Robert Mannington Edmund
Conner Robert Reves James Thompson John Phillips John Stephens Job Rozell Job
Cook Aaron Cook Samuel Coal^^^ David Hutchinson Jonathan Hutchinson, Samuel
Moore James Rogers Hezekiah Smith Peter Frankford Ellett Tucker James Saltar
Samuel Pinkerton Micajah Heart Jacob Wycoff Isaac Brearly George C. Maxwell John
Vandegriit John Morris, junior Henry Jones Zepheniah Ph^^^^er Cooper Atkinson
Michael Becknell John Carpenter Richard Hunt David Dye John Bell Robert Fagans
John Cubberl^ William Foor^ John Appleto^ John Wiligus Thomas Butch^r David
Cubberty Alexander Ma^^r Abel Appleton Robert Nelson John Walton Exra Tailor
Andrew Bowne Jacob Minton John Phares William Napton Amos Hutchinson Jacob
Stelle Obadiah Eldridge Samuel Stout George Britton Elijah Applegate Isaac
Tindall Robert Carson Gilbert Covenhoven Robert Phares William Appleton
Matthias Musgrove Robert Cunningham Richard Bainbridge George Smith Barnt De
Klyn George Anderson George Anderson, junior Jabez Ashmore, junior Daniel Denny
Daniel Hartupe Ely Anderson Noah Howell Benjamin Jones Nathaniel Moore Jabez
Ashmore John Pinkerton Cornelius Bowne William Walton William Erwine Andrew
Rowan Humphrey Fagan Ephraim Welsh


RESOLUTIONS Adopted at a numerous and respectable Meeting of the Citinuns of
Powhatan, at their Courthouse, on Tuesday the 21st Day of July, 1795, for the
Purpose of taking into Consideration (...) Proceedings of Gentlemen of
Neighboring Counties, ass^^^^ at our Courthouse, on Saturday, the 4th
Instant, in ^^^quence of the Troop of Horse belonging to the Brigode being
^^^dered to assemble there: --
IT is represented to us, that on the aforesaid meeting, ^^tain illiberal and
unmerited censures were exhibited, in a public and formal manner, by a man not
of the county, a men^ stranger, against certain officers of the federal
government, ba^^ in a particular and pointed manner against the president of
the United States; in order, therefore, to express our diffent and
disapprobation, and moreover to disclaim all political counestion with men of
the foregoing description, and to avert th^^ ^odium that must necessarily
result from an acquiescence to such measures -- We have assembled, and do

RESOLVE -- That, In the name of the county, we point^^ly and unequivocally
disavow such sentiments, in as much (...) they tend to the destruction of that
confidence which (...) good citizen ought to have in government, and to the
alie^^tion of their affections from the officers thereof, who, particularly the
president, will continue to share our warmest affection so long as the
prosperous situation of government evinces th^^^ wisdom of their deliberations.

That, Every attempt to alienate the affections of the people from the officers
of government, is an open violation of g^^^ order, and cannot be justified by
any, whose situation and circumstances in life, would make it their interest to
prefer order and government to anarchy and confusion.

That, We cannot help expressing our astonishment at the want of delicacy in
gentlemen attempting to sow the seeds of anarchy in a country where they are
not inhabitants, among people too, who are as remarkable for their attachment
to order and good government, as for their abhorrence to every measure
calculated for its destruction.

That, The spirit for disorganization, which at present so strongly features
the turbulent, has united, and deserves the united disapprobation of, all good
patriots.

That the president, though neither unerring in his judgment nor omnipotent in
his execution; for his firmness, virtue, and wisdom, which calculate him for
the meridian of a republic -- deserves our esteem, regard, and warmest
applauses; and whilst we disdain to adore him as a Deity, with equal reluctance
would we withold his tribute, and wish to canonize him as the father of his
country.

That, It is the firm and unbiassed opinion of this assembly, that the
president never has, by mal-administration, or misrule in government, incurred
a forfeiture of the esteem and affections of his fellow citizens; but, on the
contrary, that his public and private life are both superior to stricture.

That, It is the sense of this meeting, that the character of the president,
cannot be aided by eulogies, but only requires for its support, investigation.

On a motion being made and seconded,

Resolved, That the proceedings of this day be published.

BRETT RANDOLPH, Chairman. JOSIAH SMITH, Secretary.


PROTEST.
BEFORE the notary in the jurisdiction of Jeremie, there dwelling in the parish
of St. Louis, island of St. Domingo, in the West Indies, underwritten in
presence of the witnesses hereafter named, who have signed the same --

Was present in person, Mr. Samuel Oshorne, captain of the sloop Friendship, of
New York, at anchor in this road this fortnight, and on his departure and
return; assisted by Mr. Thomas Praderes, interpreter of the English language in
this town, whose requisite oath we have provided ourselves with; who told us,

That, at half past two o'clock in the afternoon of this day, the boat of the
ship Regulus, at anchor this morning in this road, came on board of his vessel,
commanded by an officer of the said ship, and took out of the said vessel the
following men; David Murcie, master; Thomas Dick, negro man; William Bennet,
negro man; Thomas Danny, negro man.


That he has no more on board of his vessel than the cook and a lame sailor.

That this exaction becomes so much the more disadvantageous to him, as he has
no more men; and that the approaching season, subject to violent storms,
exposes his vessel to the greatest dangers.

That he does not suppose that this exaction may be authorized; and that in all
cases, for the security of his owners, and all those whom it may concern, and
for any cause that may arise by reason whereof, he is desirous of making this
his authentic declaration.

Wherefore, as much in his name individually, as in the name of his owners.
Messrs. C. C. Westphal and Co. and of all others whom it may concern, he makes
here all protestations resulting, and which may result from the exaction which
has been committed on board of his vessel on those white and black sailors, and
still from all losses, charges, damages, and interests which he bears and may
bear; intending to sue Thomas Oaks, captain of the said ship, and any one it
may concern; besides reserving to himself all his rights, reasons, actions, and
pretensions, in order that they may be made use of when proper, and in the
manner specified by the laws and ordinances which may relate to this matter,
and especially in case the sloop should be lost.

This present declaration being read, and explained by the interpreter to the
captain, he has acknowledged it to be true and sincere; so the interpreter told
us.

Done and transacted at Jeremic, in our office, the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, and the fourteenth of July, at four
o'clock, P M. in presence of Delassaux and Chinon, merchants, living in this
town, known and requisite witnesses.

The parties have signed with us, notary, after a second perusal and
explanation of this present declaration.

SAMUEL OSBORNE, PRADERES, DELASSAUX, CHINON, LEPINE, Notary.


Newport, August 2, 1795. SIR,
THE following is a copy of a letter I received from Captain Home, of his
Britannic Majesty's ship Africa, which I take the most early opportunity of
forwarding to your Excellency, having the honor to be, with due respect and
esteem,

Your Exceelency's most obedient, and very humble servant, THOMAS W. MOORE.

His Excellency Arthur Fenner, Esquire, Governor and Commander in Chief of the
State of Rhode Island.
Africa, off Rhode Island, 31st July, 1795. SIR,
I DID expect to have the pleasure of seeing you on board the Africa; but as
that is not the case, I am obliged to send an officer to you, under the present
circumstances, and to desire that you will lay my letter before the governor,
or other chief magistrate of the island, which is to contain these several
requests: --

First, that there may be delivered up to me, immediately, an officer who was
taken on board a British sloop, while in Newport, and consined on board the
French frigate now in Rhode Island; these violent proceedings being contrary to
the law of all nations in a neutral port.

In the second place, that you may receive the aid of the civil power in this
island, to send on board the Africa all British or others, who have been
captured in any vessels, and set at liberty in these states; not a feigned and
pretended aid, but such as our nation has a right to expect from the United
States: And 3dly,

That I may be permitted to buy such refreshments as my ship's company are in
need of; and that in case I send my own boats on shore, my people and officers
shall not be liable to in^^^ts from any of the inhabitants, or others, of
whatever description; and to represent in plain terms to the governor, that if
my officer who carries this letter, or any other officer or people whom I may
send upon these just and lawful occasions, receive from any one individual,
whether of the nature of a mob or otherwise, any affront or insult, I WILL
IMMEDIATELY COME IN WITH HIS MAJESTY's SHIP UNDER MY COMMAND, AND PROTECT MY
OWN PEOPLE: and further, that if the government or states here, are, in such
cases as I have mentioned, guilty of such a breach of neutrality, I will then
look upon myself in the same manner, as not bound to observe the neutrality of
these ports; and I am resolved to be treated in the same manner in all
respects, whatever, as they do those of the French Republic.

And I am the more plain in the nature of my present demands, as I have
received a hint, that if I send my people on shore, while the Medusa lies at
Newport, that they will be considered as spies. In this case I want to spy
nothing; I am in full possession of every intelligence regarding that ship,
which I want to be possessed of.

And I require a written answer from the governor of Rhode Island to these
demands, and that, without loss of time.

I am, etc. R. HOME.

Thomas Wm. Moore, Esquire, his Britannic Majesty's Vice-Consul at Rhode Island.
[No. IV.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET^

-- OCTOBER 1, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. CATO, No. VIII. Page 219 2. -- No. IX. Page 223 3. -- No. X. Page 229 4. --
No. XI. Page 234 5. -- No. XII. Page 239 6. -- No. XIII. Page 244 7. Camillus,
No. XII. Page 253 8. -- No. XIII. Page 263 9. -- No. XIV. Page 269 10. -- No.
XV. Page 278 11. Governor Fenner's Reply to the British Vice Consul's Note
enclosing Captein Home's Letter Page 287 12. President's Revocation of the
British Vice Consul's Authority Page 288
Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 174.]

No. VIII.
THE article relative to the trade of India, is in itself of too little moment
to require much of our attention. The fact, with respect to that trade, is,
that as the merchandises carried to India consist of commodities which the
European nations cannot conveniently supply, together with money and
necessaries for refitting their ships: As the proceeds of these cargoes are
employed in purchasing India goods from the factors of the European nation at
whose port we trade, there is a clear prosit in admitting us freely to their
ports, and thereby rendering such ports the entrepots between the United States
and India. Should one nation only do this, and the others exclude us, the one
that admitted our vessels, would thereby acquire a double prosit; first, upon
the India goods sold to us; second, upon the sale of the commodities we brought
them. This is so well understood by all the European nations that have
establishments in India, that our vessels are freely admitted into their ports
(a very few excepted, that have a monopoly of a particular commodity) and
France has put our trade with hers upon the most favorable footing. The
restrictions in the treaty have thus narrowed, instead of enlarging, our
advantages in trading to the British factories; but as all the others are open
to us, she will be compelled to receive us or lose our commerce; and as her
ports afford no peculiar advantage, neither the one nor the other merits our
attention: the article, as far as it goes, is not good; but one can hardly call
it bad, when connected with the rest of the treaty; the deficiency of grace in
a single feature does not attract our notice, when the whole face is strikingly
deformed.

I proceed now to examine the effect of the treaty upon the commerce of this
country when Britain shall be at war. It will be admitted, that the nature of
our government, and our situation, remote from the polities and interests of
ambitious powers in Europe, will enable us for the most part to live in peace.
It will also be admitted, that a maritime nation that cultivates peace, may add
greatly to her commerce and navigation, if she can carry on her trade with the
belligerent powers, while theirs is diminished by the conflict. In order to do
this, it is essentially necessary, that she should be able to make the powers
at war respect her flag, and the rights of neutrality.

With this view, therefore, commercial nations have always endeavored by
treaty, to protect their commerce from the interruptions which the principles
of the old law of nations (now indeed sufficiently exploded) afforded either of
the belligerent powers a pretense to interpose. In looking back through the
treaties which the nations of Europe have for one hundred and fifty years past
formed, with a view to this object, we find principles laid down and
established by them, in these respects totally different from the rules which
the writers on the law of nations, borrowing their maxims from barbarous ages,
have recorded. For it should be remembered, that the law of nations is no
written code, but a collection of those principles which govern the conduct of
civilized nations, with respect to each other; which principles can only be
collected from their practice, and the theory established by their treaties:
and as the laws of a community are calculated to promote the interest of the
members of that community, and are repealed or go into disuse when they are
found not to answer this purpose, so the laws of nations also change with their
refinements and civilization. If, therefore, a man were to look into the laws
of any ancient state, he would find many things that would appear to him
absurd, and contrary to humanity, which still maintained their place in the
statute book. Thus in England, be would find the trial by Battle Laws against
Witchcraft, and a variety of ridiculous local customs, which would greatly
shoc^ his feelings, until he was told that all this trash had gone into disuse,
though the laws were never formally repealed.

So, in looking into the writings upon the laws of nations, be would find
attempts upon the common rights of humanity, upon the independence of neutral
nations, justified by the maxims of writers, who, for the most part, are
pedants that reverence antiquity, and make no allowance for the change that the
increased commerce and intercourse of nations have occasioned. Thus Vattel, to
justify the capture of vessels going to a blockaded port, tells us, that
Demetrius, about two thousand years ago, hung the pilot and mariners of a
vessel that carried provisions to Athens, which he had blockaded. The writers
on the laws of nations in Algiers, could justify their practice by more recent
and valid precedents But when we look into the practice of nations, we find
that their sentiments, expressed in all their treaties, for a series of years,
have refuted these opinions, and established a code more consonant to reason
and humanity. To strengthen those laws, is peculiarly the duty and interest of
a nation, that will probably be seldom engaged in a war, and always deeply
interested in the freedom of commence and navigation. As far back, therefore,
as the year 1630, and ever since, I find the commercial nations declaring by
treaty, what shall be considered as contraband, and limiting this strictly to
arms and ammunition, and instruments of war, actually made up for that purpose;
stipulating that free ships shall make free goods -- declaring that full credit
shall be given is ship's papers; that armed vessels shall not come within
cannon shot of a neutral ship, but send their boat on board, with only three
men at most, to examine papers, but not search. -- In short, the treaties for
one hundred and forty years back, relative to this object, are drawn in the
very words of the treaty between the United States and France; as they are
again repeated in the late treaty between England and France. For this striking
similarity I refer to the treaty between Spain and the United Provinces, in
1650, and to a long series of conventions between various nations since; in
which I can safely declare, I have not yet, after the most diligent search,
found a single treaty in which the same latitude is given to the word
contraband, as Mr. Jay has given it in his treaty with Lord Grenville: no^ have
I met with one, though such possibly may exist, in which as provision is made
to guard the neutral ship from search and spoliation.

The twenty-second article of the treaty between Great Britain and France,
confines the word, contraband, to arms, ammunition, and military stores; and
the twenty-third article expressly excludes cordage, sails, tar, rosin, pitch,
masts for ships, plank, timber of all hinds, and all other things proper for
either building or repairing ships.

The same principles are followed in our treaty with France, Holland and
Sweden, and the same, as I have stated, are to be found in treaties near one
hundred and fifty years back; so that notwithstanding a loose expression in
Vattel, velative to naval stores, we may consider it as now settled by the
uniform acknowledgment of nations, as expressed in their treaties, that
contraband must, in its nature, be confined to arms and military stores. But
were it otherwise, as the object of every treaty is to gain some advantage
which you did not before enjoy by the laws of nations, or to remove some doubt
which might be entertained on those laws; no nation ever enters into a treaty
in order to enforce an established law, unless that law is beneficial to it.
What then could Mr. Jay's inducement be, after we had obtained from France,
Holland and Sweden, express stipulations exempting naval stores, etc. from the
list of contraband -- After three great nations of Europe had, by their
treaties, and by their formal accession to the principles of the armed
neutrality, declared that these articles were not contraband -- after Britain
had at length made the same recognition by her treaty with France -- after the
president of the United States had expressly, in his proclamation, referred to
the modern law of nations for the meaning of the word contraband, and in his
enumeration of contraband articles, had excepted all those that are excepted in
our treaty with France -- I say, what could be Mr. Jay's inducement to declare,
in the 18th article of his treaty, the following staple commodities of this
country contraband -- "Also timber for ship-building, tar or rosin, copper in
sheets, sails, hemp, and cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly for
the equipment of vessels, unwrought iron and fir pl^^ds only excepted?" Is
there any reciprocity in this stipulation? Was it probable that the United
States would soon be at war with any nation, to whom Britain would carry these
commodities? Was not Britain already at war with a nation who furnishes us a
good market for them? Are they not staples of our country, which we have a very
considerable interest in shipping? What equivalent does the treaty hold out to
us for relinqui^^^ this important branch of commerce? Is it usual for nations
(...) compliment away their commerce without any equivalent? (...) Mr. Jay
assert, that these were contraband by the modern (...) nations? Will he give
the lie to the president's public declaration, that they were not? Or is common
politeness too much for our own executive, while the most servile adulation it
lavished on the monarch of Britain? But supposing that they were actually
contraband, had we not a right to expect that Britain would agree to their
exemption from that character is her treaty with us, as she had done in her
treaty with her n^^^ral enemy -- and as France, and every other nation with
whom we have treaties, had done with us when we were in a much less important
state, than we are at present? Do not the common principles of humanity, and
the interests of all commercial nations, combine in striving to narrow the
evils of was, and lessen its effects on neutral nations? The venerable
Franklin, with this view, inserted in his treaty with Sweden, a stip^lation for
an uninterrupted commerce in private ships, even if the contracting parties
were at war with each other; but the chief justice of the United States thinks
it his duty to stop the progress of civilization, and to recall the barbarism
of past ages, even at the expense of the dearest interests of his country. What
answer, sir, would you make to this venerable sage, if he was to rise from his
grave, and to charge you with sacrificing the interests, with tarnishing the
honor, of your country? If he was to allege, that you had, in this article,
violated the rights of nations, and done all in your power to re-plunge us into
that state of barbarism from which we had so happily emerged? What answer, sir,
would you make? Would you borrow the words of Macbeth? "Thou can not say, I
did it; why do thou shake thy hoary locks at me!" True, sir, you did it not.
-- But Pit did it! Grenville did it! -- did it! and twenty others did it!

CATO.
N. B. An inaccuracy of expression in some of my former numbers, may induce a
belief, that the discriminating duty on foreign bottoms is ten per cent. on the
value of the cargo, when, in fact, it is only ten and an half per cent. on the
amount of the duty; or, in other words, one-tenth additional duty.



No. IX.
IT has been usual in treaties, to confine every distinct matter to a separate
article: thus the 22d article of the treaty between France and Britain,
declares what is contraband; the 23d article expressly specifies the
exceptions. But Lord Grenville's treaty, as if with a view to render the
subject as obscure as possible, crowds a variety of distinct matter into the
same article, which makes it much more difficult to reason on the subject,
unless the reader will be at the trouble of turning to the article at the time
that he hears the commentary upon it. The article before us contains three
distinct matters; first, it enumerates contraband, without excepting any one
article shipped from the United States, other than unwrought iron and fir
plank; as is usually done in similar cases, and which would have been
peculiarly proper in the present case, because of the sweeping words, "and
generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels;" -- words of
such extent as to include a very considerable portion of our exports, which by
this article, are to be forfeited.

The second member of this article is extremely difficult to define. I shall,
therefore, give the very words of the treaty, that every reader may judge for
himself, and if he can peruse them without the most lively emotion, I shall not
hesitate to declare, that he is no native American. "And whereas (...)
difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases, in which, alone, provisions and
other articles, not generally contraband, may be regarded as such, renders it
expedient to provide against the inconveniences and misunderstandings which
might thence arise; it is further agreed, that whenever such articles, so
becoming contraband, according to the existing law of nations, shall, for that
reason, be seized, the same shall not be considered c^^^^cated; but the owners
thereof shall be speedily and compl^^^ly indemnified," etc. -- The first member
provides that in (...) a vessel's going to a blockaded port, she shall not be
con^i^^^^, till after notice of such blockade.

The second, then, does not refer to the case of a port which is blockaded; but
must refer to some other cases, in which Mr. Jay admits, that provisions and
other articles, not usually contraband, may be rendered such. Now I know of no
case in which provisions, and more especially other articles not usually
contraband, can be considered as such. It is true, Vattel has this (...)
expression in the enumeration of contraband: "Lor^i^es meme en certaines
occasions ou l'on espere de reduire (...) par la famine." "Even provisions
where they hope to (...) the enemy by famine." I have shown that great change^
have taken place in modern times with respect to the laws of ^^^ons; that every
nation has, in its treaties, expressly exc^^^^ provisions; and that England has
herself done so in her (...) treaty, even with France. But admitting Vattel's
words in (...) utmost latitude, they can only refer to the case of a place
blockaded; and this is referred to in another part of the article, (...)
therefore not intended by this, which alludes to some (...) case.

If there are really cases to which it can properly apply, independent of a
blockaded place, as the object related to the whole remaining trade of America
(that in lumber and (...) stores having been before ceded) surely it was the
duty of our minister, particularly as he was a lawyer, and must be supposed
competent to the subject, to have specified those cases as accurately as
possible, and to have confined them to the narrowed possible limits, where any
doubts could have been entertained on the subject: this was necessary, not only
to put his countrymen upon their guard, to enable them to make some estimate of
their risk and loss; but to point out to them the cases in which they might
appeal with success. But, says the treaty "it is difficult precisely to
determine the cases." Why so, sir? Are the cases so very numerous, or are they
so doubtful? If both, or either, they called for the more care and accuracy in
the enumeration and definition. Are they not ultimately to be decided some
where? Or is the difficulty of deciding, to justify the capture of every
American vessel loaded with provisions, or any other article; for the articles
which are to become contraband, are as undefined as the occasion which makes
them such? I again ask, sir, by what rule is this question, so important to our
commerce, to be decided? You say, by the law of nations! but where is this law
to be found? The writers on the law of nations, like the writers on every other
law, differ from each other; but if the cases are precisely laid down, why not
state them? Was the chief justice of the United States less capable of doing
this than the captain of a Providence privateer? These cases could either be
defined with precision, or they could not: in the first case, they should have
been stated; in the last they should not have been affirmed by the signature of
our envoy. But when an American vessel is brought into a British port, the
maritime judge must do what the chief justice of the United States and Lord
Grenville could not do; he must determine, whether her cargo, consisting of
provisions and other articles, is or is not within the case in which they may
become contraband. Now, let me ask, sir, whether, after what we have seen of
their decisions, it was prudent to leave the whole commerce of these United
States to their mercy, by giving them an unlimited power to judge, in cases of
so much intricacy, that you yourself could not agree upon them? Do you reflect,
sir, that you have, by this very article, authorized them, even if, contrary to
their usual practice, they conform to the law of nations, to condemn every
vessel going to any port of France, or their colonies, with provisions, or
returning from their islands to any port in Europe, loaded with the produce of
those islands, and that they derive this right from the very words of your
treaty? The rule of the law of nations, as laid down by Vattel, and which is
also a rule of the civil law, is thus: "that if he who can and should explain
himself clearly and fully, neglects to do it, so much the worse for himself; he
shall not be admitted afterward to make restrictions, which he has not
expressed." Now, the court of Great Britain has officially told us, that she
has a right by the law of nations, under the peculiar circumstances of France,
to interdict all trade in provisions with her or her islands; as also to
prevent any part of the produce of her colonies from being carried in neutral
vessels to any port in Europe; the clamours excited by neutral powers, and the
apprehension of drawing upon herself new enemies, made her suspend some of
these constructions: but with respect to us, as appears from Mr. Pinckney's and
Mr. Hammond's letters, she still keeps up the right, as she says, under the law
of nations. Her courts, conforming to this sentiment, (...) uniformly condemned
a great number of cargoes, agreeably (...) the law of nations, say they, as
expressed in those instructions. During the whole of Mr. Jay's negotiation,
there was no formal revocation of them, but their admiralty courts proceeded to
condemn. Under these circumstances, Mr. Jay agrees, (...), That there are cases
(other than those of blockaded ports) in which provisions and other articles
are contraband; and he agrees too, in effect, that the British courts of
admiralty (...) determine what those cases are; does not this amount to an
implicit relinquishment of our construction of the law of nation^ Are we not
the party whose interest it is (agreeably to the doctrine laid down by Vattel)
to explain ourselves clearly and fully; and does not our neglect to do it
(agreeably to the same authority) justify the British construction of the law
of national. Does it not relinquish our claim for every injury we have suff^^ed
under the very instructions which Mr. Jay was sent to ^^monstrate against? And
this fully proves, what I before a^^^^ed, that Mr. Jay's commissioners could
give no redress to (...) citizens for the loss of their property, under those
instructions. That the British have viewed the treaty in this light, is (...)
from the orders that they have lately renewed for the (...) our vessels going
to France or Holland, dating their order (...) the time in which they might
reasonably suppose the (...) would have been ratified here.

These observations apply with equal force to the third member of this article:
For as the British claimed a right to declare a whole nation at a time in a
state of siege, even (...) that nation had beat them out of the field, to
capture and condemn all vessels going to any port of such nation, and as (...)
as this moment agree, that our vessels might be so captured (...) condemned,
without defining, or in any part limiting the words, blockade and siege, do we
not tacitly agree to their construction of the term? Repugnant as this
definition is to the established and known laws of nations, it is very
remarkable, that where the most rigid construction of the laws of nations can
be made to operate against us, in order to preserve them in full forts, and in
contradiction of the settled practice of modern times, Mr. Jay has added to
these laws, the weight of a national stipulation against his constituents --
but where the writers on natural law advance a principle, beneficial to us, Mr.
Grenville's treaty cautiously avoids putting it out of doubt, or giving it any
additional force. Thus Vattel declares, "That it is now received, that full
faith and credit should be given to certificates and sea letters, etc. that the
master of the ship presents, unless a fraud appears, or there be good reason of
suspicion." -- Lib. III. chap. vii. (114) -- and in every treaty of commerce,
and navigation, that has been made, for upwards of one hundred years back, this
principle is enlarged upon, and violences in boarding a ship, to examine her
papers, guarded against by fixing that the a^med ship shall remain at a
distance, that the neutral vessels shall be boarded by two or three men only,
that full faith shall be given to papers, etc. Yet not one word of this is to
be found in Mr. Jay's treaty, except a mere vague agreement, that neither party
shall injure the other in their persons or estate, and shall make good all
damages and be punished for outrages, without defining what these outrages are,
or fixing a line, which it should always be an outrage to pass.

That the British idea of outrage differed from ours, we know; for Mr. Jay
himself possessed the fullest evidence of outrages committed by captains of men
of war and privateers, in plundering our vessels, and pressing and ill-treating
our seamen; yet we hear of no officer that has lost his ship or commission on
this account: and as to private suits, every man knows, that the expense and
distance will prevent their being brought. With all the treaties hitherto
entered into by the United States before him, as well as all other treaties
made for a series of years past, which are accurate on this point, could Mr.
Jay be ignorant of the common practice of nations? Was he ignorant, that the
abuses we daily suffered at sea, in the boarding our ships, with numerous
bodies of armed men, in the contempt manifested for our papers, in breaking up
the hatches, and endangering the ship, were among the causes of complaint that
the president sent him to prefer? If he was not, why are not these evils
guarded against by an express stipulation, that faith shall be given to papers,
that no ship shall be searched or detained, where her papers are fair, and she
does not refuse to show them! why are not privateers ordered to remain without
gun shot (as in our treaty with France, and the treaty of France with Britain,
etc.) while no more than two, or at most three hands are admitted on board the
neutral ship? Why are vague and general terms substituted for these wholesome
provisions, unless it be with design to subject our commerce to unceasing
insults?

The same abandonment of our navigation runs through every commercial article.
By the seventeenth, the British are empowered (contrary to the principles of
the armed neutrality, which have evidently changed the law of nations, by the
general consent of the great community of civilized nations, and to which
Britain herself has in effect acceded, in this particular, by her late treaty
with France) to take enemies' property from on board our vessels. One would
have imagined, even if the law of nations had been clearly against us, that
mere delicacy, with respect to the nations with whom we have treaties, by which
we can protect the property of their enemies from them, would have induced us
to refrain from a stipulation, by which we voluntarily sacrificed their
property under the protection of our flag (...) their enemies.

But that Mr. Jay did not think the law of nations on this point settled,
appears from the last parts of the twelfth arti^^^ after the war: but one would
certainly have expected, that (...) this article rendered every vessel we have,
liable to search (...) detention, that two points would at least have been
settled^^ -- 1st. That such papers would have been agreed upon, as would have
saved the risk and danger of a search at sea. 2d. T^^^ when a vessel, brought
into port on suspicion of having enemy's property on board, was dismissed, she
should have her freight and demurrage, etc. paid immediately: that none (...)
hands should be taken out of her^ that she should be, (...) time she was taken,
till she left the port; at the risk of the ^^^^tors. -- Yet we do not find a
single stipulation of this kind (...) article, none even for port charges or
law expenses, if (...) wrongfully brought in. -- But it is left wholly to the
discre^^^^ of the courts of admiralty, whether they will give any or (...)
damages, etc. That they will give none in most cases, past experience has fully
confirmed.

If it is said, the law of nations entitles neutral ships to damages, etc. I
ask whether the law of nations has hitherto been the law of the British courts
of admiralty? And, whether (...) express stipulation would have given us too
great a se^^rity against West India and Bermuda judges? I ask, whether the
neglect to make any precise stipulation in this case, is not a new proof, of
what I have before observed, that where the law of nations was favorable to us,
no stipulation is made to enforce (...) and that where it is unfavorable, there
it is strengthened by an express provision? an instance of both occurring in
this very article. -- Doubts might be entertained, whether neutral ships should
not protect enemies property -- these doubts are determined against us, by the
express words of the article; while our right to freight, etc. is left to Judge
Green's construction of the laws of nations.

CATO.

No. X.
IT may not be improper now to review our commerce, as it would stand, were the
treaty carried into effect. The Indian trade from Canada, alone, produced at
public sales in London, in 1784, L. 230, 000 sterling. The duties thereon were
in round numbers, L. 17, 000. The tonnage of furs and peltry, about 1000 tons.
The exports from Canada in furs, exceeded in 1785, that of the preceding year,
about L. 70, 000 sterling, and has, I believe, continued to increase; so that
this branch of trade may be fairly estimated at near 100, 000 dollars yearly.
As ninetenths of the Indian nations, who carry on this trade (if the
territories of the Hudson Bay company are excepted) live within the boundaries
of the states, as we enjoyed every advantage in the right to the posts and
postages, the greatest part of this valuable trade must have been ours, had not
Mr. Jay thought proper to cede it, in effect, to the British, as I have before
stated. The Indian trade, in the sourthern part of our territories, is
principally in peltries, which are too bulky to be transported in any other way
than upon large rivers; the Mississippi will be the outlet for a very great
proportion of them. This commerce must have been exclusively ours; for though,
by the treaty of Paris, the British might navigate the Mississippi; yet, as
they did not own a foot of land upon either of its banks, it became impossible
for them to avail themselves of this advantage; whereas the United States
possessing all the Indian country, in the vicinity of that river, and the east
bank for many hundred miles, could, when they pleased, establish factories, and
monopolize that commerce; and in addition to this, carry on a very important
(though illicit) trade with the Spaniards, who own the opposite bank. This our
minister extraordinary was too munificent to allow us to avail ourselves of. He
therefore provides, in the third article, "that all the ports and places, on
its eastern side, to whichsoever of the parties belonging, be freely resorted
to and used by both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports
or places, etc." then comes a clause declaring, "that all goods and
merchandises, whose importation into the United States is not wholly
prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be carried into the same,
in the manner aforesaid, by his majesty's subjects; and such goods and
merchandises shall be subject to no other or higher duties than would be
payable by the citizens of the United States on the importation of the same in
American vessels, in the Atlantic ports of the said states." I have already
shown, that the effect of this last provision is to give British ships a bounty
proportioned to the amount of the equalizing duty on the out and house voyage,
taken together, to the prejudice of American vessels; which, with the perfect
equality of rights, that they hold i^ common with our own citizens, and an
addition of 46 (...) extra tonnage, and light money, with which, as I have
before shown, our vessels will be charged, must put this important commerce
into the hands of the British. This, I presume, (...) have been the intention
of our minister, when he speaks of the ports on the eastern bank of the
Mississippi, to which soever of the parties belonging; for, as the British have
no ports on the eastern side, Mr. Jay must have looked forward to a time when
these extraordinary bounties to their commerce and perfect security for their
establishment, should have enabled them to po^^^^ themselves of that country;
and that, though the article is not reciprocal at present, by the prudence and
good management of our envoy, it may, in time, be rendered so. This article i^
perpetual; so that bidding an eternal farewell to all comm^^^e with our own
country, we turn our anxious eyes to some other to supply its place: The terms
on which our good friends, the British, propose to open their islands to us,
are such, it (...), as even our senate cannot approve; are such as
Camill^^-himself abandons; it may, however, be some consolation to (...) know,
that these islands, whose trade we were to purchase (...) the dereliction of
several very valuable branches of comm^^^^ are not of so much importance as the
advocates of Britain w^^^^ have us suppose, and for that reason I insert the
following tables: Sugar imported into the United States in 1790.
From the French islands, 9, 321, 829 lb. Dutch ditto, 2, 707, 131 Danish
ditto, 2, 833, 016 14, 861, 976 British ditto, 2, 230,647 17, 092,623

So that, after all, were our other branches of commerce lest unfettered, we
should be able to do without that of the British islands, which only amounts to
about one-eighth of the whole West India trade. And such is the dependence of
those islands upon us, that they must either starve or be supplied by us upon
our terms. As this was too obvious to escape the attention of Lord Grenville,
and our minister, they have provided, 1. That we shall impose no new duties on
tonnage; that is, in other words, that, treat us as she will, Britain shall
still have the right to carry our produce to her islands in her own vessels, to
the exclusion of ours. 2. That she shall also, if she pleases, prevent our
carrying our produce to the French or Dutch islands, or their produce to
Europe, at least during a war, which has been, for one hundred years back,
thirty years out of seventy; since she has nothing to do but to declare them in
a state of siege, or to allege that the articles are contraband, or that this
is one of the cases in which they may become contraband, though not generally
so; and she will then be justified, by the treaty, in carrying them into her
own ports, where seamen may be pressed on board their ships of war, seduced to
swear that the cargo is enemies' property, and thus the whole be confiscated;
or if this great evil should be avoided, compel the owner to pay his own
expenses, and to take whatever the captor shall deem a reasonable profit,
without any regard to the loss he sustains, in the breaking up his voyage, etc.

In peace, France will, with justice, avail herself of the article which
entitles her to put her trade upon the same footing as that of the most favored
nation, become her own carrier, and banish our vessels from her islands, as we
have permitted the British to exclude us from theirs. Europe, perhaps, will be
more favorable to us. But here again we have, by the equalizing duty, and the
extra-tonnage and light money, rendered it impossible to carry our commodities
to Britain in our own vessels; while we, at the same time, bind ourselves not
to give such advantages to other nations as would open new markets for them.
Britain then must continue to navigate; for no other merchants must monopolize
our commerce; her officers must strut upon our exchanges with all the "dignity
due to their commissions;" her high commissioned courts may drag us from one
end of the continent to the other; must establish new rules of jurisprudence;
and you, my unhappy fellow citizens, must be content with the humble offices of
hewers of wood and drawers of water, to these insolent islanders.

During the war, the concessions relative to contraband amount to an absolute
prohibition of any trade in naval stores, timber, provisions, and any other
article, which the British please to call contraband, under existing
circumstances, either with France or Holland.

The new treaty with the Algerines, will exclude you from Portugal, and render
your voyages to Spain dangerous.

With the Baltic we have little commerce that will bear a war-freight, other
than in the West India produce, which Britain has said we shall not carry to
Europe; and Mr. Jay has acceded, expressly in the 12th, and impliedly in the
^^th article, to this prohibition; so that the commerce of the world (the East
Indies and Great Britain alone excepted, and this latter, as I have said, can
only be carried on, in peace at least, in British bottoms is interdicted to us.
During war, indeed, we may continue to carry, while the insurance is less on
our ships than on those of Britain, provided that our seamen will choose to
continue in a service in which they are liable to repeated insults; provided
that the wants of the British mary shall permit them to leave us any, of which
there may be some doubts, as we just learn that a single frigate (since the
treaty was advised to be ratified) pressed 35 of our seamen upon our own coast,
and another, the Hermione, no less than 70 in the West Indies: A ship, too, we
are informed, loaded with provision, has been carried into England, agreeably
to an exp^^^^ stipulation in Mr. Jay's treaty, either under pretense that the
provision is contraband, or that it is enemies' property; and before any
investigation into the merits of the capture, every seaman is taken out and put
on board a frigate.

Our whole stock of seamen does not much exceed 12, 000. How long this will
last, with such deduction, and the i^^^^^e lose of those of our seafaring
citizens who are carried i^^^ the islands, and compelled to serve on board
ships of war in that unhealthy station, I am unable to say. Now let me (...),
w' there our commerce is not upon a much worse footing, th^^ it was before Mr.
Jay (...) to England? Whether every injury, for which he was (...) to seek
redress, has not been re^^^^d with double rigor? Whether by yielding that the
British may, of right, search^^ur ships, and confiscate the property of (...)
allies, which they before did by force, we have not ceded to those allies a
right to declare that our ships shall no longer p^^tect the property of their
enemy? Can we expect, that they will suffer their treaties to entangle them,
and extend protections to their enemies? It is not to be expected; they will be
compelled, by necessity, to treat us, as we have agreed that the British shall
treat us; in which case, as Britain will not let us trade with France or
Holland, France and Holland will interdict our commerce with Britain, Spain,
and Portugal; and thus the trade and navigation of this country be finally
destroyed, by the means that were intended for its protection.

How different has Mr. Jay's conduct been from Mr. Pinckney's! Read his letters
to Lord Grenville. He maintained our right to protect neutral property; he
protested with firmness against the absurd idea of naval stores and provisions
being contraband; he saw the wide difference between admitting a thing to be
right, and yielding to the necessities of the moment, which circumstances might
hereafter enable us to contend against with success. Indeed it may be doubted
whether the right given by treaty to take enemies' property out of our vessels,
is not a "privilege or immunity" granted to the commerce and navigation of
Great Britain; in which case, by the third article of our treaty with France,
they have also a right to claim it; which establishes an important distinction
between suffering this from necessity, and granting it by treaty.

The ill effect which this treaty must have upon our national character,
exceeds all calculation. A young nation, like a young man, is bound to be
particularly solicitous on this head; nor can any thing be more repugnant to
the interest and honor of the country, than the shocking indifference that our
ministerial writers and their newspapers endeavor to inculcate on this head.
Thus they say, "We are growing rich in spite of all these injuries; let us mind
our business -- let us submit. We shall hereafter be strong, when we may
bluster at our leisure." What should we think of the tutor that should
inculcate on a young man the same maxims? "Suffer yourself to be kicked and
cuffed now, while you are young; let your sister be ravished, and your wife be
debauched, by the letcher who permits you to get money. What though he insists
upon sharing a part of it with you, and now and then lays his cudgel over your
head? Submit now to smile upon him; by and by you will be as strong as he is,
and then you may bully him in turn." -- What, I say, should we think of such a
tutor, but that he was a villain and a scoundrel, who was leading his pupil
through the dread of present evil to debase his character, and to invite
infinitely greater evils in future, than those he feared to meet at present.
What first raised the American character, and acquired for it the admiration of
the world? Was it tame submission to ^^e injuries of Britain? Was it a
scrupulous calculation of what we might gain, or what we might lose, by the
controversy? No, my fellow citizens; it was a bold resistance. It was an ardent
passion for honor and freedom, that left all calculation of personal interests
out of sight, and counted every thing was lost, if these were not won.

CATO.

No. XI.
Fellow Citizens,
IN my former numbers, I endeavored, 1st, To show that the object of Mr. Jay's
mission, so far as related to a compensation for the injuries received, and
security against future aggression, was not accomplished. While I was yet
writing, the renewal of them proved, beyond contradiction, that my remarks were
well founded, and that the British construction of the treaty was unhappily too
similar to my own; since they only waited to give sufficient time for its
ratification, to recommence, with added violence, their depredations on our
trade, and their outrages against our citizen seamen. I then examined the
treaty in a mere commercial light, without indulging myself in those general
reflections which arose naturally from the articles under consideration. I
proceed now to consider it in a political point of view -- Would to God, my
fellow citizens, I could here find some source of consolation, some ray of
light, to irradiate the sullen gloom! -- But alas! every step we take, plunges
us into thicker darkness. We might, perhaps, have submitted to past losses;
have seen our commerce given away without an equivalent; our navigation ruined;
our seamen (I blush with shame and indignation, while I say it) our citizen
seamen delivered over to the insolence of brutal tyrants, could our national
honor have been preserved in future -- could ^^^^ances, formed by interest and
gratitude, have been left (...) paired -- could peace have been established
upon firm and honorable terms -- could the private rights of our citizens, the
public ones of our government, have remained unviolated -- but the
indiscriminate ruin of all these is too much to be borne in silence. Even the
coward-advocates for peace, feel their spirits arise at the unexampled
indignities which this treaty imposes. And for what? Are we nearer peace (if by
peace is meant the security of our persons and property, from foreign
depredations) than when Mr. Jay left this country? Is there a single outrage
which we suffered before, which is not continued to this moment? And yet the
advocates for the treaty are continually ringing in our ears, the blessings of
peace, the horrors of war; and they have the effrontery to assure us, that we
enjoy the first and have escaped the last, merely (to borrow a ministerial
term) through the instrumentality of the treaty. Does any body believe, that if
we had continued to suffer the British to plunder our trade, to man their ships
with our seamen, to possess our frontiers in quiet, the they would have
declared war upon us, at least till they had conquered France? And can any man
deny, that it would have been better to have preserved this darling, but
base-born bantling, which excites our blushings while we fondle it, by mere
submission, than to legitimate the bastard, and compel ourselves for ever to
maintain it upon the same disgraceful terms, by marrying its lewd mother? In a
political view, the treaty is bad; as it detaches us from engagements which our
interest and honor equally invite us to maintain: as it sacrifices our friends
to our enemies, and holds forth to the world, that those nations who treat us
worst, will share the greatest portion of our attachment; and that, like
fawning spaniels, we can be beaten into love and submission, notwithstanding
the corrupt maxims that were circulated under the signature of Pacificus, with
a view to promote the league of despots against France.

Notwithstanding the indecent attempts that were made about the same time, by
several members of congress, to show that we owed her no affection, the
principles of gratitude have still maintained their ground in this country; and
they have been strengthened by the necessity which every American felt, of
securing some ally against the design which Britain almost openly avowed, of
again reducing this country, when her means, strengthened by the interest she
had in our councils and in our commercial cities, should afford her a prospect
of attempting it with success. It is singular to observe the extreme solicitude
with which a party, among us, have endeavored to detach the affections of this
country from the only nation with whom its true interest would prompt it to
form a close and strict alliance, not only because its government is similar to
our own, but because its commerce is more advantageous to us than that of any
other nation in the world; while its manufactures are such as can supply the
greatest part of our wants, its demands for our produce are so much larger than
that of any other nation, that she actually pays us a considerable proportion
of that balance in money which we are compelled to remit to Great Britain on
the losing commerce which we carry on with her. It will be remembered here,
that near two millions of our former exports to England, were consumed in
France, and as much more in other countries. It will be remembered, too, she
gives the highest encouragement to our navigation, while her insular rival uses
every means to depress it. Yet whenever any attempt has been made to encourage
this commerce or strengthen this alliance, the most violent clamours have been
excited by the British faction, aided by our own royalists, and the slightest
incidents have been seized with avidity to render her obnoxious. Thus the
imprudent warmth of Mr. G -- t called forth all the zeal of the party;
ministers, chief justices, senators, etc. joined in full cry, to run down the
French nation, under the appearance of regard for the honor of their own, while
they were so totally regardless of its interests as to overlook the offers that
he brought, of such commercial advantages as might have made us see with
contempt, the narrow policy of the British government in excluding us from
their islands, which the liberality of France must have compelled her to open
to us on our own terms.

And yet these very men have heard with the utmost indifference the insulting
speech of Lord Dorchester -- the insolent correspondence of H -- d, which went,
both in matter and manner, far beyond any thing written by G -- t; and while
they discouraged a connection with France, founded upon mutual advantages, they
meanly supplicate Britain to treat with us upon her own terms, and contrive
that this treaty should serve the double purpose of connecting us with her, and
detaching us from France. At the same time, they have the effrontery to assert,
that the treaty contains no article which can reasonably give umbrage to
France, or which in any way derogates from the friendship that should subsist
between the two nations. I shall proceed briefly to consider the truth of this
assertion.

In the enumeration of contraband, Mr. Jay has included articles which are
essential to France, and which have not been considered, as far as I have been
able to discover, as contraband in any treaty for 140 years past. In admitting
that provisions may be contraband in any case (except when going to a place
blockaded) Mr. Jay has also admitted, what no treaty ever before did, though
tyrants have sometimes claimed a right to stop them. The United States had
evidently no interest in either of these articles; of course they could not be
reciprocal, nor is any equivalent offered for them. France and Britain were at
war: these articles were protected in going to the latter by our treaty with
France; so that in admitting them to be contraband, (...) necessarily confine
the sale of them to Great Britain, and exclude France from availing herself of
our commerce in these articles, unless at the utmost risque and expense; we
make their generosity in excepting them from the list of contraband (if they
really were such by the law of nations) afford the means of furnishing them to
their enemy: for if our treaty with France and Britain were similar in this
respect, the risque and expense would have been equal in going to either
country; and both would have obtained these commodities upon pretty much the
same terms. It is evident, then, that these articles could only have been
diclated by a spirit hostile to France, and as such they are a direct breach of
our neutrality.

Vattel, in enumerating the cases in which a neutral nation may carry on a
commerce with the belligerent powers, has these words, which directly apply to
the case before us: "If they (the neutral nation) refuse to sell me any
article, and take measures to supply my enemy with it in abundance, with a view
to favor them, this partially is a breach of the neutrality." Whatever has been
said with respect to the above article, applies with equal force to the right
that the treaty gives to Britain to confiscate the property of their enemy
found on board our vessels, contrary to the modern law of nations, and their
own admission of its principles in their treaty with France. But if any thing
was wanting to show the hostility of these articles, it could be found in the
time we had pitched upon to enter into them, and that we had stipulated for
their continuance. 1st, as I have said, France was actually at war. 2d, By the
12th article it is agreed that these provisions shall continue in force during
the present war, and for two years after, when the parties "will renew their
discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether in any, and what cases, neutral
vessels shall protect enemies' property; and in what cases provisions, and
other articles, not generally contraband, may become such."

From this it is evident, that these were questions of doubt in the minds of
the contracting parties; they were speculative questions, as capable of
solution in the present moment, as at any future period; the discussion of them
could have no reference to a war between powers with whom we were at peace; the
declaring, therefore, that this doubt should be construed as unfavorably as
possible to France, and directly in favor of the British, even to the partial
injury of our own commerce, without any apparent equivalent, and that, too,
during the war, how long soever it may last, is so unequivocal a proof of
hostility, that it is impossible to mistake the intention of the contracting
parties, which, reduced to plain language, is this: "these articles may be
inconvenient in future; but as the execution of them will be very injurious to
France, whose reduction we both wish, we agree that his Britannic majesty shall
have the full benefit of them, for the present; and when, by this operation, he
shall have reduced France to submission, we will agree to modify them, so as to
render them conformable to our interests." Injurious as these articles are to
our commerce, the baseness and perfidy of them are so much more so to our
national character, that the first of these considerations is almost lost in
our resentment of the last. By the 24th article it is expressly stipulated,
that no power at war with Britain shall sell their prizes in our harbors.

Now by the law of nations, independent of treaties, any nation may carry her
prize to a neutral port, and sell it, Vat. 3 lib. chapter vii. 132; and
accordingly, France has hitherto been permitted, without any express
stipulation in her treaty, so to do. To withdraw this right, now, in the midst
of a war, though not expressly against the law of nations, has certainly a most
ungracious and unfriendly appearance; especially as it is done without our
being able to apologize for it by any interest that we can have, at least
during this war, in the stipulation. As it was foreseen, at the time that the
treaty was entered into, that Holland must be conquered, and that she would
make an ally of France; the 25th article, which admits the British to bring
their prizes into our ports, and forbids the armed vessels of any other nation
(France excepted) to enter them, unless forced by stress of weather, etc. and
which agrees that we shall not in future, let any other nation share this
favor, is certainly no evidence of a friendly attachment either to France or
Holland; and yet these powers were our friends and allies, when Britain was our
bitterest foe. I forbear to remark upon the stipulations we have made in favor
of the navigation of Britain, as speaking the same unfriendly language; since
this is a less aggression and will undoubtedly be returned upon us by other
nations; so that the whole loss will ultimately (...) upon ourselves, and the
crime carry with it its own punishment. The liberality which France manifested
to us in our distress -- the succor she afforded us -- and the unexampled
generosity she manifested in taking no advantage of our situation, to impose
unjust or hard conditions upon us, certainly should have rendered us cautions
of favoring a nation, that has wantonly, and without the slightest provocation,
declared herself her enemy, and used the most barbarous and unjustifiable means
to distress her. We should have shuddered at being parties to a compact, to
starve 26 millions of our fellow creatures -- at the thought of aiding Britain
in her endeavors to repeat in Europe the horrid barbarities she had committed
in India. We should, even if we had no obligations to France, and been blind to
our own interest, we should still, for the sake of humanity, have resisted a
treaty, which admitted, that the necessaries of life could, in any case, be
justly withheld from a famished nation. But if all these motives had no weight
with us, we should have reflected on the forbearance, the delicate regard that
France has shown to our circumstances, even in the midst of her distress. By
our treaty we have guaranteed her islands to her; these islands are attacked;
she is entitled to the benefit of our guarantee. Yet she has forborne to ask it,
as she believed it inconsistent with our interest to go into the war. Can we
expect the same forbearance, after the predilection we have manifested for her
most inveterate enemy? if not, are we prepared to choose between a breach of
faith with her, the relinquishment of her guarantee of our independence, or a
war with Britain?

CATO.

No. XII.
AS every neutral nation may, without forfeiting that character, suffer the
belligerent powers to dispose of prizes in their harbors -- as the United
States will generally be at peace, while Britain is engaged in wars, 30 years
out of 70, very considerable advantages would result from this circumstance. --
During a general European war, the commodities of all nations would be sold (as
prize goods generally are) at a low rate, would supply our own wants, and be
transported in our vessels to every part of the globe, and the demand for
commodities and mechanics, necessary to the fitting of vessels, would add to
our wealth and stimulate our industry. -- To relinquish these advantages
without an equivalent, is certainly very unwise, particularly when it is
considered, that our situation in the neighborhood of the colonies of all the
maritime powers, must render the free admission of some and the exclusion of
their enemies, extremely important to them. We have, therefore, been very
tenacious of this privilege, and denied it even to Holland, who may be
considered as one of our earliest allies. Yet the 24th article of Mr. Jay's
treaty expressly stipulates, that no foreign nation, at war with Britain, shall
sell her prizes in our harbors, excludes their armed vessels, and stipulates
that similar privileges shall be granted to no other nations; and all this
without any equivalent -- For though the provision i^ mutual, yet the advantage
is entirely on one side -- 1st, Because Britain being our only natural enemy
(by natural enemy is understood one whose interests clash, either because of
the contiguity of their territorries, or rivalry in their pursuits) it is
highly improbable that we shall be engaged in any war in which she is not a
party against us. 2d, Because our distance from Europe will prevent our being
often engaged in those controversies which convulse that quarter of the globe.
3d, Because there is no naval war in which Britain is not a party; if we should
happen to be engaged on the same side with her, we should mutually use each
others ports without a treaty; if we should be opposed to her, the treaty will
cease to operate; so that in every view, we have made a very important
concession in this particular, without having acquired any thing in return. The
article is extremely exceptionable in another point of view. The construction
is so doubtful, that a similar article gave birth all the controversy between
our government and Mr. Genet. It would certainly have been prudent then to have
varied the expression, and steered clear of this ambiguity in treating with a
nation who wrests every possible doubt to her own advantage -- and who finds
chief justices and senators, and ministers extraordinary, and advocates, among
ourselves, ready to support her constructions, be they ever so absurd.

By the 15th article, we are prohibited from imposing any specific duty on
British articles, which we do not extend to all other nations, from increasing
our tonnage duty or imposing any greater charge on the importation of goods in
British bottoms than now subsists. I have already shown the mischievous effect
of this article upon our navigation. I will now consider it, as it regards our
political relation with other nations. -- Treaties are bargains, in which
something is given in return for some other received. Those, then, that put it
out of their power to give, cannot hope to receive. Suppose, for instance, we
should find it convenient, in order to procure a market for our fish and oil,
to bargain with France for their free admission into her ports, and promise in
return to receive her manufactures of silk at a less duty than we impose upon
the same articles brought from elsewhere. This is the policy of Britain with
respect to Portugal, whose wines she favors in preference to those of other
nations, in return for advantages she derives from her commerce. -- This
article puts such a bargain entirely out of our power; yet suffers Britain to
continue her restrictions upon a variety of our commodities. While it remains
in force, no treaty whatever in favor of our manufactures, navigation, or
commerce, can be entered into with other nations; thus, notwithstanding we have
not any equivalent from Britain, in return for this article, any relaxation of
her oppressive system of navigation, we bind our hands with respect to every
other nation -- and while she closes one door upon us, promises to leave our
commerce and navigation imprisoned without making the smallest effort to open
another.

The tenth article of the treaty partakes of the evils of the above, in the
want of reciprocity, and in depriving us of the means of doing ourselves
justice, without recurring to arms, when the laws of nations with respect to us
are violated. By this article, neither the debts due to individuals, nor money
in the funds, are to be sequestered or confiscated. First, this is not mutual;
because it is well known that few Americans trust their money in British funds,
since the establishment of our own. And a balance of about ten millions
(exclusive of stock) is due from our citizens, on the general average, to the
subjects Britain. By the law of nations, this property may be sequestered;
though, in general, it has been the practice of late, since the commercial
connections of nations have multiplied, not to forfeit it, and that,
principally, because the balances being mutually due, little advantage would
accrue to the nation.

As to the justice or injustice, it never has been made a question; the rule of
nations is, "that the property, either private or public, of an enemy, may be
taken," and I believe it would be difficult to show, that it was more just to
rob the merchant of his goods at sea, because his sovereign was at war, than to
forfeit his debts; both being equally the property of an enemy, both tending
equally to distress the individual, and neither being a violation of a private
contract, because the nation who makes the forfeiture is no party to such
contract. If the rights of humanity are considered, a capture at sea is a much
greater breach of them, since it is frequently attended with the loss of life,
and always with the loss of liberty. The stigma, therefore, that our minister
was pleased to introduce into the treaty on this subject, could only have been
intended as an illiberal reflection upon those virtuous men in our national
legislature, who conceived this a proper fund, out of which to compensate the
losses committed by the unjust violences of Britain. That there are cases in
which the sequestering and even the forfeiture of debts would be proper, can
hardly be disputed; as, for instance, where it might prevent the aggressor from
going into a war, by the fear of losing a considerable stake in the hands of
his enemy. Where a war has actually broke out, and the sum due is so great as
to disable the debtor nation from carrying it on with effect, if she suffered
so large a balance to be remitted to her enemy; or where the enemy nation
relies on that balance, to support her military operations; surely it will not
be disputed, that in either of these cases, in which the safety of the nation
so evidently required it, it would be highly imprudent and unjust to the
people, to suffer such debts to be paid. So likewise, where the creditor nation
had manifested the most hostile intentions, had stimulated barbarians to lead
your people into captivity -- had employed savages under their influence, to
break up your frontiers, and to murder your wives and children -- had, without
any pretense from justice, or the laws of nations, compelled your people to
fight under their banners against your allies -- and had given such
interruptions to your commerce, as to distress and ruin your merchants --
surely it would be but a slight retaliation for these wrongs, to say to such
nation, "we will detain in our hands the balance due to you, till you make
ample compensation for the injury you have done us, and if you do not us us
justice, we will apply the money ourselves." Our situation is very peculiar;
the balance we owe to Britain, including stock in the funds, banks, etc. cannot
be less than twenty-five millions of dollars, a much greater sum than the whole
circulating specie of the United States. If it should be known in Britain, that
a war with us was intended, as much as possible of this capital would instantly
be withdrawn from America; the consequence would be, if the government should
not interpose to prevent the evil, and retain the money, that in the moment
that we wanted credit most, at the entrance into a war, the nation would be
bankrupt; the banks and merchants to whom it would look for supplies, would be
ruined and unable to afford them aid, while the credit of Britain, supported by
our payments, would enable them to effect our destruction.

Again, by the laws of civilized nations, unnecessary and wanton destruction is
prohibited; but the seaport towns of America are extremely exposed. Should
Britain, in a war with us, or even without war, under some trifling pretense,
think proper to burn our towns, and by this means ruin the merchants that were
indebted to them, would it not be just in the government, to retaliate upon
their merchants, by retaining these debts, until compensation was made, or even
to make compensation themselves out of this money? and where is the difference
between making it answer one breach of the law of nations more than another?
Why is it less proper to compensate the seamen who have lost their liberty, the
family who have lost a father or a son, or a merchant who has lost his
property, by the most direct violence; than the citizen whose wharf and store
are wantonly burned? The truth is, that this debt in our hands had a very
considerable influence upon the politics of Britain, with respect to us. There
is a great portion of the monied men, who generally go with administration,
that would be sensibly affected by the forfeiture, and who are tremblingly
alive to every operation of our government with respect to it; while we can
work upon their fears, they will always be the advocates for peace with us;
remove their apprehensions, and they will go with administration. There is
great reason to believe, that the propositions in congress to sequester this
debt, produced the relaxations in their predatory system that took place
immediately after. Now, that Mr. Jay has convinced them that they have nothing
to fear in future, they have renewed them with equal violence. Can any thing be
a better commentary upon the treaty, than the present conduct of their marine?
I know that much will be said in reply to this, on the sanctity of public
credit, etc. which may indeed prove what I shall readily admit, that so violent
a remedy should not be recurred to on slight occasions; but nothing can be said
to prove, that no occasion will justify such recurrence, or to convince a free
people, that their representatives are not the proper judges of the occasion.

The strict law of nations, as laid down both by Vattel and Binherst, is, that
such debts may be forfeited; the USUAL practice is, to stay the payment, but,
not forfeit the debts; and the constant practice is, to pay the proceeds of
real property, held by the subject of an enemy; into the public treasury, and
yet this case is much stronger than the case of debts; because the holder of
real property derives his title from the state itself; but it is deemed absurd
to let property pass from a state (when at war) to its rival, in order to feed
the fire that is to consume themselves.

Let me ask, if a contract were made, during peace, by the merchants of one
nation to deliver arms and ammunition to the merchants of another, and a war
was to break out, or even to be rendered probable between these nations, would
it be wrong to stop the delivery of those arms, though they should have been
actually paid for? And is money less a necessary of war, in the present state
of things, than arms? Should we be less weakened by paying all the current
specie of the country, stopping our banks, and sinking the public funds, than
by sending away a few tons of powder, or some hundred stand of arms? But if the
law of nations on this subject is clear, to what purpose enter into new
stipulations to give it a more binding force? A breach of the law of nations by
an enemy, often renders that right which would otherwise have been wrong;
retaliation is one of the laws of nations; but that law, so frequently
essential to the support of our rights, is, by this article, entirely taken
away, so far, at least, as relates to this object. And yet, this is the ground
on which we might retaliate with the greatest prospect of success. But in any
event, as we will always be the debtor nation, to what purpose are our hands
bound? What equivalent do we receive for this important concession? The having
it in our power to hold this up in terrorem, if we never made any other use of
it, might answer important purposes. Who can say, that it may not be at
sometimes proper to discourage the British from engrossing too great a share in
our stocks and banks, or even giving too great a credit to our merchants? we
already see the influence they have acquired over the politics of the country
by means of these.

The fact is, that this article is dictated by the same principle that pervades
so many others in the treaty; our trade and navigation are surrendered to the
British. Colonies of their merchants and factors are to be established on the
north and on the west, on the sea coast and on the Mississippi Our banks are to
be placed in their hands, and that the thraldom of the country may be complete,
every encouragement is to be held out to their brethren in England, to extend
their credit and fetter the country by the excess of their debt; at the same
time, all the resources of the country are to be surrendered to them, even out
last farthing is to be drawn away, whenever it may be found necessary to bring
us back to our former state of dependence upon their sovereign. Would it not
have been wiser in America, to have submitted to the stamp act, with the
advantages we enjoyed under the British government, than by yielding to this
treaty, to render ourselves equally dependant, without enjoying the rights of
subjects? All that she would have drawn away in taxes, would not have equalled
our present debt; our seamen would not have been treated so harshly as they now
are; our commerce would have been less deranged; and the disgrace of slavery
would have been less degrading, if we never had been free.

CATO.

No. XIII.
THE few advocates that the treaty has yet met with, pretend to be zealously
attached to the constitution of the United States; and endeavor to persuade
weak minds that the opposition to it has originated in opposition to the
federal government, and in party views and party principles; yet unfortunately
for them, it has so happened, that the states in which there is least of party
spirit, manifest most warmth and most unanimity in their opposition. Thus South
Carolina, and the city of Charleston particularly, Maryland, Delaware, Jersey,
and New Hampshire, have contained no antifederal party; yet they are more
decided in their disapprobation of the treaty, than New York, Philadelphia, or
Boston, where such parties have been supposed to exist. Is it not evident,
then, that the support the treaty has received, has originated in party
principles, aided by the British interest; while the principal opposition,
originating with men who are distinguished for their attachment to the federal
government, must be attributed to pure and disinterested patriotism, at whose
shrine they have sacrificed their predilection for men and measures, where that
predilection clashed with their committee's reports?

It is remarkable, too, that if we look over the list of names of the persons
who were members of congress in 1775 and 1776, and subtract from them persons
immediately connected with the government, and who may be supposed to have
influenced the treaty, we shall find them decided in their opposition to it,
even though many of them have for years past retired from politics, and in no
sort interfered in the parties of the day.

In Carolina, both the Rutledges and Gadsden. -- In Virginia, Jefferson,
Madison, the grave and moderate Chancellor With, who himself presided at the
meeting that addressed the president on the subject of his proclamation, which
was then deemed a test of violent federalism, together with every distinguished
citizen of that important state, not holding an office. -- In Delaware, the
celebrated John Dickinson, the Pennsylvania farmer, whose enlightened pen was
among the first, and certainly the most distinguished, that has been marshalled
on the side of American freedom. -- In Pennsylvania, Governor Mifflin, Chief
Justice M'Kean. -- In New Jersey I believe none of the old members of congress
are now living; but the uniform sentiment of that federal and patriotic state,
may be urged as a proof of what their sentiments would have been, had they
lived to blush at this blot on their country's honor. -- In New York, Floyd and
Livingston are known to be decidedly opposed to the treaty. What are those of
Schuyler and Duane, Lewis and Morris, the only surviving members, Jay excepted,
I know not. That Mr. Jay, though he has made the treaty, does not approve of
its principles (unless, in leed, Mr. Jay the negociator, is a different man
from Mr. Jay the writer of an address to the citizens of New York on the
subject of the federal government) is obvious; for that address, if examined,
will be found to urge our union as a mean to regulate our commerce, or to
compel foreign nations to relax their impositions, and even to open their
islands to us; I speak from memory, not having the address before me. Now, if
this sentiment was just then, when our numbers, wealth, and resources, were
much less than at present; and when Britain was at peace, and one hundred
millions less in debt than at this day, Mr. Jay must necessarily disapprove now
of a treaty, which puts it out of our power to regulate our own commerce; which
confirms all the restrictions that we then considered as hostile to our trade
and navigation, and an infinite number of new ones, that did not then exist:
which, instead of opening their islands, closes them upon us, unless we will
consent to purchase an insignificant right to visit them in boats, by a
disgraceful surrender of an important part of our commerce. So that we may, on
the fullest proof, deduced from his unbiassed declaration, under his own hand,
number Mr. Jay among those who in sentiment disapprove of the treaty. The
opinions of the then members of Connecticut, if any of them survive, or those
of Mr. Samuel Adams or of Mr. Pain (who, however, holds an office) I am
unacquainted with. Neither of the gentlemen who then held a place in congress,
from Rhode Island, are now living. The only surviving member of that day from
New Hampshire (Mr. Langdon) has given his most decided opposition to the
treaty; though in so doing, he left his friends in the senate in whom he had
most confidence, and the party with which he (...) generally voted. As far as I
have yet learned, not one native American, who in those trying times directed
the councils of America, and is or has been unconnected with the present
administration, has manifested a sentiment favorable to this disgraceful
treaty. How little credit then must those advocates (...) it deserve, who
endeavor to prop their miserable edifice, by representing its opponents as a
factious few, and men ignorant of the great interests of their country?

To this positive evidence of the sense of Americans, upon this subject, may be
added very important negative testimony, deduced from the character of its most
steadfast supporters. Without having a reference to men in office (whose views
it may be improper to explain) we find every British subject, and every man who
has been uniformly hostile to American independence, on the side of the treaty.
That a few others, who wish well to their country, have acquieseed in the
measure, I am ready to acknowledge; attachment to party, personal friendship, a
considence in some on whom they are used to repose their political sentiments,
family connection, will, in every question, have more or less influence. But as
all these profess themselves decided friends to the constitution of the United
States, I am persuaded that they will change their sentiments when they are
convinced of the un^^^s^itutionality of the treaty, of its being at war with
every check, with every provision, by which it guards against the intrusion of
one branch upon the rights of another, and which, if suffered, would terminate
in despotism.

It will be found that no ratification by the president and senate can carry
this treaty into effect, without the concurrence of congress; nor, in some
points, even with such concurrence, without the aid of the state legislatures.

No rule is better established, than, that in construing any legal instrument,
the whole must be taken together; that if two different parts appear to
militate against each other, such a construction, if possible, is to be given
them, as to render each sensible without rejecting either; for it is absurd to
suppose, that contradictions can be intended, or that unmeaning provisions
would be purposely inserted. The constitution of the United States has desined
the powers of its different branches -- to the executive, it has given a power
to make treaties; to the judiciary, a right to judge of all cases arising under
such treaties; to congress, a right to regulate commerce with foreign nations
and with the Indians, to define piracy, to establish offices, to settle the
salary of officers, and to raise and appropriate money. These powers are
perfectly distinct from each other, and may be all exercised without
interference -- Thus the president and senate may make treaties of peace, of
alliance, of neutrality, etc. but not such treaties as shall abridge the
rights, either of congress or of the judiciary, as to those matters that are
expressly reserved to them.

On the other hand, congress shall not interfere, in any treaties, as to those
objects which are not expressly reserved to them; nor can they take from the
judiciary the right to determine all questions arising on treaties, while such
treaties remain in force. On any other construction, one branch of the
constitution might possess itself of all the powers reserved to the others.
Thus, if the power to make treaties includes a right to regulate commerce, to
raise money, to declare war, to appoint officers and settle their salaries, to
establish new courts and new rules of jurisprudence, to place in other hands,
rights reserved to the judiciary of the United States, to naturalize
foreigners, to define and punish piracy and other offenses against the United
States, then the president and senate, by combining with a foreign nation, can
invest themselves with all power, and congress and the judiciary must become
useless. If, for instance, the president and senate can agree that three
British and two Americans, or vice versa, may draw money at their discretion
out of the public treasury, they must, as incident to the power, have a right
to appropriate public money, to control appropriations already made, and to
fill the treasury, if empty, by taxes. For it would be absurd to say, that they
have a right to give away public money, and yet that they have no money to
give: a clear power always supposes every thing necessary to effectuate such
power. If it is said, that they may stipulate for the payment of money; but
that congress may or may not, at their discretion, raise and appropriate it to
the use designated by such stipulation, then it will follow, that no treaty,
which comprises powers reserved to congress, can be binding, until they give it
their sanction: in such case, any ratification by the president and senate,
until they obtain the assent of congress, must be nugatory; and as it may,
also, involve us in disagreeable discussions with foreign powers, it must be
intended that they have no right to such useless and perhaps dangerous
ratifications. If, indeed, every article made a distinct treaty (which I
believe will hardly be contended) then they might, without such assent, ratify
these articles which did not interfere with the rights of congress, but as to
all others they have no power. If, on the other hand, after a treaty is entered
into, congress have no discretion, but must necessarily enact laws to carry it
into effect, all the powers of government would be resolvable into the
president and senate, and congress are a mere instrument in their hands. And to
the millions Mr. Jay has already given away by the treaty, might be added, all
the wealth of the United States. A treaty of commerce might tax even our
exports in the face of the constitution; for surely if such a treaty can
prohibit the exportation of certain commodities as the 12th article does, it
might tax them, inasmuch as a prohibition involves greater power than taxation.

If they can create new crimes by treaty, and define the punishment of them,
the whole criminal code is subjected to the will of the president and senate.
If they can exempt a favorite nation from the operation of existing laws, they
may impose burdens upon others: for to repeal a law is not less a legislative
act than to make one. Their being able to effectuate this by treaty only, and
not in ordinary cases, instead of diminishing, adds to the evil, and the danger
the constitution would incur by this construction; since it would thereby
enable them to call in a foreign power, to aid in their usurpations; and as
such creaties might be kept secret till every necessary measure was taken to
enforce them, all resistance to oppression would be vain; nor could the
president or senate incur any risk by any attempt to seize all powers under
pretense of a treaty, if we once admit that a right to make treaties includes
every other power of government. There are so many absurdities involved in
these positions, that it becomes our duty to show that they do not exist in the
constitution, but are to be avoided by an easy and natural construction. First,
it appears from the powers given to congress, that they are in every instance
to retain their free agency, and cannot be compelled by any other branch of the
government to do any act -- the words of the constitution are, "congress shall
have power;" then follows the enumeration of their powers. They cannot then be
forced to raise money in consequence of any treaty, nor to do any other act,
derogatory to the rights vested in them. The laws they have passed, or shall
pass, in pursuance of such powers, remain in full force, notwithstanding any
treaty the executive may form, derogatory to them; nor is there a word in the
constitution that sets treaties above the laws of the United States; both
together with the constitution itself, are called supreme laws, as
contra-distinguished to the laws of particular states only. The words in
article VI. of the constitution are, "This constitution and the laws of the
United States, which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made,
or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the
supreme law of the land. And the judges in every state, shall be bound thereby,
any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary
notwithstanding." It will certainly not be pretended, that treaties are
superior to the constitution, under which they are made; on the contrary, as it
is held that laws themselves have no force in opposition to the constitution;
so it may be inferred from the order in which they are placed, as well as the
reason of the thing, that treaties are inferior in force to laws. -- Were it
otherwise, when a treaty was once ratified, however it might be abused, how
destructive soever it might be to the United States in its operation, we never
could get rid of it; because the judges, who are sworn to observe the laws,
would enforce it. And yet there are many cases, enumerated by the writers on
the law of nations, in which a treaty may be justifiably broken; and numberless
reasons may exist with the sovereign of the country for violating it.

The only true and sound construction of the constitution is, that treaties are
to have the force of laws; but, like all other laws, are subject to the will of
the sovereign, that is, to congress; that the power of the president in making
treaties, can only extend to cases that are not reserved by the constitution to
congress; that whenever he negociates as to other objects, his negociations
must be authorized by a prior or subsequent law. Though this construction may
involve some inconveniences, yet it avoids absurdities. It gives force to
every part of the constitution; it rejects no provisions in it, nor makes one
part clash with another. It is consistent with the practice in mixed
governments -- thus, in Britain, the king may make treaties; but, when money is
necessary to carry them into effect, when they clash with the laws of the
nation, a legislative provision is necessary to give them effect. And the
parliament can at any time make laws in the face of a treaty; though, until
such laws are made, the treaty is respected by the courts. Whatever has been
said with respect to the rights of the president and senate, as opposed to the
exclusive rights of congress, applies with equal force to the rights of states;
where the treaty is made relative to objects not surrendered by them, the
treaty that is binding upon them, must be constitutionally made, and consist
with the powers yielded to the federal government; otherwise the president
might barter away the independence of individual states, which makes a
necessary part of the constitution of the United States, and which is expressly
guaranteed.

Now, let us apply these principles to the treaty -- And to begin with the
sixth article. By this article commissioners are to be appointed, two by the
British king, two by the president and senate; the fifth by the other four, or
by lot. These commissioners are to sit as a court, to determine questions
relative to the demands of the British merchants -- They are to examine the
parties on oath, to fix their own rules of evidence, and to decide not by the
laws of the country, but according to their ideas of j^^^^tice and equity.
Their decision is to be both arbitrary and final.

The first enquiry is into the right of the president and senate to appoint the
commissioners contemplated by this article. If they have any such right, it
must be derived from the constitution; for it will not be pretended that the
king of Great Britain can give them new rights, or that they can enlarge their
own power, by entering into a treaty with a foreign nation. Yet the only powers
the president and senate have, relative to this object, are, to "appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
provided for, and which shall be established by law." Here the officers that
the executive may appoint, are enumerated; and so careful is the constitution
to prevent their using any improper discretion, in the creation of unnecessary
officers, that it expressly limits the powers of appointment as to all others,
to such as shall be es^^^^shed by ^^ve. The only question, then, is, whether
the commissioners contemp^^^^ by the treaty are in the class of enumerated
officers -- They are not ambassadors, consuls, judges of the supreme court, nor
are they established by law. To say that the treaty is a law, and that
therefore all officers established by treaty, are established by law, would
only be to argue in a circle, and to go back ^o the point we started from. It
would be to assert, that every thing might be done by treaty, which could be
done by law; and, as I have before said, that under the form of a treaty, the
president and senate might assume all powers, legislative, executive, and
judiciary. The question then is, whether they are the public ministers
contemplated by the constitution? It is evident, from the words public
ministers, following the word ambassadors, and preceding the word consuls, that
diplomatic ministers only could be intended; since it takes the highest and
lowest of these, and uses general words to "other public ministers," to
designate the various intermediate grades. But surely, commissioners, who are
to hold their sessions in our own country, and to determine questions of
private jurisprudence, cannot in this sense be denominated public ministers; as
well might we call the auditor a public minister, because he settles the
accounts of strangers and citizens; or the attorney general, whose duty it is
to see that the subjects of foreign princes are not maltreated. In one sense,
indeed, not only they, but every other officer of the state, is a public
minister; but that this is not the sense of the constitution, is evident from
its enumerating certain public officers, as, for instance, judges of the
supreme court (who, (...) is extensive sense, are also public ministers) and
from its (...) ^ring the right of appointment, as to all others; "to such as
shall be established by law" it is evident, that the constitution must have
assixed some specific idea to the words "other public ministers." What that
idea was, appears clearly from the context; and it would be the grossest abuse,
to extend it to a species of officers that never existed either in this, nor,
as I believe, in any other country in the world. In the third section, the same
idea is still pursued -- "He shall receive ambassadors and other public
ministers."

The constitution also preserves a right to vest the appointment of officers
(other than those enumerated) either in the president alone, the courts of law,
or the heads of departments. By what authority, then, can Mr. Jay and Lord
Grenville, or the president and senate, overruled the constitution, and assume
a power to control the rights of congress, to create the office, and to place
it in such hands as they think proper, under the above limitations? But such
are the powers of these commissioners, as even congress itself cannot
authorize, without viclating the constitution. -- They are to determine upon
certain rights, which British subjects claim under the treaty of Paris, which
was an existing treaty at the time the constitution was acceded to; of course,
must have been in contemplation when the second section of the third article of
the sederal constitution declared, "that the judicial power shall extend to ALL
CASES in law and equity arising under this constitution, the laws of the United
States, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority." "In
all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, to controversies to which the
United States shall be a party."

Now, let me ask, whether the cases that are to fall under the jurisdiction of
these commissioners are not, 1st, A case under a treaty made? and 2d, whether
the United States are not parties? What power then exists either in the
president and senate, or even in the legislature, to assume this right, which
the union has vested in a judiciary, whom it has expressly declared to be
independent of both: Or will it be said, that the power of making treaties,
implies a right to trample under foot every check that the constitution has
provided against the abuses of either branch of government? Should the
treasurer of the United States pay money out of the treasury in pursuance of
any adjudication of these commissioners, and be afterward called to an account
for the same, before the judges of the supreme court, could he expect that they
would suffer him to issue an order which clashes with their own powers and
derogates fr^^^^^e constitution? I know that incoveniencies may arise
fr^^^^^^re not existing a power in the United States to determine controversies
arising under treaties by the intervention of commissioners; I know also, that
great security is derived from having the true construction of them determined
by the courts, and preventing the misapplication of public money, by leaving
the disposition of it to tribunals that are bound by none of the solemn forms
of law: Whether the inconvenience does or does not over-balance these
advantages, is at present out of the question. It is sufficient for me, and
should be for the executive, that such is the constitution: If it is defective,
let it be amended; but while it exists, it is sacred.

The eighth article also provides for the payment of this high commission
court, and settles, that their salaries and expenses shall be regulated by
treaty; so that the president and the senate are not only to appoint officers
unknown to, and in the face of, the constitution, but to assume a right which
they never yet have presumed to exercise, even where the officers were legally
appointed, that of fixing their salaries -- and this tou in concurrence with
his Brit^nnic majesty.

CATO

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 199.]

No. XII.
THE remaining allegations, in disparagement of the third article, are to this
effect 1. That the exception of the country of the Hudson's Bay company, owing
to its underfined limits, renders the stipulations in our favor, in a great
measure, nugatory. 2. That the privileges granted to Great Britain in our
Mississippi ports, are impolitic, because without reciprocity. 3. That the
agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry on peltries, is the surrender,
without equivalent, of a valuable item of revenue, and will give the British
the facility of carrying on their fur trade through us, with the use of our
advantages. 4. That the articles, which will be brought from Europe into
Canada, coming duty free, can be afforded cheaper than the same articles going
thither from us, charged with a heavy duty on their importation into the United
States, and with the expense of a long transportation by land, and inland
navigation. 5. That the population of Canada, which, by a census in 1784,
amounted only to 123, 082 souls, is too small to render the supply of European
and Asiatic commodities, throu^^^^, of so much importance as to bear any
comparison with (...) loss by the sacrifice of the fur trade. 6. That the
intercourse to be permitted with the British territories will fa^^tate
smuggling, to the injury of our revenue. 7. That the much greater extent of the
United States than of the British territories, destroys real reciprocity in the
privileges granted by this article, giving, in fact, far greater advantages
than are received.
These suggestions will be discussed in the order in which they are here
stated: --

1. It is true, that the country of the Hudson's Bay company is not well
defined. Their charter, granted in 1670, gives them "the sole trade and
commerce of and to all the seas, bays, streights, creeks, lakes, rivers, and
sounds, in whatsoever latitude they shall be, that he within the entrance of
the streights commonly called Hudson's Streights, together with all the lands,
countries, and territories upon the coasts and confines of the said seas,
streights, bays, etc. which are now actually possessed by any of our subjects,
or by the subjects of any other Christian prince of state"

To ascertain their territorial limits, according to charter, it would be
necessary to know what portion of country, at the time of the grant, was
actually possessed by the subjects of Great Britain, or of some other Christian
prince or state; but though this be not known, the general history of the
country, as to settlement, will demonstrate, that it could not have extended
far westward, certainly not to that region which is the scene of trade in furs,
commonly called the north west trade, carried on by the Canada company from
Canada; the possession of whi^^, as far as possession exists, is recent. We
learn from a traveller who has lately visited that region, that one of this
company's establishments is in lat. 56, 9, N. long. 117, 43, W. that is, about
20 degrees of longitude westward of the lake of the Woods; and it is generally
understood, that the entire scene of the trade of this company is westward of
the limits of the Hudson's Bay company.

Canada, on the north, is bounded by the territories of the Hudson's Bay
company. -- This is admitted by the treaty of Utrecht, and established by the
act of parliament in 1774, commonly called the Quebec act. -- The treaty of
Utrecht provides for the settlement of the boundaries by commissaries. I have
not been able to trace whether the line was ever actually so settled; but
several maps lay down a line as the one settled by the treaty of Utrecht, which
runs north of the lake of the Woods.

In a (...) ^^us situated, the United States will justly claim, under the
article, access to all that country, the trade of which is now carried
^^^through Canada. This will result both from the certainty that there were no
actual possessions, at the dare of the charter, so far interior, and from the
fact of the trade being carried on through a different channel, by a different
company, under the superintendance and protection of different government, that
of Canada. It may be asked, why was the article embarrassed by the exception of
the country of the Hudson's Bay company? The answer is this, That the charter
of this company gives to it a monopoly within its limits, and, therefore, a
right to trade there could not have been granted, with propriety, to a foreign
power, by treaty. It is true that it has been questioned, whether this monopoly
was valid against British subjects, seeing that the charter had not been
confirmed by act of parliament. But besides that this doubt has been consined
to British subjects, it would appear, that, in fact, the company has enjoyed
the monopoly granted by its charter, even against them, and with at least the
implied approbation of parliament. In the year 1749, petitions were preferred
to the house of commons, by different trading towns in England, for rescinding
the monopoly, and opening the trade. -- An enquiry was instituted by the house.
The report of its committee was favorable, to the conduct and pretensions of
the company, and against the expediency of opening the trade; and the business
terminated there.

This circumstance of there being a monopoly, confirms the argument drawn from
the fact, that the north west trade is carried on through Canada by the Canada
company: a decisive presumption, that the scene of that trade is not within the
country of the Hudson's Bay company, and is, consequently, within the operation
of the privilege granted to us.

Though it will be partly a digression, I cannot forbear, in this place, to
notice some observations of CATO, in his Xth number -- After stating, that in
1784 the peltry from Canada sold in London for 230, 000 l. sterling, he
proceeds to observe, that, excluding the territories of the Hudson's Bay
company, nine-tenths of this trade is within the limits of the United States;
and, though with studied ambiguity of expression, he endeavors to have it
understood, that nine-tenths of the trade which yielded the peltry, that sold
for 230, 000 l. sterling in 1784, was within our territories. It is natural to
ask, how he has ascertained the limits of the Hudson's Bay company (which, at
other times, is asserted, by way of objection to the article, to be altogether
indefinite) with so much exactness as to be able to pronounce what proportion,
if any, of the trade carried on through Canada may have come from that country,
^^wards the calculation which has led to the conclusion, that nine-tenths of
the whole lies within our limits? The truth is indubitably and notoriously,
that whether any or whatever part of the peltry exported from Canada may come
from the country of the Hudson's Bay company, seven-eights Some statements rate
it between six-eights and seven-eighths.
of the whole trade which furnishes that peltry, has its source on the British
side of the boundary line. It follows, that if it were even true, that only
one-tenth of the whole lay in that part of the British territory, which is not
of the Hudson's Bay company, inasmuch as only one-seventh of it lies within our
limits, the result would be, that the trade, in which we granted an equal
privilege, was to that in which a like privilege is granted to us, as
oneseventh to one-tenth, and not, according to Cato, as nine to one. This
legerdemain, in argument and calculation, is really too frivolous for so
serious a subject. Or, to speak more properly, it is too shocking, by the
spirit of deception which it betrays. Cato has a further observation, with
regard to the trade with the Indians, in the vicinity of the Mississppi, and
from that river into the Spanish territories. -- The product of all this trade,
he says, must go down the Mississippi, and, but for the stipulation of the
third article, would have been exclusively ours; because, "by the treaty of
Paris, though the British might navigate the Mississippi, yet they did not own
a foot of land upon either of its banks; whereas the United States possessing
all the Indian country, in the vicinity of that river and the east bank for
many hundred miles, could, when they pleased, establish factories and
monopolize that commerce." This assertion, with regard to the treaty of Paris,
is in every sense incorrect; for the seventh article of that treaty,
establishes as a boundary between the dominions of France and his Britannic
majesty, "a line drawn along the middle of the river Mississippi, from its
source to the river Iberville, and from thence by a line drawn along the middle
of this river and the lakes Maurepas and Pont Chartraim to the sea," and cedes
to his Britannic majesty all the country on the east side of the Mississippi.
By the treaty of Paris then, his Britannic majesty owned all, except the town
and island of New Orleans, the territory on the east side of the Mississippi,
instead of not having a foot of land there.

What part of this territory does not still belong to him, is a point not yet
settled. The treaty of peace between the United States and Great Britain,
supposes that part will remain to Great Britain; for one line of boundary
between us and her, designated by that treaty is a line due west from the lake
of the woods to the Mississippi. If, in fact, this river runs far enough north
to be interfected by such a line, according to the supposition of the last
mentioned treaty, so much of that river, and the land upon it, as shall be
north of the line of intersection, will continue to be of the dominion of Great
Britain. The lately-made treaty, not abandoning the possibility of this being
the case, provides for a survey to ascertain the fact; and in every event, the
intent of the treaty of peace will require, that some closing line, more or
less direct, shall be drawn from the lake of the Woods to the Mississippi. The
position therefore, that Great Britain has no land or ports on the Mississippi,
takes for granted, what is not ascertained, and of which the contrary is
presumed by the treaty of peace.

The trade with the Indian country on our side of the Mississippi, from the
Ohio to the lake of the Woods (if that river extends so far north) some
fragments excepted, has its present direction through Detriot and
Michillimachinac, and is included in many calculations, heretofore stated, of
the proportion which the Indian trade within our limits, bears to that within
the British limits. Its estimated amount is even understood to embrace the
proceeds of a clandestine trade with the Spainsh territories; so that the new
scene suddenly explored by Cato, is old and trodden ground, the special
reference to which cannot vary the results that have been presented. It is
still unquestionably and notoriously true, that the fur trade within our
limits, bears no proportion to that within the British limits. As to a
contingent traffic with the territories of Spain, each party will be free to
pursue it according to right and opportunity; each would have, independent of
the treaty, the facility of bordering territories. The geography of the best
regions of the fur trade, in the Spanish territories, is too little known, to
be much reasoned upon; and if the Spaniards, according to their usual policy,
incline to exclude their neighbors, their precautions along the Mississippi
will render the access to it circuitous: a circumstance which makes it
problematical, whether the possession of the opposite bank is, as to that
object, an advantage or not, and whether we may not find it convenient to be
able, under the treaty, to take a circuit through the British territories.

2. It is upon the suggestion of Great Britain having no ports on the
Mississippi, that the charge of want of reciprocity in the privileges granted,
with regard to the use of that river, is founded. The suggestion has been shown
to be more peremptory than is justified by facts. Yet it is still true, that
the ports on our side bear no proportion to any that can exist on the part of
the British, according to the present state of territory. It will be examined
in a subsequent place, how far this disproportion is a proper rule in the
estimate of reciprocity. But let it be observed, in the mean time, that in
judging of the reciprocity of an article, it is to be taken collectively. If,
upon the whole, the privileges obtained, are as valuable as those granted,
there is a substantial reciprocity; and to this test, upon full and fair
examination of the article, I freely refer the decision. Besides, if the
situation of Great Britain did not permit in this particular, a precise
equivalent, it will not follow that the grant on our part was improper, unless
it can be shown, that it was attended with some inconvenience, injury, or loss
to us; a thing which has not been, and I believe cannot be shown. Perhaps there
is a very importantly beneficial side to this question. The treaty of peace
established between us and Great Britain, a common interest in the Mississippi;
the present treaty strengthens that common interest. Every body knows, that the
use of the river is denied so by Spain, and that it is an Indispensible outlet
to our western country. Is it an inconvenient thing to us, that the interest of
Great Britain has, in this particular, been more completely separated from that
of Spain and more closely connected with ours?

3. The agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry on peltries, is completely
defensible on the following grounds, viz. It is the general policy of
commercial nations to exempt raw materials from duty. This has likewise been
the uniform policy of the United States; and it has particularly embraced the
article of peltries, which, by our existing laws, may be imported into any part
of the United States free from duty. The object of this regulation is the
encouragement of manufactures, by facilitating a cheap supply of raw materials.
A duty of entry, therefore, as to such part of the article as might be worked
up at home, would be prejudicial to our manufacturing interest; as to such part
as might be exported, if the duty was not drawn back, would injure our
commercial interest. But it is the general policy of our laws, in conformity
with the practice of other commercial countries, to draw back and return the
duties which are charged upon the importation of foverign commodities. This has
reference to the advancement of the export trade of the country; so that, with
regard to such peltries as should be re-exported, there would be no advantage
to our revenue from having laid a duty of entry. Such a duty, then, being
contrary to our established system and to true principles, there can be no
objection to a stipulation against it. -- As to its having the effect of making
our country the channel of the British trade in peltries, this, if true, and it
is indeed probable, could not but promote our interest. A large proportion of
the profits would then necessarily remain with us, to, compensate for
transportation and agencies. It is likely, too that to secure the fidelity of
agents, as is usual, copartnerships would be formed, of which British capital
would be the principal instrument, and which would throw a still greater
proportion of the profits into our hands. The more we can make our country the
entrepot, the emporium of the trade of foreigners, the more we shall profit.
There is no commercial principle more obvious than this, more universally
agreed, or more generally nerally practiced upon, in countries where commerce
is well understood.

4. The fourth of the above enumerated suggestions, is answered, in its
principal point, by the practice just stated, of drawing back the duties on
importation, when articles are reexported. This would place the articles, which
we should send into the British territories, exactly upon the same footing, as
to duties, with the same articles imported there from Europe. With regard to
the additional expense of transportation, this is another instance of the
contradiction of an argument, which has been relied upon by both sides, which
is, that taking the voyage from Europe in conjunction with the interior
transportation, the advantage, upon the whole, is likely to be in our favor.
And it is upon this aggregate transportation, that the calculation ought to be
made. With respect to India or Asiatic articles, there is the circumstance of a
double voyage.

5. As to the small population of Canada, which is urged to depreciate the
advantages of the trade with the white inhabitants of those countries, it is to
be observed, that this population is not stationary. If the date of the census
be rightly quoted, it was taken eleven years ago, when there were already 123,
082 souls. It is presumable, that this number will soon be doubled; for it is
notorious, that settlement has proceeded for some years with considerable
rapidity in Upper Canada; and there is no reason to believe that the future
progress will be slow. In time to come, the trade may grow into real magnitude;
but be it more or less beneficial, it is so much gaified by the article; and so
much clear gain, since it has been shown not to be true, that it is
counterbalanced by a sacrifice in the fur trade.

With regard to the supposed danger of smuggling, in the intercourse permitted
by this article, it is very probable, it will be found less than if it were
prohibited. Entirely to prevent trade between bordering territories is a very
arduous, perhaps an impracticable task. If not authorized, so much as is
carried on must be illicit; and it may be reasonably presumed, that the extent
of illicit trade will be much greater in that case, than where an intercourse
is permitted, under the usual regulations and guards. In the last case, the
inducement to it is less, and such as will only influence persons of little
character or principle, while every fair trader is, from private interest, a
sentinel to the laws; in the other case, all are interested to break through
the barriers of a rigorous and apparently unkind prohibition. This
consideration has probably had its weight with our government in opening a
communication through lake Champlain with Canada; of the principle of which
regulation, the treaty is only an extension.

7. The pretended inequality of the article, as arising from the greater extent
of the United States than of the British territories, is one of those fanciful
positions, which are so apt to haunt the brains of visionary politicians.
Traced through all its consequences, it would terminate in this, that a great
empire could never form a treaty of commerce with a small one; for, to equalize
advantages according to the scale of territory, the small state must compensate
for its deficiency in extent, by a greater quantum of positive privilege, in
proportion to the difference of extent, which would give the larger state the
monopoly of its trade. According to this principle, what wretched treaties have
we made with France, Sweden, Prussia, and Holland! For our territories exceed
in extent those of either of these powers. How immense the sacrifice in the
case of Holland; for the United States are one hundred times larger than the
United Provinces.

But how are we sure, that the extent of the United States is greater than the
territories of Great Britain on our continent? We know that she has pretensions
to extend to the Pacifice Ocean, and to embrace a vast wilderness, incomparably
larger than the United States, and we are told, as already mentioned, that her
trading establishments now actually extend beyond the 56th degree of north
latitude, and 117th degree of west longitude.

Shall we be told (shifting the original ground) that not extent of territory,
but extent of population is the measure? Then how great is the advantage which
we gain in this particular, by the treaty at large? The population of Great
Britain is to that of the United States, about two and a half to one; and the
comparative concession by her in the trade between her European dominions and
the United States, must be in the same ratio. When we add to this the great
population of her East India possessions, in which privileges are granted to
us, without any return, how prodigiously will the value of the treaty be
enhanced, according to this new and extraordinary rule!

But the rule is, in fact, an absurd one, and only merits the notice which has
been taken of it, to exhibit the weak grounds of the opposition to the treaty.
The great standard of reciprocity is equal privilege. The adventitious
circumstances, which may render it more beneficial to one party than the other,
can seldom be taken into the account, because they can seldom he estimated with
certainly; the relative extent of country or population, is of all others, a
most fallacious guide.

The comparative resources and facilities for mutual supply, regulate the
relative utility of a commercial privilege; and as far as population is
concerned, it may be laid down, as a general rule, that the smallest population
graduates the scale of the trade on both sides, since it is at once the
principal measure of what the smaller state can furnish to the greater, and of
what it can take from the greater; or, in other words, of what the greater
state can find a demand for in the smaller state. But this rule, too, like most
general ones, admits of numerous exceptions.

In case of a trade by land and inland navigation, the sphere of the operation
of any privilege can only extend a certain distance. When the distance to a
given point, through a particular channel, is such that the expense of
transportation would render an article dearer than it could be brought through
another channel to the same point, the privilege to carry the article through
that particular channel to such point, becomes of no avail. Thus the privilege
of trading by land or inland navigation from the British territories on this
continent, can procure to that country no advantage of trade with Princeton in
New Jersey, because supplies can come to it on better terms from other
quarters. Whence we perceive, that the absolute extent of territory or
population of the United States, is no measure of the relative value of the
privileges reciprocally granted by the article under consideration, and,
consequently, no criterion of the real reciprocity of the article.

The objectors to the treaty have marshalled against this article a quaint
figure, of which from the use of it in different quarters, it is presumable
they are not a little enamoured; it is this, that the article enables Great
Britain to draw a line of circumvallation round the United States. They hope to
excite prejudice, by presenting to the mind, the image of a siege or investment
of the country. If trade be war, they have chosen a most apt figure; and we
cannot but wonder, how the unfortunate island of Great Britain, has been able
so long to maintain her independence amidst the beleaguering efforts of the
number of nations with whom she has been imprudent enough to form treaties of
commerce; and who, from her insular situation, have it in their power to beset
and hem her in on all sides. How lucky it is for the United States, that at
least one side is covered by Spain, and that this formidable line of
circumvallation cannot be completely perfected! or rather how hard driven must
those be, who are obliged to call to their aid, auxiliaries so preposterous!

Can any good reason be given, why one side of a country should not be
accessible to foreigners, for purposes of trade, equally with another? Might
not the cultivators on the side from which they were excluded, have cause to
complain, that the carriage of their productions was subject to an increased
charge, by a monopoly of the national navigation; while the cultivators in
other quarters enjoyed the benefit of a competition between that and foreign
navigation? and might not all the inhabitants have a right to demand a reason,
why their commerce should be less open and free, than that of other parts of
the country? Will privileges of trade extend the line of territorial
circumvallation? Will not the extent of contiguous British territory remain the
same, whether the communications of trade are open or shut? By opening them,
may we not rather be said to make so many breaches in the wall, or
intrenchment, of this newly invented circumvallation? if indeed it be not
enchanted!

The argument upon this article, has hitherto turned, as to the trade with the
white inhabitants of the British territories on European and East India goods.
But there can be no doubt that a mutually-beneficial commerce in native
commodition ought to be included in the catalogue of advantages. Already there
is a useful interchange of certain commodities, which time and the progress of
settlement and resources cannot fail to extend. It is most probable, too, that
a considerable part of the productions of the British territories will find the
most convenient channel to foreign markets through us; which, as for as it
regards the interest of external commerce, will yield li^^^ less advantage,
than if they proceeded from our own soil or industry. It is evident, in
particular, that as far as this shall be the case, it will prevent a great part
of the competition with our commodities which would exist, if those productions
took other routes to foreign markets.

In considering the subject, on the side of a trade in home commodities, it is
an imporrtant reflection, that the United States are much more advanced in
industrious improvement, than the British territories. This will give us a
material and growing advantage. While their articles of exchange with us will
essentially consist in the products of agriculture and of mines, we shall add
to these, manufactures of various and multiplying kinds, serving to increase
the balance in our favor.

In proportion as the article is viewed on enlarged plan and permanent scale,
its importance to us magnifies. Who can say how far British colonization may
spread southward and down the west side of the Mississippi, northward and
westward into the vast interior regions toward the Pacific Ocean? Can we view
it as a matter of indifference, that this new world is eventually laid open to
our enterprise, to an enterprise seconded by the immense advantage already
mentioned, of a more improved state of industry? Can we be insensible, that the
precedent furnishes us with a cogent and persuasive argument to bring Spain to
a similar arrangement? And can we be blind to the great interest we have,
obtaining a free communication with all the territories that environ our
country, from the St. Mary's to the St. Croix.

In this large view of the subject, the fur trade, which has made a very
prominent figure in the discussion, becomes a point scarcely visible. Objects
of great variety and magnitude, start up in perspective, eclipsing the little
atoms of the day, and promising to grow and mature with time.

The result of the whole is, that the United States; make by the third article
of the treaty a good bargain -- that with regard to the fur trade, with
equality of privileges and superior advantages of situation, we stake one
against seven, or at most one against six -- that as to the trade in European
and East Indian goods and in home productions, we make an equal stake with some
advantages of situation -- that we open an immense field of future enterprise
-- that we avoid embarrassments and dangers ever attendant on an artificial and
prohibitory policy, which, in reference to the Indian nations, was particularly
difficult and hazardous -- and that we secure those of a natural and liberal
policy, and give the fairest chances for good neighborhood between the United
States and the bordering British territories, and consequently of good
understanding with Great Britain, conducing to the security of our peace.
Experience, no doubt, will demonstrate that the horrid specter which have been
conjured up, are fictions; and if it should even be slow to realize the
predicted benefits (for time will be requisite to give permanent causes their
due effect in controuling temporary circumstances) it will at last prove, that
the predicted evils are chimeras and cheats.

CAMILLUS.

No. XIII.
THE fourth and fifth articles of the treaty, from similarity of object, will
naturally be considered together. The fourth, reciting a doubt, "whether the
river Mississippi extends so far north-westward, as to be intersected by a line
drawn due west from the lake of the Woods, in the manner mentioned by the
treaty of peace" agrees, that measures shall be taken in concert between the
two governments, to make a joint survey of that river, from a degree of
latitude below the falls of St. Anthony, to the principal source or sources
thereof, and of the parts adjacent thereto; and that if in the result it should
appear that the said river would not be intersected by such a line as above
mentioned, the two parties will proceed by amicable negotiation, to regulate
the boundary line in that quarter as well as all other points to be adjusted
between them, according to justice and mutual convenience, and the intent of
the treaty of peace. The fifth, reciting that doubts have arisen, what river
was truly intended under the name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the
treaty of peace, and forming a part of the boundary therein described, provid^^
that the ascertainment of the point shall be referred to th^^^ commissioners,
to be appointed thus: one to be named by his Britannic majesty, another by the
president of the Uni^^d States, with the advice and consent of the senate, the
third by these two, if they can agree in the choice; but if they cannot agree,
then each of them to name a person, and o^^ of the persons named, one drawn by
lot in their presence to (...) the third commissioner -- These commissioners
are to mee^^^ Halifax, with power to adjourn to any place or places they (...)
think proper -- are to be sworn to examine and decide (...) question according
to the evidence which shall be laid be^^^^ them by both parties -- and are to
pronounce their decisi^^^ which is to be conclusive, by a written declaration
under their hands and seals, containing a description of the river and
particularly the latitude and longitude of its mouth and of i^^ source.

These articles, though they have been adjusted with critical propriety, have
not escaped censure. They have even in one instance been severely reprobated,
as bringing into question, things about which there was no room for any -- and
which a bare inspection of the map was sufficient to settle.

With regard to the Mississippi, there is no satisfactory evidence that it has
ever been explored to its source. -- It is even asserted, that it has never
been ascended beyond the 45th degree of north latitude, about a degree above
the falls of St. Anthony. Fadeus's map in 1793, will serve as a specimen of the
great uncertainty which attends this matter. It notes that the river had not
been ascended beyond the degree of latitude just mentioned, and exhibits three
streams, one connected with the Marshy Lake in that latitude, another with the
White Bear Lake near the 46th degree, and the third with the Red Lake in the
47th degree; denominating each of the two first, "the Mississippi by
conjecture," and the last, "Red Lake River, or Laboutan's Mississippi," -- all
of them falling considerably short, in their northern extent, of the lake of
the Woods, which is placed as high as the fiftieth degree of north latitude.
Thus stands this very clear and certain point, which, we are told, it was
disgraceful on the part of our envoy to have suffered to be brought into
question.

There is, however, a specific topic of blame of the article which has greater
plausibility. It is this, that it does not finally settle the question, but
refers the adjustment of the closing line to future negotiation, in case it
should turn out that the river does not stretch far enough north to be
intersected by an east and west line from the lake of the Woods. I answer, that
the arrangement is precisely such as it ought to have been. It would have been
premature to provide a substitute till it was ascertained that it was necessary
-- This could only be done by an actual survey -- A survey is therefore
provided for and will be made at the joint expense of the two countries.

That survey will not only determine whether a substitute be requisite or not;
but it will furnish data for judging what substitute is proper, and most
conformable to the true intent of the treaty. -- Without the data which it will
afford, any thing that could have been done, would have been too much a leap in
the dark. National acts, especially on the important subject of boundary; ought
to be bottomed on a competent knowledge of circumstances. It ought to be
clearly understood how much is retained, how much is relinquished. Had our
envoy proceeded on a different principle, if what he had agreed to had turned
out well, it would have been regarded as, the lucky result of an act of
supererogation -- If it had proved disadvantageous, it would have been
stigmatized as an act of improvidence and imprudence.

The strong argument for having settled an alternative is the avoiding of
future dispute. But what alternative could have been agreed upon, which might
not have bred controversy? The closing line must go directly or indirectly to
the Mississippi -- which of the streams reputed or conjectured to be such,
above the falls of St. Anthony, is best emitted to be so confidered? To what
known point was the line to be directed? How was that point to be identisied
with adequate certainty? The difficulty of answering these questions, will
evince, that the danger of controversy might have been increased by an
impatience to avoid it, and by anticipating, without the necessary lights, an
adjustment which they ought to direct.

The facts, with regard to the river St. Croix, are these: the question is,
which of two rivers is the true St. Croix. The dispute concerning it is as old
as the French possession of Nova Scotia. France set up one river; Great Britain
another. The point was undecided when the surrender of Nova Scotia by the
former to the latter, put an end to the question as between those parties -- It
was afterward renewed between the colonies of Nova Scotia and Massachusetts
Bay, which last, in the year 1762, appointed commissioners to ascertain, in
conjunction with commissioners which might be appointed by the province of Nova
Scotia, the true river, but no final settlement of the matter ensued.

The treaty of peace gives us for one boundary, the river St. Croix, but
without designating it. Hence it has happened, that not long after the peace
was concluded, the question, which had been before agitated between France and
Great Britain, and between the provinces of Massachusetts and Nova Scotia, was
revived between the state of Massachusetts and that province, and it has ever
since continued a subject of debate.

A mode of settling the dispute was under the consideration of congress in the
year 1785; and powers were given to our then minister at the court of London,
to adjust the affair, but nothing was concluded. And we learn from a letter of
Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated the 15th December, 1791, that it then also,
engaged the attention of our government; that the ascertaining of the point in
dispute was deemed a matter of "present urgency," and that it had before been
the subject of application from the United States to the government of Great
Britain.

It is natural to suppose, that a dispute of such antiquity, between such
different parties, is not without colorable foundation on either side: at any
rate, it was essential to the preservation of peace that it should be adjusted.

If one party could not convince the other by argument, of the superior
solidity of its pretensions, I know of no alternative but arbitration or war.
Will any one pretend that honor required us in such a case to go to war, or
that the object was of a nature to make it our interest to refer it to that
solemn, calamitous, and precarious issue? No rational man will answer this
question in the affirmative. It follows, that an arbitration was the proper
course, and that our envoy acted rightly in acceding to this expedient. It is
one, too, not without precedents among nations, though it were to be wished,
for the credit of human moderation, that they were more frequent.

Is there any good objection to the mode of the arbitration? It seems
impossible, that any one more fair or convenient could have been devised, and
it is recommended by its analogy to what is common among individuals.

What the mode is, has been already detailed, and need not be repeated here. It
is objected, that too much has been left to chance; but no substitute has been
offered, which would have been attended with less casualty. The fact is, that
none such can be offere^. -- Conscious of this, those who make the objection
have not thought fit to give an opportunity of comparison by proposing a
substitute. What is left to chance? Not that there shall be a final decision;
for this is most effectually provided for. It is not only positively stipulated
that commissioners, with full and definitive power, shall be appointed, but an
ultimate choice is secured, by reserring, in the last resort, to a decision by
lot, what it might not be practicable to decide by agreement. This is the ne
plus ultra of precaution. Is it that this reference to lot leaves it too
uncertain of what character or disposition the third commissioner may be? If
this be not rather a recommendation of the fairness of the plan, how was it to
remedied? Could it have been expected of either of the parties, to leave the
nomination to the other? Certainly not. Would it have been advisable to have
referred the ultimate choice to some other state or government? Where would one
have been found, in the opinion of both parties, sufficiently impartial? On
which side would there have been the greatest danger of a successful employment
of undue influence? Is it not evident, that this expedient would have added to
equal uncertainty, as to character and disposition, other casualties and more
delay? Should it have been left to the two commissioners, appointed by the
parties to agree at all events? It might have been impossible for them to come
to an agreement, and then the whole plan of settlement would have been
frustrated. Would the sword have been a more certain arbiter? Of all uncertain
things, the issues of war are the most uncertain. What do objections of this
kind prove, but that there are persons resolved to object at all events?

The submission of this question to arbitration has been represented as an
eventual dismemberment of empire, which, it has been said, cannot rightly be
agreed to, but in a case of extreme necessity. This rule of extreme necessity
is manifestly only applicable to a cession or relinquishment of a part of a
country, held by a clear and acknowledged title; not to a case of disputed
boundary.

It would be a horrid and destructive principle, that nations could not
terminate a dispute about the title to a particular parcel of territory, by
amicable agreement, or by submission to arbitration as its substitute; but
would be under an indispensible obligation to prosecute the dispute by arms,
till real danger to the existence of one of the parties should justify, by the
plea of extreme necessity, a surrender of its pretensions.

Besides, the terms in which writers lay down the rule, and the reason of it,
will instruct us that where it does apply, it relates not to territory as such,
but to those who inhabit it, on the principle that the social compact entitles
all the members of the society to be protected and maintained by the common
strength in their rights and relations as members. It is understood, that the
territory between the two rivers in dispute, is either uninhabited, or
inhabited only by settlers under the British. If this be so, it obviates all
shadow of difficulty on our side. But be it as it may, it would be an abuse of
the rule, to oppose it to the amicable adjustment of an ancient controversy,
about the title to a particular tract of country, depending on a question of
fact, whether this or that river be the one truly intended by former treaties
between the parties. The question is not, in this case, shall we cede a part of
our country to another power? It is this -- To whom does this tract of country
truly belong? Should the weight of evidence be on the British side, our faith,
pledged by the treaty, would demand from us an acquiescence in their claim. Not
being able to agree in opinion on this point, it was most equitable and most
agreeable to good faith to submit it to an impartial arbitration.

It has been asked, among other things, whether the United States were
competent to the adjustment of the matters without the special consent of the
state of Massachusetts. Reserving a more particular solution of this question
to a separate discussion of the constitutionality of the treaty, I shall
content myself with remarking here, that our treaty of peace with Great
Britain, by settling the boundaries of the United States without the specific
consent or authority of any state, assumes the principle, that the government
of the United States was of itself competent to the regulation of boundary with
foreign powers -- that the actual government of the Union has even more plenary
authority with regard to treaties, than was possessed under the confederation,
and that acts, both of the former and of the present government, presuppose the
competency of the national authority to decide the question in the very
instance under consideration. I am informed, also, that the state of
Massachusetts has, by repeated acts, manifested a corresponding sense on the
subject.

A reflection not unimportant occurs here. It was perhaps, in another sense
than has been hitherto noticed, a point of predence in both governments to
^^^er the matter in dispute to arbitration. If one had yielded to the
pretensions of the other, it could hardly have failed to draw upon itself
complaints, and censures, more or less extensive, from quarters immediately
interested or affected.

CAMILLUS.

No. XIV.
THE sixth article stipulates compensation to British creditors for losses and
damages which may have been sustained by them, in consequence of certain legal
impediments, which, since the treaty of peace with Great Britain, are alleged
to have obstructed the recovery of debts bona fide contracted with them before
the peace.

To a man who has a due sense of the sacred obligation of a just debt, a proper
conception of the pernicious influence of laws which infringe the rights of
creditors, upon morals, upon the general security of property, upon public as
well as private credit, upon the spirit and principles of good government; who
has an adequate idea of the sanctity of the national faith, explicitly pledged
-- of the ignominy attendant upon a violation of it in so delicate a particular
as that of private pecuniary contracts -- of the evil tendency of a precedent
of this kind to the political and commercial interests of the nation generally
-- every law which has existed in this country, interfering with the recovery
of the debts in question, must have afforded matter of serious regret and real
afflicton. To such a man, it must be among the most welcome features of the
present treaty, that it stipulates reparation for the injuries which laws of
that description may have occasioned to individuals, and that, as far as is now
practicable, it wipes away from the national reputation the stain which they
have cast upon it. He will regard it as a precious tribute to justice, and as a
valuable pledge for the more strict future observance of our public
engagements; and he would deplore as an ill-omened symptom of the depravation
of public opinion, the success of the attempts which are making to render the
article unacceptable to the people of the United States. But of this there can
be no danger. The spontaneous sentiments of equity, of a moral and intelligent
people, will not fail to sanction, with their approbation, a measure which
could not have been resisted without inflicting a new wound upon the h^nor and
character of the country.

Let those men who have manifested by their actions, a willing disregard of
their own obligations as debtors -- those who secretly hoard, or openly and
unblushingly riot on the spoils of plundered creditors, let such men enjoy the
exclusive and undivided satisfaction of arraigning and condemning an act of
national justice, in which they may read the severest reproach of their
iniquitous principles and guilty acquistions. But let not the people of America
tarnish their honor by participating in that condemnation, or by shielding with
their favorable opinion, the meretricious apologies which are offered for the
measures that produced the necessity of reparation.

The recapitulation of some facts will contribute to a right judgment of this
part of the treaty.

It is an established principle of the laws of nations, that, on the return of
peace between nations which have been at war, a free and undisturbed course
shall be given to the recovery of private debts on both sides. Grotius, b. iii,
c. xx. ^. xvi.
In conformity to this principle, the 4th article of the treaty of peace
between the United States and Great Britain, expressly stipulates, "that
creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful impediment to the recovery
of the full value in sterling money of all bona fide debts theretofore
contracted."

Two instances of the violation of this article have been already noticed, with
a view to another point; one relating to certain laws of the state of Virginia,
passed prior to the peace, which, for several years after it, appears to have
operated to prevent the legal pursuit of their claims by British creditors.
Another, relating to a law of the state of South Carolina, which suspended the
recovery of the debts for nine months, and after that period permitted the
recovery only in four years instalments.

But these were not all the instances; there were other laws of South Carolina
prolonging the instalments, and obliging the creditors ^o receive in payment
the property of debtors at appraised values; and there were laws of Rhode
Island, New Jersey, North Carolina, and G^orgia, making paper money a le^al
tender for the debts of those creditors; which, it is known, sustained a very
great depreciation in every one of those states. These very serious and
compulsory interferences with the rights of the creditors, have received from
Decius, the soft appellation of a modification of the recovery of British
debts. Does he expect to make us believe, by this smooth phrase, that the right
to recover the full value of a debt in sterling money, is satisfied by the
obligation to take as a substitute, one half, one third, or one fourth of the
real value in paper?

It must necessarily have happened, that British creditors have sustained, from
the operation of the different acts alluded to, losses more or less extensive,
which the mere removal of the legal impediments which occasioned them could not
repair. In many instances, the losses must have actually accrued and taken
their full effect: in others, where no proceedings may have been had, the lapse
of so many years must have created inabilities to pay, in debtors who were
originally competent, who might have been made to pay, had there been a free
course of justice.

The removal of the impediments, therefore, by opening of the courts of
justice, was not an adequate satisfaction. It could not supersede the
obligation of compensation for losses which had irretrievably accrued by the
operation of the legal impediments, while they continued in force. The claim
for this was still open on the part of Great Britain, and still to be adjusted
between the two nations.

The excuse, that these laws were retaliations for prior infractions of treaty
by Great Britain, was in no view an answer to the claim. It may not be improper
to observe, that this excuse implies a palpable violation of the then
constitution of the United States. The confederation vested the powers of war
and of treaty in the Union. It therefore lay exclusively with congress to
pronounce, whether the treaty was or was not violated by Great Britain, and
what should be the satisfaction. No state, individually, had the least right to
meddle with the question, and the having done it was an usurpation on the
constitutional authority of the United States It might be shown, on a similar
principle, that an confiscations or sequestrations of British debts, by
particular states, daring the war, were also unconstitutional.




In the first place, as has already been proved, the fact of such prior
infractions was too doubtful to be finally insisted upon, and was, after a
fruitless effort to obtain the acquiescence of the other party, properly and
necessarily waved; so that it could not serve as a plea against reparation.

In the second place, if that fact had been indubitable, the species of
retaliation was unwarantable. It will be shown, when we come to discuss the
10th article, that the d^bts of private individuals are in no case a proper
object of reprisals; that independent of the treaty, the meddling with them was
a violation of the public faith and integrity; and that, consequently, it was
due as much to our own public faith and integrity, as to the individual who had
suffered, to make reparation. It was an act demanded by the justice, probity,
and magnanimity of the nation.

In the third place, it was essential to reciprocity in the adjustment of the
disputes which had existed concerning the treaty of peace. When we claimed the
reinstatement and execution of the article with regard to the posts; it was
just that we should consent to the reinstatement and execution of the article
with regard to debts. If the obstruction of the recovery of debts was the
equivalent by way of retaliation for the detention of the posts, we could not
expect to have restitution of the thing withheld, and to retain the equivalent
for it likewise. The dilemma was, to be content with the equivalent, and
abandon the thing; or to recover the thing, and abandon the equivalent: to have
both was more than we could rightly pretend. The reinstatement of the article,
with regard to the debts, necessarily included two things, the removal of legal
impediments as to the future recovery; compensation for past losses by reason
of those impediments. The first had been effected by the new constitution of
the United States; the last is promised by the treaty.

Did our envoy reply, that the reinstatement of the article with regard to the
posts included likewise compensation for their detention? Was it an answer to
this, destitute of reason, that our loss, by the detention of the posts, which
resolved itself essentially into the uncertain profits of a trade that might
have been carried on, admitted of no satisfactory rule of computation; while
the principal and interest of private debts afforded a familiar standard for
the computation of losses upon them: that, nevertheless, while this was the
usual, and must be the admitted standard, it is an adequate one in cases where
payment is protracted beyond the allowed term of credit; since the mere
interest of money does not countervail among merchants, the profits of its
employment in trade, and still less the derangements of credit and fortune,
which frequently result to creditors, from procrastinations of payment; and
that the final damage to Great Britain, in these two particulars, for which no
provision could be made, might well exceed any losses to us by the detention of
the posts?

In the last place, the compensation stipulated was a fine qua non with Great
Britain, of the surrender of the posts, and the adjustment of the controversy
which had subsisted between the two countries. The making it such may be
conceived to have been dictated more by the importance of the precedent, than
by the quantum of the sum in question. We shall easily understand this, if we
consider how much the commercial capital of Great Britain is spread over the
world. The vast credits she is in the habit of extending to foreign countries,
renders it to her an essential point to protect those credits by all the
sanctions in her power. -- She cannot forbear to contend at every hazard
against precedents of the invasion of the rights of her merchants, and for
retribution where any happen. Hence it is always to be expected, that she will
be peculiarly inflexible on this point: and that nothing short of extreme
necessity can bring her to relax in an article of policy, which perhaps not
less than any other, is a necessary prop of the whole system of her political
economy.

It was, therefore, to have been foreseen that whenever our controversy with
Great Britain was adjusted, compensation for obstructions to the recovery of
debts would make a part of the adjustment. The option lay between compensation,
relinquishment of the posts, or war. Our envoy is entitled to the applause of
all good men, for preferring the first. The extent of the compensation can on
no possible scale compare with the immense permanent value of the posts, or
with the expenses of war. The sphere of the interferences has been too partial
to make the sum of the compensation, in any event, a very serious object; and
as to a war, a conscientious or virtuous mind could never endure the thoughts
of seeing the country involved in its calamities, to get rid of an act of
justice to individuals, whose rights, in contempt of public faith, had been
violated.

Having reviewed the general considerations which justify the stipulation of
compensation, it will be proper to examine if the plan upon which it is to be
made, is unexceptionable.

This plan contains the following features, 1. The cases provided for are
those, "where losses and damages occasioned by the operation of lawful
impediments (which since the peace have delayed the full recovery of British
debts, bona fide contracted before the peace, and still owing to the creditors,
and have impaired and lessened the value and security thereof) cannot now, for
whatever reason, be actually obtained in the ordinary course of justice. 2.
There is an express exception out of this provision, of all the cases in which
losses and damages have been occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or
other causes, as would equally have operated to produce them, if no legal
impediment had existed, or by the manifest delay, or negligence, or wilful
omission, of the c^aim^nts. 3. The amount of the losses and damages, for which
compensation is to be made, is to be ascertained by five commissioners to be
appointed as follows; two by his Britannic majesty, two by the president with
the advice and consent of the senate, the fifth by the unanimous voice of these
four, if they can agree, if they cannot agree, then to be taken by lot out of
two persons, one of whom to be named by the two British commissioners, the
other by the two American commissioners. 4. These rive commissioners, thus
appointed, a^e, before they proceed to the execution of their trust, to take an
oath for its faithful discharge. Three of them to constitute a board; but there
must be present one of the two commissioners named on each side, and the fifth
commissioner. -- Decisions to be made by majority of voices of those present.
They are first to meet at Philadelphia, but may adjourn from place to place as
they see cause. 5. Eighteen months after the commissioners make a board, are
assigned for receiving applications; but the commissioners, in particular
cases, may extend the term for any further term, not exceeding six months. 6.
The commissioners are empowered to take into consideration all claims, whether
of principal or interest, or balances of principal and interest, and to
determine them according to the merits and circumstances thereof, and as
justice and equity shall appear to them to require -- to examine persons on
oath or affirmation, and to receive in evidence, depositions, books, papers, or
copies, or extracts thereof, either according to the legal forms existing in
the two countries, or according to a mode to be devised by them. 7. Their award
is to be conclusive; and the United States are to cause the such awarded in
each case to be paid in specie to the creditor without deduction, and at such
time and place as shall have been awarded; but no payment to be required sooner
than twelve months from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of the
treaty.


This provision for ascertaining the compensation to be made, while it is
ample, is also well guarded.

It is confined to debts contracted before the peace, and still owing to the
creditors. It embrances only the cases of loss or damage in consequence of
legal impediments to the recovery of those debts which will exclude all cases
of voluntary compromise, and can include none, where the laws have allotted a
free course to justice. It can operate in no instance where, at present, the
ordinary course of justice is competent to full relief, and the debtor is
solvent; nor in any, where insolvency or other cause would have operated to
produce the loss or damage, if no legal impediment had existed, or where it has
been occasioned by the wilful delay, negligence, or omission of the creditor.

If it be said, that the commissioners have nevertheless much latitude of
discretion, and that in the exercise of it they may transgress the limits
intend^d, the answer is, that the United States, though bound to perform what
they have stipulated with good faith, would (...) bound to submit to a manifest
abuse of authority by the commissioners. Should they palpably exceed their
commission, or abuse their trust, the United States may justifiably, though at
their peril, refuse compliance. For example, if they should undertake to award
upon a debt contracted since the peace, there could be no doubt that their
award would be a nullity. So likewise there may be other plain cases of
misconduct, which, in honor and conscience, would exonerate the United States
from performance. It is only incumbent upon them to act, bona fide, and as they
act at their peril, to examine well the soundness of the ground on which they
proceed.

With regard to the reference to commissioners to settle the quantum of the
compensation to be made, this course was dictated by the nature of the case.
The tribunals of neither country were competent to a retrospective adjustment
of losses and damages, in many cases which might require it. It is for this
very reason of the incompetency of the ordinary tribunals to do complete
justice, that a special stipulation of compensation, and a special mode of
obtaining it, became necessary. In constituting a tribunal to liquidate the
quantum of reparation, in the case of a breach of treaty, it was natural and
just to devise one likely to be more certainly impartial than the established
courts of either party. Without impeaching the integrity of those courts, it
was morally impossible that they should not feel a bias toward the nation to
which they belonged, and for that very reason they were unfit arbitrators. In
the case of the spoliations of our property, we should undoubtedly have been
unwilling to leave the adjustment in the last resort to the British courts; and
by parity of reason, they could not be expected to refer the liquidation of
compensation in the case of the debts to our courts. To have pressed this would
have been to weaken our argument for a different course in regard to the
spoliations. We should have been puzzled to find a substantial principle of
discrimination.

If a special and extraordinary tribunal was to be constituted, it was
impracticable to contrive a more fair and equitable plan for it than that which
has been adopted. The remarks on the mode of determining the question
respecting the river St. Croix, apply in full force here, and would render a
particular comment superfluous.

To the objection of the Charleston committee, that the article erects a
tribunal unknown to our constitution, and transfers to commissioners the
cognizance of matters appertaining to American courts and juries, the answer is
simple and conclusive. The tribunals established by the constitution do not
contemplate a case between nation and nation arising upon a breach of treaty,
and are inadequate to the cognizance of it. -- Could either of them hold plea
of a suit of Great Britain plaintiff, against the United States, defendant? The
case, therefore, required the erection or constitution of a new tribunal; and
it was most likely to promote equity to pass by the courts of both the parties.

The same principle contradicts the position, that there has been any transfer
of jurisdiction from American courts and juries to commissioners. It is a
question not between individual and individual, or between our government and
individuals, but between our government and the British government; of course,
one in which our courts and juries have no jurisdiction. There was a necessity
for an extraordinary tribunal to supply the defect of ordinary jurisdiction;
and so far is the article from making the transfer imputed to it, that it
expressly excepts the cases in which effectual relief can be obtained in the
ordinary course of justice.

Nations acknowledging no common judge on earth, when they are willing to
submit the question between them to a judicial decision, must of necessity
constitute a special tribunal for the purpose. The mode by commissioners, as
being the most unexceptionable, has been repeatedly adopted.

I proceed to reply to some other objections which have been made against the
provision contained in this article.

It is charged with affixing a stigma on the national character, by providing
reparation for an infraction, which, if it ever did exist, has been done away,
there being now a free course to the recovery of British debts in the courts of
the United States.

An answer to this objection has been anticipated by some observations
heretofore made. The giving a free course to justice in favor of British
creditors, which has been effected by the new constitution of the United
States, though it obviates the future operation of legal impediment, does not
retrospectively repair the losses and damages which may have resulted from
their past operation. In this respect, the effects continued, and reparation
was due. To promise it, could fix no stigma on our national character. That was
done by the acts which created the cause for reparation. To make it, was as far
as possible to remove the stigma.

It has been said, that the promise of compensation produces injustice to those
states which interposed no legal impediments to the recovery of debts, by
saddling them with a part of the burden arising from the de^^quencies of the
transgressing states. But the burden was before assumed by the treaty of peace.
The article of that treaty, which engaged that there should be no lawful
impediments to the recovery of debts, was a guarantee by the United States of
justice to the British creditors. It charged them with the duty of taking care
that there was no legal obstacle to the recovery of the debts of those
creditors, and consequently with a responsibility for any such obstacle which
should happen, and with the obligation of making reparation for it. We must,
therefore, refer to the treaty of peace, not to the last treaty, the common
charge which has been incurred by interference in the recovery of British
debts. The latter only carries into execution the promise made by the former.
It may be added that it is a condition of the social compact that the nation at
large shall make retribution to foreign nations for injuries done to them by
its members.

It has been observed, that Mr. Jefferson has clearly shown, that interest in
cases like that of British debts, is liable, during the period of the war, to
equitable abatements and deductions; and that, therefore, the discretion given
to the commissioners on this head ought not to have been as large as it appears
in the article.

Mr. Jefferson has, no doubt, offered arguments of real weight to establish the
position that judges and juries have, and exercise, a degree of discretion in
any article of interest; and that the circumstances of our war with Great
Britain, afford strong reasons for abatements of interest. But it was foreign
to his purpose, and accordingly he has not attempted to particularise the rules
which ought to govern in the application of this principle to the variety of
cases in which the question may arise: and he has himself noted that the
practice in different states and in different courts, has been attended with
great diversity. Indeed, admitting the right to abate interest under special
circumstances, in cases in which it is the general rule to allow it, the
circumstances of each case, are, perhaps, the only true criterion of the
propriety of an exception. The particular nature of the contract, the
circumstances under which it was entered into, the relative situation of
parties, the possibility or not of mutual access; these and other things would
guide and vary the exercise of the discretion to abate. It was, therefore,
right to leave the commissioners, as they are left, in the same situation with
judges and juries: -- to act according to the true equity of the several cases
or of the several classes of cases.

Let it be remembered, that the government of Great Britain has to consult the
interests and opinions of its citizens, as well as the government of the United
States those of their citizens The only satisfactory course which the former
could pursue, in reference to its merchants, was to turn over the whole
question of interest as well as principal, to the commissioners. And as this
was truly equitable, the government of the United States could make no
well-founded opposition to it.

CAMILLUS.

No. XV.
IT is the business of the seventh article of the treaty, to provide for two
objects: one, compensation to our citizens for injuries to their property, by
irregular, or illegal captures, or condemnations; the other, compensation to
British citizens for captures of their property within the limits and
jurisdiction of the United States, or elsewhere, by vessels originally armed in
our ports, in the cases in which the captured property having come within our
posts and power, there was a neglect to make restitution.

The first object is thus provided for; 1. It is agreed, that in all cases of
irregular and illegal captures or condemnations of the vessels and other
property of citizens of the United States, under color of authority or
commissions from his (...) majesty, in which adequate compensation for the
losses and damages sustained, cannot, for whatever reason, be actually obtained
in the ordinary course of justice, full and compl^^ compensation for the same
will be made by the British government to the claimants; except were the loss
or damage may have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or
wilful omission of those claimants. 2. The amount of the losses and damages to
be compensated, is to be ascertained by five commissioners, who are to be
appointed in exactly the same manner as those for liquidating the compensation
to British creditors. 3. These commissioners are to take a similar oath, and to
exercise similar powers for the investigation of claims with those other
commissioners: and they are to decide according to the merits of the several
cases, and to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. 4. The same term of
eighteen months is allowed for the reception of claims, with a like discretion
to extend the term, as in the case of British debts. 5. The award of these
commissioners, or of three of them, under the like guards as in that case, is
to be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claims, and to the
amount of the compensation. And, lastly, his Britannic majesty is to cause the
compensation awarded, to be paid to the claimants in specie, without deduction,
at such times and places, and upon the condition of such releases or
assignments, as the commissioners shall prescribe.


Mutually and dispassionately examined, it is impossible not to be convinced,
that this provision is ample, and ought to be satisfactory. The course of the
discussion will exhibit various proofs of the disingenuousness of the clamours
against it; but it will be pertinent to introduce here, one or two samples of
it.

It has been alleged, that while the article preceding, and this article,
provide effectually for every demand of Great Britain against the United
States, the provision for this important and urgent claim of ours is neither
explicit nor efficient, nor co-extensive with the object, nor bears any
proportion to the summary method, adopted for the satisfying of British claims.

This suggestion is every way unfortunate. The plan for satisfying our claim,
except as to the description of the subject which varies with it, is an exact
copy of that for making compensation to British creditors. Whoever will take
the pains to compare, will find, that in the leading points, literal conformity
is studied; and that in others, the provisions are assimilated by direct
references; and will discover also, this important distinction in favor of the
efficiency and summariness of the provision for our claim -- that while the
commissioners are expressly restricted from awarding payment to British
creditors, to be made sooner than one year after the exchange of ratifications
of the treaty, they are free to award it to be made the very day of their
decision, for the spoliations of our property. As to compensation for British
property, captured within our limits, or by vessels originally armed in our
ports and not restored, which is the only other British claim that has been
provided for, it happens that this, forming a part of the very article we are
considering, is submitted to the identical mode of relief, which is instituted
for making satisfaction to us.

So far, then, is it from being true, that a comparison of the modes of redress
provided by the treaty, for the complaints of the respective parties, turns to
our disadvantage, that the real state of the case exhibits a substantial
similitude, with only one material difference, and that in our favor; and, that
a strong argument for the equity of the provisions on each side, is to be drawn
from their close resemblance of each other.

The other suggestion alluded to, and which has been shamelessly reiterated,
is, that Denmark and Sweden, by pursuing a more spirited conduct, had obtained
better terms than the United States. It is even pretended, that one or both of
them had actually received from Great Britain a gross sum on account -- in
anticipation of an ultimate liquidation. -- In my second number, the
erroneousness of the supposition, that those powers had obtained more than the
United States, was intimated; but the subsequent repetition of the idea, more
covertly in print, and very openly and confidently in conversation, renders
expedient an explicit and peremptory denial of the fact. There never has
appeared a particle of evidence to support it; and after challenging the
asserters of it to produce their proof, I aver, that careful enquiry, at
sources of information, at least as direct and authentic as theirs, has
satisfied me, that the suggestion is wholly unfounded, and that at the time of
the conclusion of our treaty with Great Britain, both Denmark and Sweden were
behind us in the effect of their measures for obtaining reparation.

What are we to think of attempts like these, to dupe and irritate the public
mind? Will any prudent citizen still consent to follow such blind or such
treacherous guides?

Let us now, under the influence of a calm and candid temper, without which
truth eludes our researches, by a close scrutiny of the provision, satisfy
ourselves, whether it be not really a reasonable and proper one. But previous
to this it is requisite to advert to a collateral measure, which was also a
fruit of the mission to Great Britain, and which ought to be taken in
conjunction with the stipulations of this article. I refer to the order of the
British king in council, of the 6th of August, 1794, by which order, the door
before shut by lapse of time, is opened to appeals from the British West India
courts of admiralty, to be brought at any time which shall be judged reasonable
by the lords commissioners of appeals in prize causes. This, of itself, was no
inconsiderable step toward the redress of our grievances; and it may be hoped,
that with the aid which the government of the United States has given to
facilitate appeals, much relief may ensue from this measure. It will not be
wonderful, if it should comport with the pride and policy of the British
government, by promoting justice in their courts, to leave as little as
possible to be done by the commissioners.

I proceed now to examine the characteristics of the supplementary provision
made by the article, in connection with the objections to it.

It admits fully and explicitly the principle, that compensation is to be made
for the losses and damages sustained by our citizens, by irregular or illegal
captures, or condemnations of their vessels and other property, under color of
authority (which includes governmental orders and instructions) or of
commissions of his Britannic majesty. It is to be observed, that the causes of
the losses and damages are mentioned in the disjunctive, "captors or
condemnations;" so that damages by captures, which were not followed by
condemnations, are provided for as well as those where condemnations did follow.

A cavil has been raised on the meaning of the word, color, which it is
pretended, would not reach the cases designed to be embraced; because the
spoliations complained of, were made, not merely by color, but actually by
virtue of instructions from the British government.

For the very reason that this subtle and artificial meaning ascribed to the
term, would tend to defeat the manifest general intent of the main provision of
the article, which is plainly to give reparation for irregular or illegal
captures or condemnations of American property, contrary to the laws of nations
-- that meaning must be deemed inadmissible.

But in fact, the expression is the most accurate that could have been used, to
signify the real intent of the article. When we say, a thing was done by color
of an authority or commission, we mean one of three things; that it was done on
the pretense of a sufficient authority or commission not validly imparted, or
on the pretense of such an authority or commission validly imparted but abused
or misapplied, or on the pretense of an insufficient authority or commission,
regularly, as to form, imparted and exercised. It denotes a defect of rightful
and just authority, whether emanating from a wrong source, or improperly from a
right source; whereas the phrase "by virtue of," is most properly applicable to
the valid exercise of a valid authority. But the two phrases are not
unfrequently used as synonimous. Thus, in a proclamation of the British king,
of the 25th of May, 1792, he, among other things, forbids all his subjects, by
virtue or under color of any foreign commission or letters of reprisals, to
disturb, infest, or damage, the subjects of France.

In whose mouths does the article put the expression? In those of citizens of
the United States? What must they be presumed to have meant? Clearly this; that
by color of instructions or commissions of his Britannic majesty, either
exercised erroneously, or issued erroneously, as being contrary to the laws of
nations; the citizens of the United States had suffered loss and damage by
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their property. W^^t is the
standard appealed to, to decide the irregularity or illegality to be redressed?
Expressly the laws of nations. The commissioners are to decide "according to
the merits of the several cases, to justice, equity, and the laws of nations."
Wherever these laws, as received and practiced among nations, pronounce a
capture or condemnation of neutral property to have been irregular or illegal,
though by color of an authority or commission of his Britannic majesty, it
would be the duty of the commissioners to award compensation.

The criticism, however, fails on its own principle, when tested by the fact.
The great source of grievance, intended to be redressed by the article,
proceeded from the instruction of the 6th of November, 1793. That instruction
directs the commanders of ships of war and privateers, to stop and detain all
ships laden with goods, the produce of any colony belonging to France, or
carrying provisions and other supplies for the use of such colony, and to bring
the same, with their cargoes, to legal adjudication in the British courts of
admiralty. These terms, "legal adjudication," were certainly not equivalent,
upon any rational construction to condemnation. Adjudication means simply, a
judicial decision, which might be either to acquit or condemn. Yet the British
West India courts of admiralty appear to have generally acted upon the term as
synonimous with condemnation. In doing this, they may be truly said, even in
the sense of the objection, to have acted by color, only, of the instruction.

The British cabinet have disavowed this construction of the West India courts;
and have as we have seen, by a special act of interference, opened a door which
was before shut to a reversal of their sentences, by appeal to the courts in
England. We find, also, that the term adjudication is used in the XVIIth
article of our late treaty as synonimous, only with judicial decision,
according to its true import. This, if any thing were wanting, would render it
impossible for the commissioners to refuse redress on the ground of the
condemnations, if otherwise illegal, being warranted by the pretended sense of
the words legal adjudication. But in reality, as before observed, their
commission will be to award compensation in all cases, in which they are of
opinion, that, according to the established laws of nations, captures or
condemnations were irregular or illegal, however otherwise authorized; and this
in contempt of the quibbling criticism which has been so cunningly devised.

2d, The provision under consideration, obliges the British government, in all
cases of illegal captures or condemnations, in which adequato compensation
cannot, for whatever reason, be actually had in the ordinary course of justice,
to make full and complete compensation to the claimants, which is to be paid in
specie to themselves, without deduction, at such times and places as shall be
awarded.

They are not sent for redress to the captors, or obliged to take any
circuitous course for their payment, but are to receive it immediately from the
treasury of Great Britain.

3d, The amount of the compensation in each case is to be sixed by five
commissioners, two appointed by the United States, two by Great Britain: the
fifth by these four, or in case of disagreement, by lot. these commissioners to
meet and act in London.

It seems impossible, as has been observed and shown in the analogous cases, to
imagine a plan for organizing a tribunal more completely equitable and
impartial than this; while it is the exact counterpart of the one which is to
decide on the claims of British creditors. Could it have been believed, that so
palpable an error could have been imposed on a town meeting, in the face of so
plain a provision, as to induce it to charge against this article, that in a
national concern of the United States, redress was left to British courts of
admiralty? Yet, strange as it may appear, this did happen even in the truly
enlightened town of Boston. The just pride of that town will not quickly
forget, that it has been so compromitted.

The truth is, that, according to the common usage of nations, the courts of
admiralty of the belligerent parties are the channels through which the redress
of injuries to neutrals is sought. But Great Britain has been brought to agree
to refer all the cases, in which justice cannot be obtained through those
channels, to an extraordinary tribunal; in other words, to arbitrators mutually
appointed.

It is here that we find the reparation of the national wrong which we had
suffered. -- In admitting the principle of compensation by the government
itself, in agreeing to an extraordinary tribunal, in the constitution of which
the parties have an equal voice, to liquidate that compensation, Great Britain
has virtually and effectually acknowledged the injury which had been done to
our neutral rights, and has consented to make satisfaction for it. This was an
apology in fact, however it may be in form.

As it regards our honor, this is an adequate, and the only species usual in
similar cases between nations; pecuniary compensation is the true reparation in
such cases -- governments are not apt to go upon their knees to ask pardon of
other governments -- Great Britain, in the recent instance of the dispute with
Spain about Nootka Sound, was glad to accept of a like reparation. It merits
remark, incidentally, that the instrument, which settles this dispute,
expressly waves, like our treaty, reference to the merits of the complaints and
pretensions of the respective parties. Is our situation such as to authorize us
to pretend to impose humiliating conditions on other nations!

It is necessary to distinguish between injuries and insults, which we are too
apt to confound. The seizures and spoliations of our property fall most truly
under the former head. The acts which produced them, embraced all the neutral
powers, were not particularly levelled at us, bore no mark of an intention to
humble us by any peculiar indignity or outrage.

These acts were of June 8th, and of November 6th, 1793. The seizure of our
vessels going with provisions to the deminions of France, under the first, was
put on the double ground of a war extraordinary in its principle, Though this
country has viewed the principle of the war favorably, it is certain that
Europe generally. the neutral powers not wholly excepted, has viewed it in a
different light, so that this was not a mere pretense.
and of a construction of the laws of nations, which, it was said, permitted
that seizure; a construction not destitute of color, and apparently supported
by the authority of Vattel, though, in my opinion, ill founded. It was
accompanied also by compensation for what was taken, and other circumstances,
that evinced a desire to smooth the act. The indiscriminate consiscation of our
property, upon the order of the 6th of November, which was the truly flagrant
injury, was certainly unwarranted by that order (and no secret one has
appeared) -- and the matter has been so explained by the British government. It
is clear that evils suffered under acts so circumstanced, are injuries rather
than insults -- and are so much the more manageable as to the species and
measure of redress. It would be Quixotism to assert that we might not honorably
accept in such a case, the pecaniary reparation which has been stipulated.

But it is alleged, in point of interest, it is unsatisfactory -- tedious in
the process -- uncertain in the event; that there ought to have been actual and
immediate indemnifications, or at least, a payment upon account.

A little calm reflection, will convince us, that neither of the two last
things was to be expected. There was absolutely no criterion, either for a full
indemnification, or for an advance upon account. The value of the property
seized and condemned (lay out of the case, damages upon captures where
condemnation had not ensued) was not ascertained, even to our own government,
with any tolerable accuracy. Every well informed man will think it probable,
that of this, a proportion was covered French property. -- There were,
theresore, no adequate data, upon which our government could demand, or the
British government pay, a determined sum. -- Both governments must have acted
essential by guess. Ours could not in honor or conscience have made even an
estimate but upon evidence. It might have happened, that a sum which appeared
upon the evidence that had been collected, sufficient, might have proved on
further evidence insufficient. Too little, as well as too much, might have been
demanded and paid. But it will perhaps be said, that some gross estimate might
have been formed; and that of this, such a part might have been advanced upon
account, as was within the narrowest probable limit, liable to eventual
adjustment. Let us for a moment suppose this done -- what good end would it
have answered? How could the United States have distributed this money among
the sufferers, till it was ascertained which of them was truly entitled, and to
how much? Is it not evident, that if they had made any distribution, before the
final and perfect investigation of the right of each claimant, it would be at
the risk of making mispayments, and of being obliged to replace the sums
mispaid, perhaps at a loss to the United States, for the benefit of those who
should be found to be better entitled? Would it have been expedient for our
government to have incurred this risk to its constituents? And if the money was
to be held undistributed till an investigation of claims was completed, to what
purpose the haste about an advance?

On the other hand -- Is it in this loose, gross way, that nations transact
affairs, with each other? Do even individuals make indemnifications to one
another, in so lumping a manner? Could it be expected of Great Britain, that
she would pay, till it was fairly ascertained what was to be paid; especially
when she had too much cause to suspect, that a material proportion of the
property claimed, might turn out to be French? Would it have been justifiable
on our part, to make her compliance with such a demand, the sine quo non of
accommodation and peace? Whoever will believe that she would have complied with
so humiliating a requisition, must be persuaded that we were in a condition to
dictate, and she in a condition to be obliged to receive any terms that we
might think fit to prescribe? The person who can believe this, must be, in my
opinion, under the influence of a defirium, for which there is no cure in the
resources of reason and argument.

If it must be admitted, that it was matter of necessity, that investigation
should precede payment; then I see not what more summary mode could have been
devised. Who more capable of proceeding with dispatch, that arbitrators
untrammelled with legal forms; vested with powers to examine parties and
others, on oath, and to command and receive all evidence in their own way? Here
are all the means of expedition divested of every clog.

Eighteen months are allowed for preferring claims, but the commissioners are
at liberty to adjust them as fast as they are preferred. -- In every case in
which it appears to them bona fide, that the ordinary course of justice is
inadequate to relief, they may forthwith proceed to examine and decide. There
is no impediment, no cause of delay whatever, more than the nature of a due
investigation always requires.

The meeting of the commissioners at London, was recommended by the
circumstance that the admiralty courts were likely to concentre there a
considerable part of the evidence, on which they were to proceed; which upon
the whole, might favor dispatch, as well as more complete justice. In many
cases, the decisions of those courts may come under their review.

As to the uncertainty of the event, this, as far as it may be true, was
inseparable from any plan, bottomed on the idea of a previous investigation of
claims: and it has been shown, that some such plan was reasonable and
inetitable.

It may also be added, that the plan affords a moral certainty of substantial
justice, which is all that can rationally be expected in similar affairs;
compensation, where due, is explicitly stipulated. A fair and edequate mode of
deciding and liquidating it has been settled. All the arguments which were
adduced to prove the probability of good says, in regard to the posts, apply
equally to this subject. The interest which every nation has in the
preservation of character, and which the most profligate dare not entirely
disregard -- the consideration of defeating the fulfillment of the stipulations
on our part -- the size of the object, certainly not of great magnitude -- the
very discouraging situation for replunging suddenly into a new war, in which
the present war will in every event leave Great Britain. These are reasons
which afford solid ground of assurances that there will be no evasion of
performance.

As to the commissioners, two of the five will be of our choice, a third may be
so likewise; but should it prove otherwise, it will be surprising if one of the
other three, all acting under oath, and having character at stake, shall not be
disposed to do us reasonable justice.

3d, While their power is co-extensive with all losses and damage; from
irregular or allegal captures or condemnations, their sentence in each case is
to be conclusive, and the rules which are to govern it as prescribed by the
article, are the merits of each case, justice, equity and the law of nations.
What greater latitude could have been desired to be given? What greater
latitude could have been given? What else in the case was there to have been
provided for? What is meant by the assertion, that the provision is not
commensurate with the object?

The general and unqualified reference to the laws of nations, dismisses all
pretense to substitute the arditrary regulations of Great Britain as rules of
decision. Her instructions or orders, if incompatible with those laws, are
nullities.

Thus the treaty unfetters the question between us and her, from the
commencement of the war, and with her own consent, commits them at large to a
tribunal to be constituted by mutual choice.

Will any man of candor and equity say, that a better provision ought to have
been expected than has been accomplished?

The alternative was immediate indemnification, by actual payment in whole or
in part, without examination of the extent or justice of claims; or suture
indemnification, after a due investigation of both in some equitable and
effectual mode. The first was attended with dissiculties on our side, and with
solid objections on the other side. The last was therefore the truly reasonable
course, and it has been pursued on a very proper plan. -- The causes of loss
and damage are fully embraced. They are referred to the decision of an
unexceptionable tribunal, to be guided by unexceptionable rules, and the
indemnification which may be awarded, is to be paid fully, immediately, and
without de tour by the British government itself. Say ye impartial and
enlightened, if all this be not as it ought to have been!

CAMILLUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
GOVERNOR FENNER's REPLY To the British Vice Consul's Note, See page 215.
enclosing Captain Home's Letter.
SIR, Providence, August 5, 1795.
I AM to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 2d instant, which came
to hand this morning.

With regard to the application of Captain Home, such was the indecency of his
letter to you, and such his sabsequent conduct, in searching and capturing
Captain Bliss within the limits and jurisdiction of the state, that I must wait
for instructions from the president of the United States, to whom I shall
transmit a so^^ account of the behavior of Captain Home by the next mail.

I am not a little surprised that you, sir, in your character as vice consul of
his Britannic majesty, should be instrumental in offering this unprovoked and
unprecedented insult to the state.

I am, with due esteem and regard, Sir, your most humble servant, A. FENNER.

Thomas W. Moore, Esquire, his Britannic Majesty's Vice Consul, for Rhode
Island, etc.
GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, To all whom it
may concern.
THOMAS WILLIAM MOORE, Esquire, having heretofore produced to me his
commission, as vice consul of his Britannic majesty, within the seat of Rhode
Island, and having thereon received from me an exequatur, bearing date the 5th
day of December, 1792, recognizing him as such, and declaring him free to
exercise, within the said state, such functions and powers, as may be given or
permitted, by the laws of the land, to the consuls of nations, between whom and
the United States, no treaty or convention exists, for permitting specific
powers and functions, to be exercised by their consuls reciprocally: And the
said Thomas William Moore, having, on the second day of August, 1795,
transmitted to the governor of the state of Rhode Island, a letter, dated the
31st of July, 1795, addressed to him the said Thomas William Moore, and written
by captain Rodham Home, commander of the British ship of war, Africa, then
lying at or near the port of New Port, in the said state: which said letter is
conceived in terms of menace and insult against the authority of the United
States: And the said Thomas William Moore having participated in the commission
of the said menace and insult, by transmitting the letter as aforementioned,
having perfect knowledge of its contents: And it being no longer proper, and
consistent with the respect due to the government and authority of the United
States, that the said Thomas William Moore should continue to exercise any of
the functions or powers heretofore allowed in virtue of his said commission of
vice consul.

These are therefore to declare, That I do no longer recognize the said Thomas
William Moore as vice consul of his Britannic majesty, in any part of these
United States, nor permit him to exercise any of the functions or powers
heretofore granted. And I do hereby wholly revoke the said exequatur heretofore
given, and do declare the same to be absolutely void, from this day forward.

In testimony whereof, I have caused these letters to be made patent, and the
seal of the United States of America to be hereunto assixed.

Done at the city of Philadelphia, the fifth day of September, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-five, and of the independence of the United States of
America the twentieth.

GO. WASHINGTON.

END OF VOL. I.
[No. V.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- OCTOBER 10, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. CATO, No. XIV. Page 3 2. -- No. XV. Page 8 3. Juricola, No. I. Page 14 4.
Camillus, No. XVI. Page 18 5. -- No. XVII. Page 24 6. Proceedings at Lexington
(Massachusetts) August 13th, 1795 Page 34 7. Resolutions of a respectable
Number of Land-holders and other Inhabitants of Amelia County (Virginia) Page
43 8. Proceedings of the Citizens of Richmond County (Georgia) September 1st,
1795 Page 46 9. Proceedings of the Inhabitants of Warren County (North
Carolina) August 22d, 1795 Page 49 10. Address of the Citizens of Charleston
(South Carolina) to the President of the United States Page 51 11. Judge
Stith's Charge to the Grand Jury for the County of Chatham (Georgia) August
4th, 1795 Page 52 12. Resolutions of the Citizens of Camden Town and District
(South Carolina) July 25th, 1795 Page 54 13. Nudum Pactum Page 56 14.
Proceedings in the Senate of the United States Page 57 15. The Lamentation Page
59 16. The Federalist, No. I. Page 61 17. -- No. II. Page 67
Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM VOL. 1. PAGE 252.]

No. XIV.
THE numerous faults of the 6th article compel me reluctantly to make it the
subject of another number; and the rather, as we shall thereby anticipate
similar objections, which we should otherwise be obliged to notice in several.
The appointment of commissioners without the concurrence of congress -- the
ascertaining their salaries by treaty -- their assumption of a jurisdiction
over matters arising under treaties and cases in which the United States are
parties, in derogation of the rights of the supreme court, having been shown to
violate the constitution -- it will, I believe, be readily admitted, that no
power exists in the president and senate, to appropriate money to the payment
of British debts, unless with the concurrence of congress; and that the treaty,
therefore, is unconstitutional, inasmuch as it pledges them absolutely to do
an, act which they may or may not do at their discretion. Whether in the
exercise of this discretion, they could constitutionally, agree to this
article? or whether if they could, it would be just or politic? are questions
that remain to be examined. The right of the president and senate, to appoint
commissioners with judiciary powers, has already been discussed. The right of
congress to establish officers by law, is also limited. 1st, To the president
and senate. 2d, To the courts of law. 3d, To the heads of departments. 4th, To
the president alone. No power a vested in them to allow the appointment of any
officer by lot, and much less to admit that his Britannic majesty should
exercise the right of appointing judges for the trial of causes in which they
are themselves to be the parties. 2. No power exists in congress, to take from
the supreme court the right to determine all cases arising under treaties --
all cases in which the United States are parties. The determination of these
cases is not less exclusively the right of the judiciary, than the making of
laws exclusively of congress. 3. In examining these powers, I find none that
enables them to change the rules of evidence -- to alter the established laws
of the country, or to authorize courts so to do. These rights, therefore, not
being given to congress, I presume are exclusively invested in the state
legislatures; and, of course, I am led to doubt the right that congress
themselves have, to empower any five men, to examine the plaintiff on oath, and
to receive in evidence, written depositions, papers, copies, or extracts,
authenticated in any such way "as the said commissioners shall see cause to
require or allow." A right so extensive, so liable to abuse, particularly when
accompanied with the power to decide finally and arbitrarily, should, I think,
be tolerated in no free stare.

The justice or policy of the assumption of the debts of individuals, by the
United States, must be determined by a reference to the treaty of Paris, and
the subsequent measures of the United States. By the 5th article of that
treaty, it was agreed, "That creditors on either fide shall meet with no lawful
impediment to the recovery of the full value in sterling money of all bona fide
debts heretofore contracted." It is observable, that this article gives the
creditors on neither side any claim upon the states, but leaves them to
prosecute the individual, and the ordinary courts of law to determine their
rights. In consequence of which, some debtors have discharged all that was due;
others have been more negligent.

Upon what principle can the British creditor charge the community, with debts
due from delinquent individuals? It is said, that laws were passed to restrain
the payment of debts for a certain period -- yet whoever will turn to Mr.
Jefferson's letter to Mr. Hammond on this subject, will find, that these laws
in no one instance have operated to the prejudice of the British creditor; that
the right of congress to make treaties, under the old confederation, being
unlimited, the state courts always construed the treaty as a law which
overruled state laws -- so that the British creditor has had the full effect
of the treaty. Mr. Jefferson's reasoning was so conclusive on this head, that
Mr. Hammond, notwithstanding his rage for writing and the able aid he had at
Philadelphia, did not pretend to answer his arguments; but, after some delay,
evaded them by saying that he had sent his letters to England. Lord Grenville
also (as appears by Mr. Pinckney's letters) was so struck with the force of his
reasoning, that instead of answering it, he commends it in the highest terms;
nor did it ever meet with a reply, until Camillus took up the gauntlet as the
British champion. -- It is true, indeed, that his arguments on this subject,
partake so much of the quibbles of the bar, are so inconsistent with the style
of reasoning adopted by statesmen, that, probably, Lord Grenville disdained to
use them -- With all his ingenuity, he has not, however, adduced (...) a
British creditor's being obstructed by our courts in the recovery of his debts.
But, admitting that there had been temporary obstructions arising, either from
the situation of the country or the breach of treaty on the part of Britain,
all that she could possibly ask, was, that these obstructions should be
removed. Now it is admitted that this has been done for more than six years
past; so that the British creditor, from that period, at least, has had the
full effect of the treaty. Upon what pretense, then, must the United States
step in between him and his debtor? Why must the farmer and mechanic be charged
with the debt of the merchant, and states that owe nothing, that never have
made laws of the nature complained of, pay the debts of those that owe much?

But supposing (contrary to the most obvious principles of reason and justice
that the United States should be liable to the British creditors; surely it
would have been sufficient to place them in the situation of the debtor, and
submit themselves to the rules of law which prevailed in the state where the
debt was contracted; these are known to be various in the different states --
in some, for instance, land and slaves are not liable to be sold in fee, for
debts, nor were so when the debt was contracted; in such states the debtor
being dead, etc. it will be very difficult to get at the property in the hands
of the heir. In others, such assignments and conveyances may have been made, as
to put the recovery out of the creditor's power -- In others, laws, limiting
the time for the recovery of debts to a short period may have barred the
demand. All these are risks the creditor knew-he was to run, when he made his
contracts. -- The United States, who were no party to this contract, can
certainly not be bound to secure the British creditor against them, while it
leaves them to operate against their own citizens. But, what is still worse,
even the rules of law, both in the decision and in the admission of evidence,
are to be relaxed in favor of British creditors. What circumstance, either in
the treaty or in reason, can convert all these common law causes into proper
subjects for courts of equity? What shall carry them even beyond the rules
established in courts of equity, which, like courts of law, are bound by
certain known principles -- while these commissioners are to determine,
agreeably to their own (perhaps wild and undeterminate) ideas of equity and
justice? (...) of equity, for instance, would not permit the compla^^ (...)
^^ch to influence the question; yet these commissioners are (...) ^^^wered to
examine " all persons that shall come before them on oath," nor will any courts
admit of extracts as evidence; yet so solicitous has Mr. Jay been to swell the
amount of British debts, and to increase the public debt, that every thing,
copies, papers, depositions, books, extracts, are to be admitted in evidence.
-- It is very extraordinary, that when we complain of an immense loss of
property, by the depredations committed upon our trade, by order of the British
government, and which, of course, they are bound to compensate -- that Mr. Jay's
treaty sends us first to their courts of admiralty to determine the questions
of right, which courts must necessarily determine agreeably to the spirit of
the very instructions we complain of, nor in any case apply to his
commissioners till such admiralty co^rts have decided upon it. The Americans
must go through all the delays, and sustain all the expense of suits in British
courts, to obtain redress for loffes which the British government has
occasioned, while the British creditor is to charge the United States with
debts which they do not owe, without the expense of a suit in any court, and
under the advantages of having all the forms of law relaxed in his favor. --
This is certainly a new species of reciprocity, which nothing but the inventive
genius of Mr. Jay, sharpened by the warmest attachment to Britain, could have
discovered. It is a little extraordinary, too, that when this article was under
consideration, Mr. Jay should not have reflected, that the 4th article of the
treaty of Paris was mutual, that it related to debts of either side; yet Mr.
Jay has made no stipulation for the payment of debts due to us from British
creditors.

It is true, that they have passed no laws to obstruct the recovery of them.
But it is also true, that without such laws their courts of equity have
undertaken to prevent their being recovered. And I need only appeal to the
treasurer of this state (New York) to show the amount that has been paid in
discharge of debts due from persons whose estates have been forfeited, and
which such persons were liable to pay to their creditors: and that, too, in
many cases in which suits had actually been brought in England, and the causes
stopped by their courts. If my memory, serves me, affidavits to this purpose,
from respectable merchants of New York, will be found on the files of our house
of assembly. It cannot be denied, that where the state has discharged such
debts, they are creditors to the amount, and that under the express words of
the treaty of Paris, they have a right to recover. Yet Mr. Jay has carefully
excluded them from the benefit of this article; since he well knew, that the
amount of debts due from British subjects to the states and to individuals,
exceeded the demands of British creditors. Is any so blind as not to see in
this article a continuation of that system which forms the strength of
government upon the most corrupt principles? A public debt is thought necessary
to keep the government together; as if government wanted any strength but that
which she derived from the sense the people had of the advantages they derived
from it. -- New debts are, therefore, to be created under every possible
pretense. New debts will occasion new taxes -- new taxes new officers -- and
new officers new supporters of the government, at the expense of the yeomanry
of the country; for it is observable, that the public creditors, bank holders,
etc. pay no taxes; those burdens are all borne by those who maintain their
state, and nothing is left for these lordlings to do, but to watch over the
safety of government, and sing hosannas to the highest. It was necessary to dry
up the resources of the country, lest the irritation occasioned by British
insolence, and the confirmation of them by treaty, should at length rouse the
spirit of the people; lest, being too rich, they should revolt against that
virtuous supporter of our government, the British nation!

It was foreseen, too, as Camillus acknowledges, that clamours would be excited
by the treaty. The British party might be too weak to silence them. It was a
refined stroke of policy to strengthen their hands by the addition of such
merchants as had unsettled accounts in Britain. The assumption of these debts
by the general government, like the assumption of the state debts, cannot fail
to make many partisans; nothing can be more convenient for the merchant, than
that the farmer, the shopkeeper, the mechanic, the landholder, should discharge
the debts he owes, while he is tearing them to pieces for the principal,
interest, and profit upon that very capital which the state assumes. It may be
said that this may be recovered against him by the state: but every body knows
how negligent public bodies are in the recovery of debts -- how impossible it
will be for them to arrange all the little items of evidence on which the
creditor recovers before the commissioners, especially where he is not consined
to strict legal proof. And at all events, what advantages will not the debtor
derive from many years delay? Can we wonder that some merchants are found in
our cities to advocate a treaty, which enables them to ride on the necks of
their fellow citizens! should we not rather be surprised (when the British
subjects are deducted) to find that number so very small? is it not at once a
proof of their virtue, and the egregious vices of the treaty?

CATO.

No. XV.
THE seventh article is subject, in a constitutional view, to all the
objections which have been noticed in the 6th. Nothing, therefore, remains but
to examine its political character. The first thing that strikes us, is its
studied obscurity, and the extreme solicitude of the parties to render Mr.
Jesserson obnoxious to the censure it might naturally be supposed to draw after
it, by appearing to make it originate in his letter to Mr. Hammond, written at
the moment when the irritation occasioned by the controversy with Mr. Genet was
highest, and when it was doubtful whether a rupture with France would not have
compelled us, according to the then favorite system, to throw ourselves into
the arms of England. This letter, as was natural under these circumstances,
carries our concessions to Britain, far beyond any thing which the laws of
nations will warrant. These only require the restorations of vessels taken in
the ports or waters of the neutral nations if they can be recovered; every
capture under such circumstances being an insult to the nation within the
jurisdiction of whom such capture was made. They also consider it as an
unfriendly act, voluntarily to suffer the vessels of either party to arm
themselves against the other; and should any vessel which had been so armed,
enter their ports with prizes, it would be strictly consonant to the laws of
nations, to order such vessel to depart with her prize. -- But no writer that I
have met with, gives the neutral nation a right to seize a prize, taken on the
high seas, and to restore it to the original owner; -- or much less, binds them
to pay for the prizes so taken, which never entered their ports, merely because
the vessel by which it had been captured, had privately, and without the
consent or knowledge of the neutral government, armed in her ports. Mr.
Jefferson's letter declares the president's opinion to be, that as by treaty
with three nations, we are bound to use all the means in our power, to restore
vessels taken in our ports, waters; or seas near our shores; so he thought the
same protection should be extended to the vessels of Britain, though we had no
such treaty with her -- that if in any particular case, we had forborne or
should forbear, for political reasons, to use the means for the restoring of
such vessels, he then thought we should be bound to make compensation; but
otherwise, where we had used means, and those means proved ineffectual, as we
should not be bound to make restoration to the nations with whom we had
treaties -- he gave no opinion, that it ought to be done to Great Britain; that
the same principle should be extended, even to captures made on the high seas,
by vessels armed in our ports, provided the prizes were brought into our ports.
He concludes, as the result of these sentiments, "And hence, you see, sir, that
the president contemplates restitution or compensation in cases before the 7th
of August [1793] and after that date, restitution, if it can be effected by any
means in our power." From this it appears, that though the president's opinion
was declared as to some cases, yet that as to others he gave no opinion. If,
then, the article had referred, as some have contended, to the letter, for a
definition of the cases in which compensation was to be made, it would be
wholly indefinite, and it must have been left to the discretion of the
commissioners, a majority of whom may be British subjects, to declare the cases
in which the United States shall be liable. As it was, however, possible that a
majority of these commissioners, had the question been left to be construed by
Mr. Jefferson's letter, would not have extended it to the length Lord Grenville
wished, this discretion was taken from them; and the cases, in which the United
States should be liable, carried not only far beyond what the president had
declared to be his opinion, to wit, "The case of prizes taken in our waters,
which we had used no means to have restored, and prizes taken upon the high
seas, by vessels armed in our ports, if brought into our horbours." The treaty
renders us liable, in every possible case, whether it was or was not in our
power to restore the prize; whether it was taken upon the high seas, and sailed
to our own or foreign ports. Nor is the letter referred to in any part of the
article, in order to define the case intended by the article, but merely (if it
had any other object than that I have mentioned) to prevent a second
investigation of the question, where the engagements contained in the letter
had been already fulfilled. This will appear from the preamble, which is always
considered as a key to the article. "And whereas certain merchants and others,
his majesty's subjects, complain, that in the course of the war they have
sustained loss and damage by reason of the captures of the vessels and
merchandise, taken within the limits and jurisdiction of the United States, and
brought into the ports of the same, or taken by vessels originally armed in
ports of the United States; it is agreed that in all such cases, where
restitution shall not have been made, agreeably to the tenor of the letter from
Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, etc. the complaints of the parties shall be
referred to the commissioners," etc.

It is observable, that there is not one word in the article, that confines the
judgment of the commissioners to cases in which we either connived at the
capture, or used no means to restore the prize; nor to the case of prizes,
which, after having been captured on the high seas, came into our ports; but
extends the provision to all cases of vessels taken in our waters, provided
they ever entered into our ports, notwithstanding our having been unable to
recover them; or wherever taken, if by vessels armed in our harbors, whether
they came into our ports or not. The article contains a complete and ample
definition of the cases intended, so that the mention of the letter cannot be
designed, in any sort, to limit the sense; it does not even say that
restitution shall be made agreeably to the tenor of the letter, but "but where
restoration has not been already made agreeably to the tenor of the letter,"
then, in all cases of captures, as described in the preamble, the commissioners
shall determine the amount, and the United States shall pay. The reference to
the letter was to answer the double purpose -- first, of rendering the writer
odious, who, Camillus tells us, was Mr. Jay's rival in his further pursuit of
power, and to preclude the captors, whose prizes had been taken from them
agreeably to the tenor of the letter, from a second hearing before the
commissioners. Thus, then, Mr. Jay has, without any warrant from his own
government, without any equivalent from the British, without any justification
drawn from the law of nations, mortgaged the United States for uncertain and
immeasurable sums. It was not enough, it seems, to relinquish our well founded
claim, for compensation for the detention of our posts -- the loss of our fur
trade -- the property carried off. It was not enough to charge the yeomanry of
the country with the debts of the merchants; but, in addition to this, we must
pay a very considerable part of the havoc that has been made by French
privateers on British property, and this, too, without any real or pretended
equivalent, and while our trade was suffering under British depredations. One
would really suppose that the treasures of the United States were
inexhaustible; that the art of government consisted not in relieving the
burdens of the people, but in adding to their load, that they might crouch the
more before their lordly masters; that instead of seeking for the support of
government by convincing the people of its influence on their happiness, the
object was to work upon our fears only -- to assemble a chosen corpse of stock
jobbers about -- I had almost said the throne -- to make new debts, in order to
acquire new recruits to this valuable band -- to impose new taxes, that the
uneasy sensations occasioned thereby, may afford a pretense to armed supporters
of government to exert their benign influence -- to strengthen these by
innumerable officers, by boards of commissioners (^^^ess than thirteen of which
are provided for by this treaty, by ministers extraordinary, to put the
concluding hand to a variety of matters that are purposely left unfinished by
the treaty); by bands of surveyors, who are, at the expense of the union, to
run over the interior of the country. In short, by adopting every expense which
the profusion of a corrupt government has encouraged in Britain.

CATO.

N. B. As the space allotted for this paper will not admit of my entering upon
a new article, I will indulge myself in a short note, in order to observe, that
Camillus having done me the honor to notice some of my remarks, it will give me
peculiar pleasure, when I can do it without breaking in upon the course of my
observations on the treaty, to address myself to him in reply to his. For the
present I confine myself to request, that his readers and mine will suspend
their judgment of it, until an investigation of his law and his facts shall
enable them to judge of both with some degree of precision. Genius is with
difficulty retained within the limits of either; and as a specimen of the
boldness with which it sometimes overleaps both, I will only refer back to one
of his late papers. In speaking of the Indian trade, he asserts, that
seven-eighths of their trade, exclusive of the Hudson Bay territories, is drawn
from the north side of the lakes; the position I maintain, is directly the
reverse. As neither of us will probably think it delicate to balance the
testimony we have received from individuals, we must recur to other data, to
confirm or refute our respective assertions. Those I shall assume, are so
consonant to known and established facts, that I think I may rely upon
Camillus's candor to admit them. My first position is, that savage nations
hunt chiefly for subsistence, and to procure necessaries which they cannot do
without; that the proportion of this which each enjoys is much the same in the
respective tribes on either side of the lakes; that, therefore, where the
greatest number of savages live by the chase, the greatest quantity of furs and
peltry will be collected, with this difference, that the Indians that are
nearest the market, will be most careful of those they collect; will wear
finer, and exchange more; they will also have a greater taste for luxuries,
which will stimulate their industry and increase their ardour for the chase;
that the bleak regions on the north side of the lake are more thinly inhabited
than those on the south, where not only the difference of latitude, but the
effect of the large bodies of waters in softening the north-west winds, renders
the climate much milder, and better fitted for the habitation of those who live
a savage life. The great trading stations are, therefore, all on the south side
of the lakes.

But let us, for the present, wave all those circumstances, which are so well
known to operate upon the relative proportion of savages to the territory they
inhabit; and let us take the extent of territory as in part the rule by which
to determine the number of inhabitants; it will even then be found, that the
trading country of the United States is near four times larger than that of
Canada, exclusive of the limits of the Hudson's Bay company. Camillus professes
to be ignorant of the extent of their boundary, which, I must own, surprises
me; since he assures us, that he has made the fur trade an object of enquiry
for years back; and more particularly as it appears, from the whole course of
his writing, that he can command any materials in the power of Mr. Jay. It is
hardly conceivable, that this gentleman, when treating on the subject of those
limits in London, where every document of this kind could be instantly
acquired, would have been so extremely negligent, as not to have possessed
himself of the settlement by the commissioners, after the treaty of Utrecht,
and the still more extended claim of the company, to which, without doubt, the
utmost latitude will now be allowed. The southern boundary of the Hudson Bay
company, as settled by commissioners, subsequent to the treaty of Utrecht, is
the forty-ninth degree of north latitude, in the whole extent, till it meets
with the head of Moose river, which brings it one third of a degree more south,
thence it runs a north-east course, nearly parallel with the St. Lawrence
river, along the heights that divide the waters which fall into Hudson's Bay,
from those that run into the St. Lawrence. This line runs within twenty miles
of the north side of the lake of the Woods; supposing, as the latest
geographers do, that lake to lie in forty-eight degrees and forty minutes north
latitude. If, therefore, a line run from that lake due west, should intersect
the Mississippi, or if not, till it intersects a line drawn from the head of
that river, due north, till in meets the west line so drawn from the lake of
the Woods, which must, in that case, be our boundary, it will only leave a
strip of country of less than 30 miles in extent, to the north; nor will it be
much broader on the north of lake Superior. To the west of the Mississippi, the
British have no claim. Should the lake of the Woods lie one half a degree
higher, which is very probable, if we judge from most maps of that country, our
line will overtop that of the Hudson Bay company. But whether it does or not,
the only Indian territory on the north side of the lakes, of the least
consequence, is the space surrounded by the lakes, and bounded on the east by
the Ottawa river, which empties itself at Montreal. The country east of that, I
presume, cannot be frequented by our traders any more than the country east of
the Hudson: And by their deducting both these from our account, and placing the
Mississippi four degrees to the west of the lake of the Woods, the British
Indian territory will be found (after deducting the great lake and settled
country on both sides) to be, to that of the United States, as 15 is to 55. As
to any territory to the west of the Mississippi, I know of no ground whatever
on which it can be claimed by the British; the west and north west coasts of
America being actually possessed by Spain and Russia, who made the first
discoveries there, and not by Britain) even if we should hold so absurd a
doctrine, as to suppose that either one or the other could give a title to that
great inland territory. After this statement of facts, if we take into
consideration the infinitely greater population of the southern than the
northern nations, it will not, I believe, be deemed extravagant to assert, that
the Indian trade on our territory is ten times greater than that on the British
side of the lakes. How greatly, then, must. Camillus have been deceived, even
though he has been for years past, as he tells us, collecting information on
this subject? How suspicious should it render him and his readers, when he
makes assertions relative to matters with which he has taken less time to make
himself acquainted? The limits of this paper will not permit me to travel from
his facts to his law, or to compliment him upon the ingenuity with which he
makes a judgment, in the reign of Elizabeth, a commentary upon an act which
passed in that of Charles the Second, half a century afterward. It would,
perhaps, have been more in point, to have shown any one decision of Lord Coke,
in which a bare implication was said to overruled an express statute. But an
extraordinary defense requires as extraordinary means of defense. As I greatly
respect the talents of Camillus, I cannot but with sympathy enter into his
feelings, when this rash undertaking compels him to sin against his better
judgment,

CATO.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
FROM THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE. No. I. An Examination of the pending Treaty
with Great Britain.
To the President of the United States of America.
SIR,
NOTWITHSTANDING the great happiness, which results from free government, it
remains to be regretted by the temperate friends of liberty, that party-spirit
and party-measures are "consequential ills which freedom draws." The people of
the United States, enjoying in their social connection, an unequalled portion
of the natural rights of individuals, have been from that cause, peculiarly
subjected to the operations of party-causes and party-springs. Local
circumstances, inaccurately appreciated, have contributed to increase the evil;
and the accidentally unequal course of some of the first advantages, which
resulted from our reunion and reform in 1789, had a strong, though temporary,
effect upon large portions of the people, disposing them to suspicions,
jealousies, and fears.

At a time, when the United States were under these circumstances and
impressions, an unexampled conflict arose in the old world. Though our remote
situation has saved us from being inveloped in the devouring flame, even the
broad Atlantic has not interposed a sufficient distance to screen us from the
wide and mighty fire, with which Europe is consumed: and upon this occasion the
zealous agents of more than one nation have been led, by their passions and our
own, into more than ordinary operations upon our private opinions and our
public councils.

It has been happy for this country, sir, that the influence of these causes
has not been extended to your mind. It is a most comfortable reflection to
considerate men of all parties, that you have been actuated by a sincere desire
of common good in our domestic operations, and by impartial views in our
foreign relations and concerns.

It is hoped, that the freedom of these preliminary remarks will not give
offense to any of our fellow citizens. They are made solely from a conviction,
that in our free government it is an object of primary importance to be aware
of existing causes of prejudice and heat at the moment of interesting
discustions. It is hoped, sir, that these prefatory observations will appear to
be pertinent, as they regard your present delicate and important relation to
the subject, which it is proposed to examine -- a relation which attracts to
you the undivided solicitudes of the American people and of their friends and
foes. May the God, whom we serve, fill your mind with the knowledge of what
concerns our peace, at this awful moment, when he has ordained the swords of
all civilized nations (except this highly favored people) to be either prepared
for defense, or to be most destructively exercised against each other.

In considering the treaty, lately concluded between Mr. Jay and Lord
Grenville, three questions arise.

I. Whether it is expedient to adopt it, as it was made. II. Whether it is
expedient to reject it, without further endeavors to adjust the subject
matters: and III. Whether it is expedient to pursue further amicable measures,
satisfactorily and equitably to adjust the subject matters.
On the first question, the senate appear to have been unanimous in judgment,
that "it was not expedient to adopt the treaty as it was made," because
two-thirds of that body have advised you to procure certain alterations, and
the remainder of that body voted for some other alterations. Your own
sentiments upon the necessity of amendments are unknown, and it is the object
of this examination respectfully to lay before you such considerations, as
appear to recommend the employment of this term of suspension to procure all
such meliorations of the treaty, as candid and reasonable investigation shall
point out. This contribution to the collection of materials, whereon you will
form your ultimate determinations, may prove to be very small. But that
reflection ought not to restrain well intentioned individuals from contributing
their mites to the public service.

On the second question, it appears, that the senate were also unanimous in
their judgment, that "it is not expedient to reject the treaty without further
friendly endeavors to adjust the subject matters." For the opponents to the act
of the senate, explicitly recommended further amicable negotiation of the
treaty with Great Britain: and the act itself, carried by a respectable
majority, This majority of two to one, has been considered as a bare majority,
because it was a bare quorum.
advises that mode of procedure.

On the third question, stated above, the members of the senate appear likewise
to have been unanimous, "that it is enpedient to pursue further amicable
measures to adjust satisfactorily and equitably the subject matters of the
treaty."

It has been already observed, sir, that the course of the business has not yet
unfolded the state of your mind. It is yet unknown, whether the patriotic and
respectable citizen, who was charged with the business on the part of the
United States, was able to accomplish all the objects of his instructions,
conformably with your judgment; and it is also unknown, whether he was led, by
the course of the negotiation, to contract for objects, which your instructions
had not anticipated, though his general powers may duly include them.

Although every member of the senate has discountenanced the twelfth article,
as it now stands, yet as it is advised that amendments be procured, one remark
on a point apparently important will be here offered. Besides the great
deviation from reciprocity in regard to the tonnage of our vessels and of
theirs in the West India trade, the stipulations respecting goods are also
unequal. In our limited vessels we may import only such articles as can now by
the British laws be exported from the West India islands. These are about six
enumerated articles, one of which is rarely exported. But in their ships of
unlimited size they can export all West India articles, which now may, by the
laws of the United States, be imported into this country -- that is to say,
every thing which is or can be produced by nature, or by cultivation, and every
thing manufactured in the West India islands. Whether this was perceived and
intended, and, if it was intended, why so clear a departure from reciprocity
was agreed to, appear, sir, to be sit objects of your consideration.

In order accurately to determine the importance of this plain discrimination
against us, it may be useful to inspect the list of the commodities, which
British vessels may import into the United States by their own application of
an act of parliament to this article, and which cannot be imported in our
vessels during the existence of the treaty. The principal articles are at
present as follow: cotton, indigo, limes, lemons, oranges, turtle, dried and
salted hides, yams, mahogany and other cabinet woods, lign^^ vitae, fustic,
logwood and other dye woods. As the productions of the West Indies shall be
varied and extended by agricultural enterprise, our privilege will be
constantly narrowed, and their unequal right, under the treaty, extended in
proportion.

There are parts of the pending treaty, which carry the appearance of new or
extended grants to aliens of the right to hold lands, and which would enable
foreigners to receive them by descent and purchase within the United States.
Serious doubts exist, whether the formation and establishment of the
regulations concerning the tenure, acquisition and descent of lands within the
states, has been in any, the least degree, committed by the acts of the
conventions to the general government. The raising of this question is
sufficient, sir, to insure it due consideration from you, whose judgment on the
constitution is your guide. If it be said, that the passages referred to in
some degree confirm what the ancient law and the treaty of 1783 had been before
secured to those foreigners, then it may be enquired, whether a precise and
explicit reference back to that former state of things would not have been most
prudent and safe. But it will not be disputed that the present treaty goes
beyond the rights of the untenati. It may be politic to admit foreigners to
hold lands, and it may be right to secure such as have been conveyed in trust
to discharge just debts; but if the state legislatures have now that power
exclusively, from the entire omission of a grant of it to the general
government, it will be questioned, whether that part of the treaty can be
ratified, without a retrospective amendment of the constitution, or the consent
of the legislatures of those states, in which any of the lands may lie. If it
is urged, that a former treaty gave all or some of these privileges to French
citizens, it may be observed, that such doctrine is of a very recent date, that
it might appear on investigation to be erroneous, that the French treaty was
made under the old confederation of the states, and underwent a different
ratification, and was not made under the present definite constitution. It may
prevent uneasiness and inconvenience to anticipate, in time for thorough
examination, the possibility, that the judicial courts might decide against the
existence of any power in the general government over the tenure, and
particularly over the acquisition, and the descent of lands within the several
states.

I have the honor to be, with sincere and perfect respect, Sir, Your most
obedient, and Most humble servant, JURICOLA.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM VOL. I. PAGE 287.]

No. XVI.
THE second object of the seventh article, as stated in my last number, is
"compensation to British citizens, for captures of their property within the
limits and jurisdiction of the United States, or elsewhere, by vessels
originally armed in our ports, in the cases in which the captured property
having come within our power, there was a neglect to make restitution."

This precise view of the thing stipulated, is calculated to place the whole
subject at once before the mind, in its true shape; to evince the
reasonableness of it, and to dismiss the objections which have been made, as
being foreign to the real state of the case. These objections are, in
substance, that the compensation promised is of great extent and amount; that
an enormous expense is likely to be incurred; and that it is difficult to
prove, that a neutral nation is under an obligation to go the lengths of the
stipulation.

These remarks obviously turn upon the supposition, erroneously entertained or
disingenuously affected, -- that compensation is to be made for all captures
within our limits or jurisdiction, or elsewhere, by vessels originally armed in
our ports, where restitution has not, in fact, been made. Did the stipulation
stand on this broad basis, it would be justly liable to the criticism which has
been applied to it. -- But the truth is, that its basic is far more narrow --
that instead of extending to all those captures, it is confined to the
particular cases of them only, in which the captured property came, or was,
after the capture, within our power, so as to have admitted of restitution by
us, but restitution was not made, through the omission or neglect of our
government. It does not extend to a single case, where the property, if taken
within our jurisdiction, was immediately carried out of our reach -- or where,
if taken without our jurisdiction, it was never brought within our reach -- or
where, if at any time within our reach, due means were employed without success
to effect restitution.

It will follow from this, that the cases within the purview of the article,
must be very few -- for, except with regard to three prizes, made in the first
instance, where special considerations restrained the government from
interposing, there has been a regular and constant effort of the executive, in
which our courts have efficaciously co-operated, to restore prizes made within
our jurisdiction, or by vessels armed in our ports. The extent or amount,
therefore, of the compensation to be made, can by no possible means be
considerable.

Let us, however, examine if the construction I give to the clause be the true
one.

It is in these words: -- "It is agreed that in all such cases where
restitution shall not have been made agreeably to the tenor of the letter from
Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated September 5th, 1793, a copy of which is
annexed to this treaty, the complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are
referred to the commissioners to be appointed by virtue of this article, who
are hereby authorized and required to proceed in the like manner relative to
these as to the other cases committed to them; and the United States undertake
to pay to the complainants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such
sums as shall be awarded to them respectively," etc.

The letter of Mr. Jefferson, by this reference to it, and its annection to the
treaty, is made virtually a part of the treaty. The cases in which compensation
is promised, are expressly those in which restitution has not been made,
agreebly to the tenor of that letter.

An analysis of the letter will of course unfold the cases intended.

1. It recapitulates an assurance before given by a letter of the 7th August,
to the British minister, that measures were taken for excluding from further
asylum in our ports, vessels armed in them to cruise on nations with which we
were at peace, and for the restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince
William Henry, and the Jane of Dublin; and that, should the measures of
restitution fail in their effect, the president considered it as incumbent on
the United States, to make compensation for the vessels. These vessels had been
captured by French privateers, originally armed in our ports, and had been
afterward brought within our ports.

2. It states, that we are bound by our treaties with three of the belligerent
nations, France, Holland, and Prussia, and our treaty with Sweden includes a
like proviso.
by all the means in our power, to protect and defend their vessels and effects
in our ports or waters, or on the seas near our shore, and to recover and
restore the same to the right owners, when taken from them; adding, that if all
the means in our power are used, and fail in their effect, we are not bound by
our treaties to make compensation. It further states, that though we have no
similar treaty with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the president, that we
should use toward that nation the same rule which was to govern us with those
other nations, and even to extend it to captures made on the high seas and
brought into our ports, if done by vessels which had been armed within them.

3. It then draws this conclusion, that having, for particular reasons, forbore
to use all means in our power for the restitution of the three vessels
mentioned in the letter of the 7th of August. -- The president thought it
incumbent upon the United States to make compensation for them: and though
nothing was said in that letter, of other vessels, taken under like
circumstances and brought in after the 5th June, and before the date of that
letter, yet when the same forbearance had taken place, it was his opinion, that
compensation would be equally due. The cases, then, here described, are those
in which illegal prizes are made, and brought into our ports, prior to the 7th
of August, 1793, and in which we had forborne to use all the means in our power
for restitution. Two characters are made essential to the cases in which the
compensation is to be made; one, that the prizes were brought within our ports
-- the other, that we forbore to use all the means in our power to restore them.

4. The letter proceeds to observe, that, as to prizes made under the same
circumstances, and brought in after the date of that letter, the president had
determined, that all means in our power should be used for their restitution;
that if these failed, as we should not be bound to make compensation to the
other powers, in the analogous case, he did not mean to give an opinion, that
it ought to be done to Great Britain. But still, if any case shall arise,
subsequent to that date, the circumstances of which shall place them on a
similar ground with those before it, the president would think compensation
incumbent on the United States. The additional cases of which an expectation of
compensation is given in this part of the letter, must stand on similar ground
with those before described -- that is, they must be characterised by the two
circumstances of a bringing within our ports, and a negle^^ to use all the
means in our power for their restitution. Every where the idea of compensation
is negatived, where the prizes have not come within our power, or where we have
not forborne to use the proper means to restore them.

The residue of the letter merely contains suggestions for giving effect to the
foregoing assurances.

This analysis leaves no doubt that the true construction is such as I have
stated. Can there be any greater doubt that the expectations given by the
president, in the first instance, and which have been only ratified by the
treaty, were in themselves proper, and have been properly ratified?

The laws of nations, as dictated by reason, as receive and practiced upon
among nations, as recognized by writers, establish these principles for
regulating the conduct of neutral powers.

A neutral nation (except as to points to which it is clearly obliged by
antecedent treaties) whatever may be its opinion of the justice or injustice of
the war on either side, cannot, without departing from its neutrality, favor
one of two belligerent parties more than the other -- benefit one, to the
prejudice of the other -- furnish or permit the furnishing to either, the
instruments of acts of hostility, or any warlike succor or aid whatever,
especially without extending the same advantage to the other -- cannot suffer
any force to be exerted, or warlike enterprise to be carried on from its
territory, by one party against the other, or the preparation or organization
there, of the means of annoyance; has a right and is bound to prevent acts of
hostility within its jurisdiction; and, if they happen against its will, to
restore any property which may have been taken in exercising them. These
positions will all be found supported in the letter or spirit of the following
authorities; Barbeyrac's note on Puffendor^^, b. viii. c. vi. s. 7. Grotius, b.
iii. c. xvii. s. 3. Bynkershoeck, b. i. c. viii. p. 61 -- 65. c. xi. p. 69 --
70. Vattel, b. iii. c. vii. Bynkershoeck cites examples of restitution in the
case mentioned.

Every treaty we have made with foreign powers, promises protection within our
jurisdiction, and the restoration of property taken there. A similar
stipulation is, indeed, a general formula in treaties, giving an express
sanction to the rule of the laws of nations in this particular.

An act of congress, of the 5th June, 1794, which is expressly a declaratory
act, recognizes at large the foregoing principles of the laws of nations,
providing, among other things, for the punishment of any person, who, within
the United States, fits out and arms, or attempts to fit out and arm, or
procures to be fitted out and armed, or is knowingly concerned in furnishing,
fitting out, or arming, of any ship or vessel, with intent to be employed in
the service of a foreign state, to cruise or commit hostilities upon the
subjects or citizens of another foreign state, with which the United States are
at peace; or issues or delivers a commission for any such ship or vessel, or
increases or augments, or procures to be increased or augmented, or is
knowingly concerned in increasing or augmenting the force of any ship of war,
cruiser, or other armed vessel, in the service of a foreign state at war with
another foreign state, with which the United States are at peace; or within the
territory of the United States, begins or fets on foot, or provides or prepares
the means of any military expedition or enterprise, to be carried on from
thence against the dominions of any foreign state, with which the United States
are at peace.

And our courts have adopted, in its fullest latitude, as conformable, in their
opinion, with those laws, the principle of restitution of property, when either
captured within our jurisdiction, or elsewhere, by vessels armed in our ports.
The supreme court of the United States has given to this doctrine, by solemn
decisions, the most complete and comprehensive sanction.

It is therefore, undoubtedly, the law of the land, determined by the proper
constitutional tribunal, in the last resort, that restitution is due in the
above mentioned cases.

And it is a direct and necessary consequence from this, that where it is not
made by reason of the neglect of the government, to use the means in its power
for the purpose; there results an obligation to make reparation. For, between
nations, as between individuals, wherever there exists a perfect obligation to
do a thing, there is a concomitant obligation to make reparation for omissions
and neglects.

The president was therefore most strictly justifiable, upon principle, in the
opinion which he communicated, that, in the cases of such omissions or
neglects, compensation ought to be made. And in point of policy, nothing could
be wiser: for had he not done it, there is the highest probability, that war
would have ensued.

Our treaty with France forbids us expressly to permit the privateers of the
enemy to arm in our ports, or to bring or sell there the prizes which they have
made upon her. We could not, for that reason, have made the privilege of arming
in our ports, if it had been allowed to France, reciprocal. -- The allowance of
it to her would, consequently, have been a clear violation of neutrality, in
the double sense of permitting a military aid, and of permitting it to the one,
and refusing it to the other. Had we suffered France to equip privateers in our
ports, to cruise thence upon her enemies, and to bring back and vend there the
spoils or prizes taken, we should have become by this the most mischievous foe
they could have. For, while all our naval resources might have augmented the
force of France, our neutrality, if tolerated, would, in a great degree, have
sheltered and protected her cruisers. Such a state of things no nation at war
could have acqui^sced in. And as well to the efficacy of our endeavors to
prevent equipments in our ports, as to the proof of the sincerity of those
endeavors, it was essential that we should restore the prizes which came
within our reach, made by vessels armed in our ports. It is known, that
notwithstanding the utmost efforts of the government to prevent it, French
privateers have been clan-destinely equipped in some of our ports, subsequent
to the assurances which were given, that the practice would be discountenanced.
If prizes made by such vessels were suffered to be brought into our ports, and
sold there, this would be not only a very great encouragement to the practice,
but it would be impossible that it should be regarded in any other light than
as a connivance.

In such circumstances, can we blame our chief magistrate? Can we even deny him
praise, for having diverted an imminent danger to our peace, by incurring the
responsibility of giving an expectation of compensation? The conjuncture we may
remember was critical and urgent. Congress were at the time in recess. A due
notice to convene them in so extensive a country, can hardly be rated at less
than three months.

In this situation our envoy found the business. It is not true, in the sense
in which it has been advanced, that he was to be governed by the fitness of the
thing, unmindful of the opinion of the president. An opinion of the chief
magistrate of the union, was to a diplomatic agent an authority and a guide,
which he could not justifiably have disregarded. -- The claim of compensation,
on the other side, was greatly fortified by this opinion: Nor was it a matter
of indifference to our national delicacy and dignity, that the expectation
given by it should be fulfilled. It would have been inde^ent in our envoy to
have resisted it. It was proper in him, by acceding to it, to refer the matter
to the ultimate decision of that authority, which, by our constitution, is
charged with the power of making treaties. It was the more proper, because the
thing was intrinsically right. Every candid man, every good citizen, will
rejoice that the president acted as he did in the first instance -- that our
envoy acted as he did in the second -- and that the conduct of both has
received the final constitutional sanction.

The opinions of Mr. Jefferson, when they can be turned to the discredit of the
treaty, are with its adversaries oracular truths. When they are to support it,
they lose all their weight. The presumption, that the letter referred to had
the concurrence of the judgment of that officer, results from a fact, generally
understood and believed, namely, that the proceedings of the president, at the
period when it was written, in relation to the war, were conformable with the
unanimous advice of the heads of the executive departments.

This case of British property captured by privateers originally armed in our
ports, falsifies the assertion of the adversaries of the treaty, that the
pretensions of Great Britain have been fully provided for. She had a colorable
ground to claim compensation for all captures made by vessels armed in our
ports, whithersoever carried in, or howsoever disposed of, especially where
their equipment had been tolerated by our government. This toleration was to be
referred, as well from a forbearance to suppress those vessels when they came
within power, as from an original permission. Had compensation been stipulated
on this scale, it is not certain that it would not have amounted to as much
more than that which has been promised, as would counterbalance our claims, for
negroes carried away, and for the detension of the posts. But instead of this,
it is narrowed down by the treaty to such prizes of those vessels as were
brought within our ports, and in respect to which we forbore to use all the
means in our power for restitution. Here, then is a set off against doubtful
and questionable claims relinquished on our side. Here, also, is another proof
how much the antagonists of the treaty are in the habit of making random
assertions. But can we wonder at it, when we reflect that they have undertaken
to become the instructors of their fellow citizens on a subject, in the
examination of which they unite a very superficial knowledge with the most
perverse dispositions?

CAMILLUS.

No. XVII.
THE eighth article provides merely, that the commissioners to be appointed in
the three preceding articles, shall be paid in such manner as shall be agreed
between the parties, at the time of the exchange of the ratification of the
treaty; and that all other expenses attending the commissions, shall be
defrayed jointly by the two parties, the same being previously ascertained and
allowed by a majority of the commissioners; and that in case of death,
sickness, or necessary absence of a commissioner, his place shall be supplied
in the same manner as he was first appointed -- the new commissioner to take
the same oath or affirmation, and to perform the same duties as his predecessor.

Could it have been imagined, that even this simple and equitable provision was
destined not to escape uncensured? As if it was predetermined, that not a
single line of the treaty should pass without the imputation of guilt; nothing
less than an infraction of the constitution of the United States has been
charged upon this article. It attempts, we are told, a disposition of the
public money, unwarranted by and contrary to the constitution. -- The
examination of this wonderful, sagacious objection, with others of a similar
complexion, must be reserved for the separate discussion which has been
promised of the constitutionality of the treaty.

Let us proceed, for the present, to the ninth article.

This article agrees, that British subjects, who now hold lands in the
territories of the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in
the dominions of his Britannic majesty, shall continue to hold them, according
to the nature and tenure of their respective estates and titles therein; and
may grant, sell, or devise the same to whom they please, in like manner as if
they were natives; -- and that neither they, nor their heirs or assigns, so far
as may respect the said lands, and the legal remedies incidental thereto, shall
be regarded as aliens.

The misapprehension of this article, which was first ushered into public view,
in a very incorrect and insidious shape, and was conceived to amount to the
grant of an indefinite and permanent right to British subjects to hold lands in
the United States, did more, it is believed, to excite prejudices against the
treaty, than any thing that is really contained in it. And yet when truly
understood, it is found to be nothing more than a confirmation of those rights
to lands, which, prior to the treaty, the laws of the several states allowed
British subjects to hold; -- with this inconsiderable addition, perhaps, that
the heirs and assigns of those persons, though aliens, may hold the same lands:
but no right whatever is given to lands of which our laws did not permit and
legalize the acquisition.

These propositions will now be elucidated.

The term, hold, in the legal code of Great Britain and of these states, has
the same and that a precise technical sense -- It imports a capacity legally
and rightfully to have and enjoy real estate, and is contradistinguished from
the mere capacity of taking or purchasing, which is sometimes applicable to the
acquisition of a thing, that is forfeited by the very act of acquisition. Thus
an an alien may take real estate by purchase, but he cannot hold it. Holding is
synonimous with tenure, which, in the feudal system, implies fealty, of which
an alien is incapable. Land, therefore, is forfeited to the government, the
instant it passes to an alien. The Roman law nullifies the contract entirely;
so that nothing passes by the grant of land to an alien: but out law, derived
from that of England, permits the land to pass for the purpose of forfeiture to
the state. This is not the case with regard to descent, because the succession
or transmission there, being an act of law, and the alien being disqualified to
hold, the law, consistent with itself, casts no estate upon him.

The following legal authorities, selected from an infinite number of similar
ones, establish the above positions, viz. COKE on LITTLETON, page 2, 3. --
"Some men have capacity to purchase, but not ability to hold. Some, capacity to
purchase and ability to hold or not to hold, at the election of themselves and
others. Some, capacity to take and to hold. Some, neither capacity to take nor
to hold, And, some are specially disabled to take some particular thing. -- If
an alien, Christian or Infidel, purchase houses, lands, tenements, or
hereditaments to him and his heirs, albeit he can have no heirs, yet he is of
capacity to take a fee simple, but not to hold." -- The same, page 8. "If a man
seized of land in fee, has issue an alien, he cannot be heir, propter defectum
subjectianis." -- Blackstone's commentaries, book II. chap. xviii. 2.
"Alienation to an alien is a cause of forfeiture to the crown of the lands so
alienated, not only on account of his incapacity to hold them, but likewise on
account of his presumption in attempting, by an act of his own, to acquire real
property." Idem, chap. xix. 1. "the case of an alien born, is also peculiar;
for he may purchase a thing; but, after purchase, he can hold nothing, except a
lease for years of a house, for the convenience of merchandise."

Thus it is evident, that by the laws of England, which it will not be denied,
agree in principle with ours, an ALIEN may take but cannot hold lands.

It is equally clear, the laws of both countries agreeing in this particular,
that the word hold, used in the article under consideration, must be understood
according to those laws, and therefore can only apply to those cases in which
there was a legal capacity to hold -- in other words, those in which our laws
permitted the subjects and citizens of the two parties to hold lands in the
territories of each other. Some of these cases existed prior to the treaty of
peace; and where confiscations had not taken place, there has never been a
doubt, that the property was effectually protected by that treaty -- Others
have arisen since that treaty, under special statutes of particular states.
Whether there are (...) others depending on the principles of the common law,
need not be enquired into here, since the late treaty will neither strengthen
nor impair the operation of those principles.

Whatever lands, therefore, may have been purchased by any British subject,
since the treaty of peace, which the laws of the state wherein they were
purchased did not permit him to acquire and hold, are entirely out of the
protection of the article under consideration; the purchase will not avail him;
the forfeiture, which was incurred by it, is still in full force. 'As to those
lands which the laws of a state allowed him to purchase and hold, he owes his
title to them, not to the treaty.

Let us recur to the words of the article, "British subjects, who now hold
lands, shall continue to hold them according to the nature and tenure of their
respective estates and titles therein." But it has been seen, that to hold
lands is to own them in a legal and competent capacity, and that an alien has
no such capacity. The lands, therefore, which, by reason of the alienage of a
British subject, he could not, prior to the treaty, legally purchase and hold
-- he cannot, under the treaty, continue to hold. As if it was designed to
render this conclusion palpable, the provision goes on to say, "According to
the nature and tenure of their respective estates and titles therein." This is
equivalent to saying, they shall continue to hold as they before held. If they
had no valid estate or title before, they will of course continue to have none
-- the expressions neither give any new, nor enlarge any old estate.

The succeeding clauses relate only to descents or alienations of the land
originally legally holden. Here the disability of alienage is taken away from
the heirs and assigns of the primitive proprietors. While this will conduce to
private justice, by enabling the families and friends of the individuals to
enjoy their property by descent or devise, which it is presumable, was the main
object of the provision, there is no consideration of national policy that
weighs against it. If we admit the whole force of the argument, which opposes
the expediency of permitting aliens to hold lands (and concerning which I shall
barely remark here, that it is contrary to the practice of several of the
states, and to a practice from which some of them have hitherto derived
material advantages) the extent to which the principle is affected by the
present treaty is too limited to be felt, and in the rapid mutations of
property, it will every day diminish. Every alienation of a parcel of the
privileged land to a citizen of the United States, will, as to that land, by
interrupting the chain, put an end to the future operation of the privilege;
and the lapse of no great number of years may be expected to make an entire
revolution in the property, so as to divest the whole of the privilege.

To manifest the unreasonableness of the loud and virulent clamor, which was
excited against this article, it has been observed by the friends of the
instrument, that our treaty with France not only grants a much larger privilege
to the citizens of France, but goes the full length of removing universally and
perpetually from them the disability of alienism, as to the ownership of lands.
This position has been flatly denied by some of the writers on the other side.
Decius in particular, after taking pains to show that it is erroneous -- that
the terms "goods moveable and immovable," in the article of our treaty with
France, mean only chattels real and personal in the sense of our law, and
exclude a right to the freehold and inheritance of lands, triumphantly plumes
himself on the detection of a fallacy of the writer of certain "candid remarks
on the treaty," who gives the interpretation above stated to that article.

The error of Decius's interpretation, proceeds from a misunderstanding of the
term goods, in the English translation of the article, to which he annexes the
meaning assigned to that term in our law, instead of resorting, as he ought to
have done, to the French laws for the true meaning of the correspondent term
biens, which is that used in the French original. Goods, in our law, no doubt,
mean chattel interests: but goods or "biens" in the French law, mean all kinds
of property, real as well as personal. It is equivalent to, and derived from,
the term bona, in the Roman law, answering most nearly to "estates" in our law,
and embracing inheritances in land, corporeal and incorporeal hereditaments, as
well as property in moveable things.

When it is necessary to distinguish one species from another, it is done by an
adjective -- "biens meubles et immeubles," answering to bona or res mobilia, or
immobilia, things moveable and immovable, estates real and personal. -- The
authorities at foot Justinian's Institutes, Lib. iii. Tit. 10, 11, 12, 13. Lib.
iv. Tit. 2. Domat's Civil and Public Law. Prel. Book, Tit. 3, Sect. 1, 2. Book
iv. Sect. 1.
will show the analogy of these different terms in the three different
languages; but for fixing the precise sense of those used in the treaty, I have
selected and shall quote two authorities from French books, which are clear and
conclusive on the point. -- One will be found in the work of a French lawyer,
entitled, Collection DE DECISIONS NOUVELLES, ET DE NOTIONS RELATIVES A LA
JURISPRUDENCE ACTUELLE, under the Article BIENS Biens. Le mot, bien, a une
signification generale, and comprend toutes sorts de possessions, comme
meubles, immeubles, acquts, conquts, propres, etc. On distingue dans l^s biens
des particuliers, les meubles and les immeubles, Jes acquts and les propres:
and enter les propres, les paternels and les maternels, les anciens and les
naissans. Les biens meubles sont ceu^ qui peuvent se mouvoir and se transporter
d'un lieu en un autre, comme des denrees, des marchandises, de deniers
comptans, de la vaisselle d'argent, des bestiau^, des utensiles d'hotel. Les
biens immeubles sont ceux qui ne peuvent se mouvoir ou se transporter d'un lieu
dans un autre, comme des heritages, des maisons, etc.


, and is in these words, viz. "The word bien has a general signification, and
comprehends all sorts of possessions, as movables, immoveables, purchases,
acquisitions by marriage, inheritances, etc. It is distinguished into these
particulars, movables, immoveables, purchases, and inheritances, subdividing
inheritances into p^ternal and maternal, old and new. Moveable biens are those
which may be moved and transported from one place to another, as wares,
merchandises, and current money, plate, beasts, household utensils, etc.
Immovable biens are those which cannot be moved from one place to another, as
inheritances, houses, etc. Biens are distinguished again into corporeal and
incorporeal" Another Biens -- C'est en generale tout ce qui compose nos
richesses; il y a deux sorts de biens, les meubles and les immeubles; meubles,
tout ce qui peut etre transpor^e d'un lieu (...) un autre: immeubles -- biens
en fonds, ou qui sont presume avoir la nature de fonds -- On distingue deux
sorts d'immeubles, les reels, and les fictifs; les immeubles reels sont non
seulement la substance mem^ de la terre qui est ce qu'on appelle le fond, mais
tout ce qui est adherent a sa surface, foit par la nature, comme les arbres,
soit par la main des hommes, comme les maisons and autre batiments -- On a
appelle l'autre espece d'immeubles, immeubles sictifs; parce qu'ils ne sont
tells que par fiction; de ce nombre sont les offices venaux, casuels, and les
rentes constitutes.
is drawn from the celebrated institutes of the French law, by Mr. Argou, and
is in these words, "Biens -- This is in general whatever composes our riches.
There are two sorts of biens, moveable and immovable. Moveable, all that may
be transported from one place to another. Immovable, lands or what is presumed
to have the nature of land. They are distinguished into two kinds, real and
fictitious. Real are not only the substance of the earth, which is called
fonds; but all that adheres to its surface, whether from nature, as trees, or
from the hand of man, as houses and other buildings. The others are called
fictitious, because they are only real by fiction, as offices which are
vendible, and subject to fiscal reversion, rent-charges," etc. The
signification of bona in the Roman law, corresponds, as was observed above,
with that of biens in the French. "Bonorum appellatio universitatem quandem, et
non singulas res demonstrat;" which may be rendered, "The appellation of BONA
designates the totality of property or estate, and not particular things." --
And hence it is, that the cessio bonorum of a debtor is the surrender of his
whole fortune.

Both these terms, "bona" and "biens," are indiscriminately translated goods,
estates, effects, property. See authorities before cited: (...) Puss^^dorff,
book viii. chapter 5. sect. 8. Groti^s, book iii. chapter 5. sect. 11, 12. V^^te^, book
1. chapter 20. sect. 245, 246, 247.
-- In our treaty with France they are translated "goods;" but it is evidently
a great mistake to understand the expression in the limited sense of our law.
Being a mere word of translation, it must be understood according to the
meaning of the French text; for it is declared in the conclusion of the treaty,
that it was originally composed and concluded in the French tongue. Moreover,
the term goods, when used in our language, as the equivalent of the term bon^,
or biens, is always understood in the large sense of the original term; in
other words, as comprehending real and personal estate, inheritances as well as
chattel interests.

Having now established the true meaning of the terms "goods moveable and
immovable," let us proceed with this guide to a review of the article.

Its first and principal feature is, "that the subjects and inhabitants of the
United States, or any of them, shall not be reputed AUBAINS in France. This is
the same as if it had been said, "they shall not be reputed ALIENS." For the
definition of AUBAINS, as given in the work before first cited, is this --
"AUBAINS are persons not born under the dominion of the king," the exact
equivalent of the definition of ALIEN in the English law. If our citizens are
not to be reputed aliens in France, it follows, that they must be exempted from
alien disabilities, and must have the same rights with natives, as to
acquiring, conveying, and succeeding to real and other estate. Accordingly the
article, having pronounced that our citizens shall not be reputed aliens in
France, proceeds to draw certain consequences. The first is, that they shall
not be subject to the droit d'aubaine. The droit d'aubaine was, under the
monarchy, one ^f the regalia; it was the right of the prince to succeed to all
estates or property situate in the kingdom, belonging to foreigners, who died
without legitimate children, born in the kingdom.

It is to be observed, that the laws of France permitted foreigners to acquire
and hold even real estates, subject to the right of the sovereign, in case of
demise without issue born under his allegiance. But this right of the
sovereign, as to American citizens, is abrogated by the treaty; so that their
legal representatives, wherever born, may succeed to all the property, real or
personal, which they may have acquired in France.

And, in conformity to this, it is further declared, that they may, by
testament, donation, or otherwise, dispose of their goods, moveable and
immovable (that is, as we have seen, their estates, real and personal) in
favor of such persons as to them shall appear good; so that their heirs,
subjects of the United States, whether residing in France or elsewhere, may
succeed to them, ab intestato, without being obliged to obtain letters of
naturalization.

These are the stipulations on the part of France; and they amount to a removal
from the citizens of the United States, of alien disabilities in that country,
as to property. I say as to property, because, as to civil and ecclesiastical
employments, it seems to have been a principle of the French law, that the
incapacity of foreigners could only be removed by special dispensations,
directed to the particular object.

What are the correlative stipulations on the part of the United States? They
are in these terms, "the subjects of the most Christian king shall enjoy, on
their part, in all the dominions of the said states, an entire and perfect
reciprocity, relative to the stipulations contained in this article. But it is
at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect the laws made, or
that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations, which shall remain
in all their force and vigor; and the United States on their part, or any of
them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws relative to that matter, as to
them shall appear proper."

Since, then, the article removes from our citizens the disabilities of aliens
as to property in France, and stipulates for her citizens, an entire and
perfect reciprocity in the United States, it follows, that Frenchmen are
equally exempt in the United States from the like disabilities. They may,
therefore, hold, succeed to, and dispose of, real estates.

It appears that the sense both of the French and of the American government
has corresponded with this construction.

In the year 1786, the Marquis Bellegarde and the Chevalier Meziere, sons of
the two sisters of General Oglethorpe, represented to the Count de Vergennes,
the French minister for foreign affairs, that they met with impediments to
their claims from the laws of Georgia, prohibiting aliens to hold lands. Mr. de
Vergennes communicated their complaint to Mr. Jefferson, our then minister in
France, observing, that the alien disabilities of the complainants having, in
common with those of all Frenchmen, been removed by the treaty between the two
countries, they ought to experience no impediments on that account, in the
succession to the estate of their uncle, and that the interfering laws of
Georgia ought to be repealed so as to agree with the treaty.

Mr. Jefferson, in reply, states the case of the complainants, proving that
they were precluded from the succession for other reasons than that of
alienism; and then adds, that as the treaty with France having placed the
subjects of France in the United States on a footing with natives, as to
conveyances and descents of property, there is no necessity for the assemblies
to pass laws on the subject, the treaty being a law, as he conceives, superior
to those of particular assemblies, and repealing them when they stand in the
way of its operation.

Where now, DECIUS, is thy mighty triumph? Where the trophies of thy fancied
victory? Learn that in political, as well as other science, "Shallow draughts
intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again."


The fixing the true sense of the article in the treaty with Great Britain, is
alone a refutation of most of the objections which have been made to it, by
showing, that they apply not to what really exists, but to a quite different
thing. It may be useful, however, to pass them briefly in review with some
cursory remarks.

The article, it is said, infringes the rights of the states, and impairs the
obligation of private contracts, permits aliens to hold real estates against
the fundamental policy of our laws, and at the hazard of introducing a
dangerous foreign influence; is unequal, because no American has been hardy
enough, since the peace, to purchase lands in England, while millions of acres
have been purchased by British subjects in our country, with knowledge of the
risk -- is not warranted by the example of any other treaty we have made; for
if even that of France should contain a similar provision (which is denied)
still the difference of circumstances would make it an inapposite precedent;
since this was a treaty made, flagrante bello, in a situation which justified
sacrifices.

These objections have been formally and explicitly urged. One writer, afraid
of risking a direct assertion, but insidiously endeavoring to insinuate
misconception, contents himself with putting a question. What (says he) will be
the effect of this article as to the revival of the claims of British subjects,
traitors or exiles?

As to the infraction of the rights of the states, this, it is presumed, must
relate to the depriving them of forfeitures of alien property. But as the
article gives no right to a British subject to hold any lands which the laws of
a state did not previously authorize him to hold -- it prevents no forfeiture
to which he was subject by them, and, consequently, deprives no state of the
benefit of any such forfeiture. With regard to escheats for want of qualified
heirs, it depended on every proprietor to avoid them by alienations to citizens.

As to impairing the obligation of private contracts, it is difficult to
understand what is meant. Since land, purchased by an alien, passes from the
former proprietor, and becomes forfeited to the state, can it be afterward the
subject of a valid private contract? If the effect of the article was to
confirm a defective title derived from the alien, how could this impair the
obligation of any other private contract concerning it? But whatever may be
intended, it is enough to say, that the article does not confirm the title to
any land which was not before good. So that the ground of the objection fails.

As to permitting aliens to hold land, contrary to the policy of our ^^ws, it
has been shown, that, on a true construction, it only applies to the very
limited case of the alien heirs and assigns of persons who before rightfully
held lands, and is confined to the identical lands so previously holden; that
its greatest effect must be insignificant; and that this effect will
continually decrease.

As to the millions of acres, said to have been purchased by British subjects
since the peace, it has been shown, that if by the laws of the states in which
the purchases were made, they were illegally acquired, they still remain in the
situation in which they were before the treaty.

As to there being no precedent of a similar stipulation with any other
country, it has been proved, that, with France, we have one much broader. The
idea, that this was a sacrifice to the necessity of our situation, flagrante
bello, is new. Are we then to understand, that we in this instance gave to
France, as the price of her assistance, a privilege in our country, which leads
to the introduction of a foreign influence, dangerous to our independence and
prosperity? For to this result tends the argument concerning the policy of the
exclusion of aliens. Or is it, that no privilege, granted to France, can be
dangerous?

Those who are not orthodox enough to adopt this last position, may,
nevertheless, tranquillize themselves about the consequences. This is not the
channel through which a dangerous foreign influence can assail us.
Notwithstanding all that has been said, it may, perhaps, bear a serious
argument, whether the permission to foreigners to hold lands in our country,
might not, by the operation of private interest, give us more influence upon
foreign countries, than they will ever acquire upon us, from the holding of
those lands. Be this as it may, could we not appeal to some good patriots, as
they style themselves, by way of eminence, for the truth of the observation,
that foreign governments have more direct and powerful means of influence than
can ever result from the right in question?

Moreover, there was a peculiar reason for the provision which has been made in
our last treaty, not applicable to any treaty with another country. The former
relative situation of the United States and Great Britain, led to the
possession of lands by the citizens of each in the respective territories. It
was natural and just to secure by treaty their free transmission to the heirs
and assigns of the parties.

As to the revival of the claims of traitors or exiles; if property,
confiscated and taken away, is property holden by those who have been deprived
of it, then there may be ground for alarm on this score. How painful is it to
behold such gross attempts to deceive a whole people on so momentous a
question! How afflicting, that imposture and fraud should be so often able to
assume with success the garb of patriotism? And that this sublime virtue should
be so frequently discredited by the usurpation and abuse of its name!

CAMILLUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Proceedings at Lexington.
At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Lexington
(Massachusetts) legally assembled, August 13th, 1795, to know the Sentiments of
the Town, upon the Commercial Treaty between the United States and the British
Nation, as agreed to by Mr. Jay.
THE said treaty was read -- a conversation upon the subject took place; and
observations, obviously occurring, were freely and heartily made upon the
treaty: And a committee was chosen, to take into consideration the said treaty,
and report thereon at the adjournment.

At the meeting, according to adjournment, September 7th, the committee
submitted the following draught, as an attempt to express the sentiments of the
town, on the interesting subject committed to their consideration.

Claiming it as one among the unalienable rights, for which we have fought and
bled, and which we hold dear and sacred, as freemen, and citizens of a free
state, freely, heartily, and firmly, to express our sentiments upon any public
measure, which appears interesting to us, our fellow citizens, state, of
nation; and having deliberately attended to, and considered, the treaty of
amity, commerce, and navigation, between Great Britain and the United States of
America, agreed upon and signed by the Right Honorable William Wyndham, Baron
Grenville, on the one part, and the Honorable John Jay, Esquire, on the other;
and which has been ratified, with certain exceptions, by the senate of the
United States.

We, the inhabitants of the said town of Lexington, in town meeting assembled,
unhappily find ourselves constrained to observe, that, from the general
sentiments and principles of the treaty at large, the most natural construction
of the several articles contained in it, or the measures and regulations
therein stipulated and held up to view, we cannot even flatter ourselves with
the prospect of those benefits and advantages, political, civil or commercial,
which, as free citizens and an independent nation, we had a right to expect, in
such a negotiation as this.

That, viewed in comparison with existing treaties of amity and (...) merce,
between France and the United States, and the United States of Holland and the
United States of America, we do not find that fair and perfect reciprocity of
privileges and advantages, in the present treaty, as evidently appears in them.
On the contrary, as it appears to us, the stipulations of the present treaty,
in several instances, at least, in their operation, must tend, directly or
indirectly, to deprive us of the benefits and privileges intended to be secured
to the citizens of the United States, as a neutral nation, by those treaties.
Particularly in those articles of the present treaty, where provisions and
other articles, not explicitly contraband of war, by the known and established
law of nations, are made liable to capture and adjudication, the parties making
compensation, as they may see fit, as specified in said article. This, as we
think, at once throws an important branch of the trade of he United States, as
a neutral nation, into the hands and on the mercy of the British government.
Besides, admitting this privilege to the British, the French and the Dutch may
claim the same: For, by treaty, they are entitled to the privileges of the most
savored nation. The consequences are too obvious to need a mention.

By the second article, provision is made for the delivering up the western
posts, held by the British within the limits of the United States, after twelve
years detention, contrary to express stipulation of the treaty of peace, in
1783. And though it is too obvious to need any proof, that the detention of
these posts has been to the great injury of the United States, in the progress
of their settlements and trade with the Indians; -- but, above all, in
fostering and encouraging, if not actually supporting, a long, expensive and
destructive war with the Indians; yet no provision is stipulated for any, the
least, compensation for those injuries. Neither is there, in any part of the
treaty, any provision made for compensation for Negroes, or other property
carried off by Britons, contrary to the express prohibition in the treaty of
peace between Britain and the United States. Whereas the most ample provision
is made, in the 6th article, for the payment of private debts, to British
subjects, contracted before the peace, out of the public treasury, with
interest for the same, to the utmost farthing. What is the justice, what the
reciprocity of these measures and stipulations of the treaty, we leave to the
principles of equality and common sense to determine. The contrast is too
glaring to need, or even admit of, illustration.

In the same article, it is provided, after the evacuation of said posts, etc.
"That all settlers and traders within the precincts or jurisdiction of said
posts, shall continue to enjoy all their property of every kind, and shall be
protected therein. They shall be at free liberty to remain or remove, to sell
or retain. They shall not be compelled to become citizens of the United States,
or to take an oath of allegiance to the government thereof: But they shall be
at full liberty to do so, if they think proper, and they shall make and declare
their election, within one year after the evacuation aforesaid."

How far the precincts or jurisdiction of these posts do or may extend, we are
yet to learn; but be they greater or less, by this article, all who, within the
time prescribed, declare their election to continue British subjects, are at
free liberty so to do. And thus hundreds, or perhaps thousands, of British
subjects and citizens, with the children of them, to a thousand generations,
may claim an indisputable right to all the benefits and privileges of natural
born subjects and citizens, in their persons, property and estate, and yet have
no connection with, dependence upon, or obligations to, the government of the
land in which they dwell, save only for protection. This unlimited indulgence
appears to us to be utterly inconsistent with all principles of sound policy,
and of most dangerous tendency.

To say nothing of an undue British influence, on our internal affairs, arising
from this quarter; the moment a war begins between Britain and the United
States, they become, of all men, the most dangerous: And whether they continue
with us or go from us, they may, and, to prove themselves faithful to the
prince or state of whose government they are subjects, they must, become the
most injurious; as they will have it in their power to give the best
information to the enemy, and, as pilots, to lead and conduct them where they
can injure us most, and have the best prospect of success against us.

Of the same nature, on the same general principles, liable to the same
objections, and of equally dangerous tendency to the United States, is the 9th
article in said treaty. And though there is an appearance of reciprocity, in
the stipulation, that "British subjects who now hold lands in the territories
of the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in the dominions
of the king of Great Britain, shall continue to hold them, according to the
nature and tenure of their estates and titles therein; and may grant, sell, or
devise the same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were natives,"
etc. Yet when it is considered, that by well known laws of the British
government, aliens are incapacitated to hold real estates, the article appears
to be nugatory and delusive; or even suppose this not to be the case, this
article will, at any rate, be in favor of Britain, and detrimental to the
United States, as "The quantity of lauds, held by the citizens of the United
States in the British dominions, will, probably, bear no proportion to the
quantity held by the subjects of Britain, in the United States."

How far the United States, or the citizens thereof, may avail themselves of
benefit, profit or advantage from the liberty stipulated for the subjects of
Britain, the citizens of the United States, and also the Indians, freely to
pass and repass the boundary line, by land or inland navigation, into the
respective territories and countries of the two parties, for the purposes of
trade and commerce, as agreed in the 3d article, we are much in doubt: And from
attending to the nature and probable consequences of such a stipulation, are
led to suppose that the inconveniences attending, and sacrifices which must be
made, by acceding to, this agreement, will greatly overbalance every benefit
that would be like to accrue to the United States or their citizens: And that
under an appearance of reciprocity, the balance would turn greatly in favor of
Britain. But be this as it may, it is certain, that by excepting the country
within the limits of the H^dson's Bay company, the United States are deprived
of a great part of the fur trade with the Indians, to which, by local
situation, they have as good a claim as Britain. By this means all reciprocity
is destroyed, and such an exception appears both ungenerous and unjust.

Not less unequal is the stipulation, in the paragraph immediately succeeding,
in the same article; for all vessels of the United States are expressly
excluded admission into any of his British majesty's "Sea ports, harbors, bays
or creeks, in his said territories, or into such parts of the rivers, in his
majesty's said territories, as are between the mouth thereof and the highest
ports of entry from the sea;" barely excepting "small vessels trading bona fide
between Montreal and Quebec," under certain regulations: -- While British
vessels may claim admission into all seaports, bays, harbors, and even into
all rivers, to the highest ports of entry for foreign vessels, in the United
States. No comment is necessary. The very words of the treaty itself, naturally
lead us -- with astonishment, not to say, indignation -- to ask, What equality
-- what reciprocity is here!

It is added, in the very next sentence, in this article -- "The river
Mississippi shall, however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open
to both parties; and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its
eastern side, to which soever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted
to, and used by both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports
or places of the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty,
in Great Britain." Upon which we shall only observe;

That we are utterly at a loss to account for an idea or principle suggested,
that the ports and places of resort for vessels, shipping, etc. on the eastern
side of the Mississippi, may belong either to Britain or the United States, be
British ports, or ports of the United States, promiscuously and indefinitely,
as if the land, on the eastern side of the said Mississippi, was the property
of, and held in common by, both nations: whereas, by the treaty of peace, it is
explicitly declared, that the boundary of the territory of the United States,
on that quarter, should be "by a line to be drawn along the middle of the said
river Mississippi, until it shall intersect the northernmost part of the 3^st
degree of north latitude."

Upon the same principles we see not but with equal propriety, British ports
and places of resort for vessels, shipping, etc. might be established on the
western side of the Atlantic for like purposes, on the territory of United
States, from Georgia to Nova Scotia; and with equal advantage, perhaps, to the
states and citizens of them. The truth is, while mutual advantage, perhaps,
might result to the citizens and subjects of both the contracting nations, by
opening their ports to each other, on terms of equality, it is hard to find
principles to justify the policy, or even safety of admitting another nation to
establish ports and places of resort, in the manner stipulated in this article,
as it appears to us.

Whatever "doubt may have arisen concerning the river truly intended under the
name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the treaty of peace, as forming a
part of the boundary therein described," -- we cannot feel satisfied with the
mode of adjustment, proposed in the 5th article of the treaty* To us it appears
impolitic, unreasonable and unjust, that the title to so great an extent of
territory, as is drawn in question by said doubts, should be risqued on the
casting of a die, or the drawing of a lot.

The treaty professes to have "no reference to the merits of the complaints and
pretensions of the contracting parties;" yet, as we have already observed,
"those of the British are fully provided for, while a part only of those of the
United States are attended to;" vide and comp. art. 6th and 7th.

We are more especially dissatisfied with this treaty, as, with our fellow
citizens in Boston, we conceive, "that the capture of vessels and property of
the citizens of the United States, during the present war, made under the
authority of the government of Great Britain, is a national concern; and claims
arising from such captures ought not to have been submitted to the decision of
their admiralty courts; as the United States are thereby precluded from having
a voice in the final determination of such cases; and because the
indemnification proposed to be made, is to be sought by a process tedious and
expensive, in which justice may be delayed to an unreasonable time, and
eventually lost to many of the sufferers, from their inability to pursue it;
and because this mode of indemnification bears no proportion to the summary
method adopted for the satisfaction of British claims." Vide proceedings at
Boston, article 4th.

However disagreeable to the feelings of a benevolent heart it may, at first
sight, appear, to arrest the property of unoffending individuals of foreign
nations; yet, in the course of events, certain circumstances may arise, in
which such property may be the most interesting and effectual pledge for the
peace, safety, independence, and even existence of a nation. We cannon
therefore, admit the idea of the necessary, justice, or policy of the total
prohibition of such a measure, as we find in the 10th article of the treaty.
Nor can we suppose the sequestration of the debts of individuals, for the
common safety of a nation, to be any more inconsistent with the principles of
equity, or commutative justice, than what every day takes place between
contending nations at war, under the sanction of law and the highest authority,
in privateering and otherwise, in almost every act and event of war.

The 12th article, in every point of view, appears to us unprofitable,
degrading, and humiliating to the United States; And although the senate have
declined to ratify a part of it, yet, as it will remain after the alteration
the senate has proposed, it will cut off a very advantageous part of our
trade, in the exportation of certain West India articles, from wheresoever
imported, and even some articles, the produce of the United States, to any part
of the world. Nor are the regulations and restrictions on the trade to the East
Indies, less degrading and destructive, as stipulated in the 13th article.

The succeeding articles relating to commerce, to articles contraband of war,
to mutual privileges of vessels entering the ports of the contracting parties
-- whether of war or for commerce, and many other matters connected therewith;
while, in various respects, under the veil of reciprocity, they obviously fail
of promising equal advantages to the United States and their citizens; are, in
many important instances, as direct contraventions of privileges expressly
stipulated, in treaties, in favor of France and the United Provinces of
Holland: and cannot fail to operate accordingly.

A saving clause is, indeed, introduced in the 25th article, providing, "that
nothing in this treaty contained shall be construed to operate contrary to
former and existing treaties, with other sovereigns or states." How this
proviso can be consistently or sincerely pretended, we are totally at a loss to
determine; when it is evident, that the greater part of the latter articles,
which are temporary, are obviously intended to operate in favor of the
contracting parties, particularly Britain, in the course of the present war, as
well as afterward; and of consequence must, in a degree, be subversive of
benefits and advantages stipulated in favor of France and Holland, in our
treaties with them.

It is immediately subjoined, that "the two parties agree that while they
continue in amity with each other, neither of them will in future make any
treaty inconsistent with this or the preceding article." So that whatever
advantages with other nations may offer, on these points, the United States are
totally excluded from availing themselves thereof, during the existence of this
part of the treaty.

But what appears most of all interesting and alarming to us, and to the
citizens of the United States at large, in the treaty, is yet to be mentioned.

It appears to us inconsistent with the spirit, the principles, and the very
letter of the constitution of the United States, and, in many instances,
subversive of them.

In society and government, an executive, be it the supreme, evidently supposes
a legislative as at the foundation and above it; and the executive as acting
under it, obedient to its laws and directions, and accountable to it.

In the social compact, or constitution of a nation, the powers of legislation
are the first and supreme powers delegated by the people, who are the
sovereign, and, of right, have and retain the control of all the powers of
government, in society, at pleasure.

All other powers of government, the supreme executive, as well as others, are
founded in, dependent upon, and grow out of, the legislative.

All other powers, therefore, the supreme executive not excepted, are to look
up to this, and to realize that they can, constitutionally, do no one thing or
act, in the administration of government, but what is founded in the laws
actually made by, and consistent with the powers vested in, the legislative. So
that, in the present case, though the constitution has vested the president
and senate of the United States, with the general power of making treaties: yet
this power, at highest, is but a subordinate power; and whenever assumed or
carried beyond the laws of the land, or to the subversion or infringement of
the powers, by the people in social compact, vested in the legislative, in the
formation of treaties; such treaties are subversive of themselves, and, ipso
facto, null and void. And this, we humbly conceive, (in a degree at least) is
the truth of fact, in the present instance.

By the constitution, the congress, as supreme legislative of the United
States, is vested with power -- "To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and
among the several states, and with the Indian tribes:" -- "To establish an
uniform rule of naturalization:" -- "To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts,
etc." -- "To desine and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high
seas:" -- "To make rules concerning captures on land and water:" -- To grant
and appropriate moneys, as it is expressly declared, that "no moneys shall be
drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law."

Each of these powers, vested by the constitution in congress, as the supreme
legislative of the United States, appear to us to have been assumed, infringed,
violated, or superseded, in various instances, by the general principles,
particular articles, or special regulations of the treaty before us. -- For
satisfaction and proof, we beg leave to refer to the following articles, viz.
the 2d, 3d, 9th, 12th, 13th, 15th, 17th, and 21st, in each of which, one or
other of the above mentioned powers, vested in congress, as the supreme
legislative of the United States, obviously appears to have been assumed,
infringed, violated or superseded, as well as by general principles in the
treaty at large.

Upon the whole -- upon the most careful attention to, and the most mature,
dispassionate, and candid consideration of, the treaty before us, we are of
opinion, That it is unequal, impolitic and unjust; that it is degrading to the
dignity of an independent nation, and, in its tendency, to the rights, the
privileges, the property, and prosperity of the United States: And that as we
have hitherto been, to a great degree, happy and prosperous, without any treaty
with Britain since the peace, so we should much sooner prefer no treaty of this
kind, or even a return to a state of colonization, than the adoption of this.

The foregoing report, being read and attentively considered, was unanimously
adopted by the town.

Voted, That the proceedings of the town be presented to his excellency the
governor and the honorable the council, requesting them to call the general
court together, as soon as convenient, to consider the subject of the treaty,
and to do or act upon it, as in their great wisdom they shall think meet. Also,

Voted, That the Reverend Jonas Clark be requested to take the charge of the
proceedings of the town upon the treaty, and present them to his excellency the
governor.

Attest, BENJAMIN BROWN, Moderator.

RESOLUTIONS Of a respectable Number of the Land-holders and other Inhabitants
of the County of Amelia (Virginia) assembled at the Courthouse, on previous
Notice, to take into Consideration the Treaty now pending between the United
States of America and Great Britain.
1. RESOLVED, That the people of the United States have a right to assembled,
for the purpose of expressing their opinion of the conduct of those employed in
the administration of the government, and of the tendency of every important
public measure.

2. Resolved, That the people of the different towns in these states, who have
expressed their sentiments and feelings, in disapprobation of the treaty
proposed between the United States and Great Britain, have acted in a manner
becoming the citizens of a free government, and have fully conveyed to the
federal executive, the opinion of the merchants and traders on this momentous
subject.

3. Resolved, That it is the duty of the agricultural part of the union, also
to express their sense of the probable effects of an instrument so novel and so
comprehensive as the treaty lately presented to the public, as this meeting
conceives it embraces most of the important relations in which we are placed as
citizens, or in which we stand as connected with foreign nations; and because,
should it be ratified by the president, and submitted to by the people, we
should be deprived of many, the most important, benefits resulting from that
memorable contest, which terminated in our independence. -- These conclusions
appear to the members of this meeting, as fair deductions, and such as will
inevitably result from a ratification of the treaty.

1st, Because, the 2d, 3d, 12th, 14th, 15th and 21st articles are direct
violations of the constitution, so far as the regulations therein respect those
matters which are exclusively vested in the congress by that constitution, viz.

"To lay and collect taxes, duties, excises and imposts; to regulate commerce
with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with the Indian tribes;
to establish an uniform rule of naturalization; to define and punish piracies."

2d, Because, The second article authorizes aliens to possess all the benefits
of American citizens, if they should choose to become such, and without
complying with the rules prescribed by law; or it establishes a British colony
within the limits of the United States, with most dangerous privileges, and it
gives these advantages to men who have been the chief agents in exciting the
Indians to a tedious, bloody, and expensive war; and being our bitter and
irreconcilable enemies, they are placed in the most favorable situation
imaginable, to cooperate in inflicting the most deadly and irreparable
injuries, at some future period, on our western frontiers.

3d, Because, By the 6th article, compensation is to be made out of the public
revenue, to British creditors, for losses and damages in debts contracted
previous to the adoption of the federal constitution, although, immediately
after its adoption, courts were established at a great expense, whose business
has consisted in enforcing their collection; and the treaty of peace only
stipulated that there should be no legal impediment to their recovery; and
because by this article, new and unheard of powers are given to a tribunal,
whose mode of proceeding will be materially different from any heretofore known
in America, excluding juries, and attended with the singular circumstance of
banishing all kind of defense to any claims which may be set up, by assuming
the payment of debts due from individuals: and after thus enticing men to the
commission of frauds and perjuries; for any claims they may establish before a
set of commissioners, the majority of whom may be probably of the British
nation, payment is to be made out of the treasury of the United States; by
which means a vast addition will, undoubtedly, be made to the public debt,
which is thus to be increased at the will of a set of commissioners, a majority
of whom may feel anxious for our political destruction; and though this
extraordinary concession is made for the supposed infraction of the treaty of
1783, on the part of America, not the least notice is taken of, ^or is any
compensation provided for, the damages sustained by our citizens in being
deprived of their negroes and other property, being carried off by the British
army in direct violation of the 7th article of the said treaty; though this
infraction must have preceded any infraction on the part of America; and thus,
in this stipulation, there is not even the appearance of reciprocity preserved.

4th, Because, In the 7th and some succeeding articles, there is a shameful and
most pernicious direliction of the principle which has been acceded to by many
of the powers of Europe, a principle most advantageous to the United States,
and which has been carefully attended to in her treaties with the other powers
of Europe. These articles we consider as most shameful and pernicious, ^nasmuch
as they appear calculated to depress the agricultural and commercial interest
of those states, and at the same time operate most cruelly against that gallant
people, who so generously and effectually afforded us their powerful support,
when the armies and fleets of Great Britain had a near prospect of completing
our subjugation.

5th, Because, There is no redress given for former injuries, nor even a
stipulation to prevent a repetition of those injuries, in future, to a most
useful and meritorious class of our fellow citizens, the seamen, who have been
frequently and wantonly seized, when engaged in their laborious occupation,
torn from their families and dearest connections, and compelled to serve on
board British ships of war, to assist in plundering their countrymen, and in
endeavoring to enslave a nation, who formerly contributed so much to give
freedom to this country.

6th, Because, The whole treaty, in all its aspects, appea^r^ to be entirely
calculated for the aggrandizement of Great Britain, and the e^tension of her
comme^^^, to the destruction of American prosperity, and, even^^^lly, her
independence, and to the (...) of that connection with France, formerly so
advantageous, and which, the (...) of this meeting still conceive, will best
conduce to our wealth and population, and to the preservation of the republican
form of government which we YET profess to hold dear.

Resolved, therefore, That the members of this meeting, are induced by their
feelings toward France, which her former magnanimous and essential services to
America, and her present arduous struggles have excited -- by their feats of
the numerous evils that would result from a connection so unequal, and so close
with Great Britain -- and by their anxious wishes to preserve, unimpaired, that
temple of liberty and independence, which has been reared at such an expense of
blood and treasure, to disapprove the treaty; and, being ardently solicitous
that it may not become the supreme law of the land, they take leave to request
of the president to withhold his signature therefrom.

Resolved, That Stephens Thompson Mason has proved himself worthy the
confidence of the people; because he remembered and r^spected the power from
which he derived his authority, and that the thanks of this meeting are due to
him and the virtuous nine, who voted with him against the ratification of the
treaty.

Resolved, That the secretary take some speedy mode of conveying to the
president and the public, the foregoing resolutions, as containing the opinions
and feelings of this meeting, in the hope that their sentiments, being added to
the general voice of the people of these states, may prevent the ratification
of the proposed treaty.

PROCEEDINGS Of the Citizens of Richmond County (Georgia) at a Meeting held in
August^, September 1, 1795.
WE, the citizens of ^i^^mond county, being assembled (...) the courthouse
square, in the town of Augusts, and having taken into our serious consideration
the treaty lately ^^tered into between the United States and Great Britain, say
that by recurring to the message of (...) president of the (...) States, at the
time of the (...) of Mr. Jay, it is (...) that the object of his appointment
was "a friendly adjustm^^^ of our claims." And that "going immediately from the
United States, ^^ch an envoy will ^^^ry with him a (...) knowledge (...) the
existing temper and sensibility of our country; and wi^^ th^^ be taught to
vindicate our rights with firmness, and to cultivate peace with sincerity."

This appointment took place when a bill was before congress, for restraining
the intercourse with that nation; and th^^ object of an extraordinary mission
to the court of London, (...) declared in the message, embracing the subjects
which gave rise to the bill, the same was relinquished in favor of the
executive proceedings -- and America waited, with patience, the result. This
has been a proceeding styled a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation,
signed in London by Mr. John Jay and the British minister for that purpose, in
November last, and since approved by the senate of the United States, with an
exception as to the 12th article.

And it appears to us, that the treaty so entered into, does not correspond
with the objects of this appointment; or that it is calculated to promote the
prosperity of the country which made it. On the contrary, it appears, that the
envoy lost sight of the causes which were declared to lead to his appointment,
and to have subscribed to engagements suited to the present circumstances of
England, only.

To see, and to be convinced of these truths, it is only necessary to have
recourse to this instrument itself.

The basis of all national treaties, reciprocity of interest, has been laid
aside; and our commerce put under the control of England.

In the East Indies, it is to exist only by her guardianship and direction. To
the West Indies we may go in small vessels, until she shall see cause to
reconsider the state of her possessions in that quarter.

Her fleets and armies may commit any depredations upon our coasts and
seaports; and no reprisals can take place until a plaintive demand is made,
and a tedious negotiation gone through, in which she would have time to fasten
upon all the strong holds of the union.

We are restrui^ed from allowing any favor to other nations, without extending
them to h^^; and several articles of commerce are declared to be contr^^^^d,
which are contracted to be otherwise by existing treaties. So that, in the
first instance, we cannot ^^^or those to whom we are indebted and ineli^ed;
nor, in the second, fulfill our solemn (...); by which we make the world our
en^^ies for the preca^i^^^ favor of England.

The (...) of the treaty of peace, in respect to the removed negroes, has been
relinquished; and compensation for the spoliations complained of, is made to
depend on a dilatory process, and the uncertainty of chance: while future
captures and detentions are made lawful.

The tribunals of justice are censured in general terms; and made the ground of
superseding their authority by a commissioner of chance, which may involve some
of the states in millions of expense.

Privateers giving security in an inconsiderable sum, will scarcely restrain
them. It will rather be a license for capture, by subjecting them to the
penalty only, in taking the richest vessels; nor does it appear, that such
security could be availed by an American citizen.

Even the exception to the 12th article, has been partially made; for it
appears, that the senate has approved the whole of the treaty, except so much
of that article "as respects the trade which his majesty hereby consents may be
carried on between the United States and his islands in the West Indies, in the
manner and on the terms and conditions therein specified." So that the other
part of the same article, which prohibits the exportation of cotton from the
United States, is not included in the exception.

This is particularly injurious to this state; for the cultivation of cotton
has become, within these few years, one of the greatest conveniences to the
citizens; and the improvements in machinery are extending its cultivation. It
is light and portable; and is the article most conveniently carried to market,
to obtain foreign necessaries. A prohibition to export it would, therefore, be
sensibly felt; and may have a direct tendency to disaffect the minds of the
people to the general government.

But it is said, that it may be exported in British bottoms. Admit this, and
the injury is increased by the addition of insult. To be restrained from
exporting the produce of our own fields, in our own vessels, is to submit, not
to treat.

In fact, if this treaty is ratified, and its several parts allowed to operate,
as the supreme law of the land, essential articles of the constitution will be
(...) the necessity of a congress superseded; any other (...) of law, being
inferior, would be useless and null.

It will remove the boundaries of the United States, as ^^^ed by the definitive
treaty, upon the (...) of our independence (...) and they must remain ^^oat,
unless again made by "(...), or more faithful negociators.

Should the troops be removed from the western posts, which have hitherto been
detained in violation of a former treaty, at the distant period of the second
engagement, the (...) subjects are to remain, and to continue the sea of their
possessions. This is an actual cession of the key of the lakes to the crown of
England, and, with it, the trade of the savage^ It is consenting to establish
the British empire in the bosom of the union, to the dishonor of our
sovereignty, and at the risk of our safety.

But we are disgusted with the detail; and, in short, such are the concessions
to the crown of Great Britain, that, to these who recollect, or will review,
the causes assigned in the declaration of our independence and separation from
that nation, it will appear astonishing, that such articles could ever have
been subscribed, in the same age, with the same king and nation, and in the
name of the people who had profusely shed their blood to support the former.

We cannot but consider, therefore, that, to ratify the said treaty, would be
an abuse of the mercies of Heaven, by whose blessing and protection we
established our liberty, independence, and government; an entire disregard of
the fate and welfare of our republican friends and allies, the French nation;
and an abandonment of the true interests of the United States.

And we do sincerely and earnestly recommend it to the president of the United
States, to withhold his signature from the same; assuring him of our
affectionate attachment and confidence, and of our utmost reliance on his
wisdom, patriotism, and firmness.

Resolved, That the foregoing proceedings be signed by the committee, and
transmitted, without delay, by the chairman, to the president of the United
States, by land and water.

Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be given to Stephens Thompson Mason,
a senator from Virginia, for his timely promulgation of the said treaty.

Signed this 1st September, 1795. GEORGE WALTON, Chairman. Committee.
Edward Telfair, Thomas Cumming, Seaborn Jones, Nathaniel Cook, Adam Boyd,
James Harris, John Twiggs, Thomas R. Corn^^, Abraham Jones, Robert Watkins,
Eli^^^ Palmer, Ambros^ Gordon, John Milton, Littl^berry Bostick.



Warren County Proceedings.
At a numerous and respectable Meeting of the Inhabitants of the County of
Warren (North Carolina) held at the Courthouse in Warrenton, on Saturday the
22d of August, for taking into Consideration the Treaty lately passed upon by
the Senate of the United States, Mr. William Falkener was unanimously called to
the Chair.
ON motion of Colonel William Johnson, seconded by Colonel Wyatt Hawkins,

It was ordered, That the treaty be read; which being done, the following
address was proposed to be transmitted to the president; and on motion (with
but two dissenting voices) the chairman was requested to forward the same by
such conveyance as he might deem most respectful and proper.

To the President of the United States.
WE, the inhabitants of the county of Warren, in the state of North Carolina,
having assembled for the purpose of taking into consideration, the treaty of
amity, commerce and navigation, lately passed upon by the senate -- being
desirous of evidencing our hearty concurrence with the almost unanimous sense
of our fellow citizens, who deem many parts of it inimical to the constitution,
and most of it disadvantageous to the interests, and derogatory to the honor
and dignity, of the United States -- most respectfully (for reasons we forbear
to state, as it would only be reiterating what you have been generally
addressed with) intimate -- That it is our earnest wish you will refuse
ratifying the same; by which, we humbly conceive, you will evince that your
attachment to the constitution of the United States, is unalterable, and your
real to promote the happiness and welfare of your constituents, umbating and
undiminished.

Signed by order of the meeting, held at the cour^-house in Warrenton, the 22d
of August, 1795. WM. FALKENER, Chairman.


Resolved, That the ten members of the senate, who voted against the
recommendation for a conditional ratification of the treaty, deserve the thanks
of this meeting, and merit the approbation of their fellow citizens.

Resolved, That S. T. Mason, by giving his fellow citizens an opportunity of
knowing the treaty, exemplified a truly independent and patriotic conduct.

Signed by order, W. A. RICHARDS, Sec'ry.

ADDRESS Of the Citizens of Charleston (South Carolina) to the President of the
United States, transmitted by Thomas Lowndes, one of the Members of the House
of Representatives of that State.
To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States.
SIR,
WITH the freedom of men who are sensible of their own rights, but with the
sincere deference which true republicans must ever pay to the constitution
which themselves have framed, to the laws which themselves have authorized, and
to the chief magistrate of their own choice; and with all that reverence and
affection which Americans justly owe to the man who has most eminently
distinguished himself by his important services, his incorruptible integrity,
and the wisdom of his councils; we venture to express to you the painful
apprehensions and alarms which have been excited in our minds, by the perusal
of this treaty now pending between the United States and his Britannic majesty:
having considered it with the most careful attention, we are confirmed in our
fears, that the ratification of it would prove ruinous, or highly injurious, to
the best interests of our country. Having not time to go into a lengthy detail
of all the objections to which we think the treaty liable, we have contented
ourselves with stating a few only of those which have most forcibly impressed
themselves on our feelings, and this statement, put into the form of a report,
See Appendix to Mr. Jay's Treaty, page 175.
we transmit to you, with a full persuasion that you will give it that weight
and consideration which the reasons on which it is founded, may justly merit.
Confident as we are, that our fellow citizens in other parts of the union,
impelled by sensations similar to our own, and actuated by motives purely
patriotic, will, with equal respect to your station and to your person, come
forward with like representations: we conjure you to suspend, for a short time,
at least, the ratification of this instrument, that the general sense of the
community, if they should think proper to express it, may be known on so
interesting a measure.

The pleasing conviction with which your undeviating conduct has ever inspired
us, of the rectitude of your mind, will not permit us to doubt, but that you
will rejoice to avail yourself of the light which, from every source, may be
thrown on an obscure and intricate subject; and that, if the arguments offered
by us, or by any of the rest of your fellow citizens, shall appear to be
substantially founded, and conclusively to evince the injurious tendency of
this treaty; you will altogether withhold that assent which would entail its
evils on our country. As we are convinced that, in all your public conduct, you
have acted and ever will act, with a purity of intention that must ensure the
approbation of your own conscience; so it is our ardent wish, that on all
occasions it may also be with that happy conformity to the general sentiments
of your constituents, that will preserve to you, and, if possible, increase the
universal affection which it is your peculiar glory and happiness to possess.

JOHN MATHEWS, Chairman. A true copy, JOHN SANDFORD DART.

Charleston, July 19th, 1795.
Judge Stith's Charge.
At a Superior Court, begun and held at Savannah, in and for the County of
Chatham, on the 4th of August, 1795, Judge Stith delivered the following Charge
to the Grand Jury.
FELLOW CITIZENS OF THE GRAND JURY,
I HAVE observed, with sincere pleasure, the spirited, firm, and patriotic
measures of my fellow citizens of this city, in opposition to the pending
treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, lately entered into between the
United States and the king of Great Britain; an example so truly laudable and
necessary, that, I have no doubt, it will be followed in each of our sister
counties.

This subject has been so fully discussed by abler hands, that I shall forbear
to enter into a detail of those prominent features of humility and disgrace to
the dignity of the American character, with which every article abounds. When
it was thought necessary that an envoy extraordinary should be deputed by the
American republic to the court of London, and when the chief justice of the
United States was invested with that important appointment, we were flattered
with the expectation, that he was expressly charged to demand of the British
king, an unequivocal fulfillment of certain stipulations in the treaty of peace,
which that monarch had, contrary to good faith, neglected, and, indeed, refused
to comply with, and immediate and adequate compensation for flagrant violations
of other stipulations in the said treaty, and for the most wanton and injurious
depredations committed on our citizens, and their commerce, by the British
ships of war and privateers, authorized and sanctioned by the British cabinet,
in direct violation of the law of nations and the rights of neutrality. On any
other basis, a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, with that nation,
must be felt as an insult to the American people. I have read this pernicious
instrument with attention, and with a mind, I trust, favorable to a just
estimate of such advantages as might be derived to us from its adoption; but
alas! widely devious from the public hope and expectations, to the American
mind it presents nothing but a dishonorable submission to our most inveterate
enemies, insult and injury to our warmest friends and allies, and perhaps makes
the first instance in history, wherein, after a special embassy for the
particular purpose, a negotiation between two independent nations has
terminated by a treaty which contains not even a solitary advantage to the
party who made the application.

The spirited resolutions and address of this city, and similar measures in a
sister state, while they discover a proper respect for the government, at the
same time evince a due attention on the part of the people, to the preservation
of their inestimable privileges, and may, perhaps, be a mean of averting the
evils which would inevitably result from a ratification of the treaty.

If happily the president should withhold his assent to it, there will yet
remain this melancholy truth, that the dearest interests of the American people
are prostrated at the foot of a single individual; and, however highly I may
think of the virtues of that individual, yet, while human nature is frail, I
shall consider the trust too momentous to be confided even to him. It will then
be our duty, as citizens, to enquire, what is the real source of this important
evil, and by what means a repetition of it may be avoided. I confess myself
partial to, and a warm admirer of, our constitution; but am not blind to its
faults; among the greatest of which is, the power given to the president, with
the advice of two-thirds of the senate, to make treaties with foreign nations,
and its declaring such treaties to be the supreme laws of the land. They ought
then, surely, to undergo a fair, open, and public discussion, and be approved
of with those legislative forms and solemnities, which are necessary to the
passing of other acts, before they assume the dignity and efficacy of supreme
laws. Happily for America, her constitution contains in itself a principle by
which its errors may be peaceably corrected, whenever the finger of experience
shall point them out. An occasion now presents itself, on which to exercise,
with singular propriety, "that healing principle," the power of amendment, and
which it is the duty of every good citizen to recommend in the strongest terms
to the attention of congress, and the state legislatures. By thus making
improvement the result of experience, our government will arrive to a degree of
perfection unknown in the annals of human institutions. To you, and to my
fellow citizens at large, I submit these important considerations.

It will be needless for me to reiterate to you the ordinary duties you are now
called to perform. Your experience as grand jurors, and your attachment to the
public order and tranquillity, sufficiently assure me that your exertions will
be properly directed. It is with pain I observe a very numerous docket of
appeals, some of which appear to be of long standing; they will demand, in a
particular manner, your pointed attention, and I trust will have it.

W. STITH, ju^^.

RESOLUTIONS Of a Meeting of the Citizens of Camden Town and District, (South
Carolina) held at the Courthouse, on Saturday the 25th Day of July, assembled
for the Purpose of considering the Treaty, lately agreed upon between the
United States of Americe and the King of Great Britain.
AFTER a free and liberal communication of sentiments on the occasion, the
following resolutions were agreed to.

Resolved unanimously, That it is the duty, as well as the right, of freemen,
on all great public occasions, that concern the honor and welfare of the
republic, to come forward and declare their sentiments, with freedom and
firmness; to the end that those who are entrusted with power, may be admonished
to use that power, only for the good of the people, who have placed it in their
hands, and beware to violate the sacred trust.

Resolved unanimously, That the aforesaid treaty strikes us, in every point of
light, with astonishment and indignation. It appears to us mean, slavish, and
obscure, no wise equally binding; but conferring all advantages on the one
side, and imposing all restraints on the other; degrading to the dignity of an
independent republic, and insulting to the honor and spirit of a brave and free
people: And that we think it not only infamous in these respects, but utterly
incompatible with our just claims, rights, and interests.

Resolved unanimously, That Great Britain has always invariably pursued a
policy hostile and insidious to the United States, and that she is now engaged
in a war, dangerous to our independence and existence as a nation. Sound
policy, therefore, as well as resentment for past and present injuries, should
powerfully persuade us to seize on the moment of her prostrated strength and
humbled ambition, to derive, from the necessity of her situation, terms, which,
in more prosperous circumstances, we might in vain expect from her justice.

Resolved unanimously, That the treaty appears to us, in every shape,
calculated to dissolve those bands of affection and interest, which ought to
connect us, in a friendship inviolate, with the people of France, a great and
regenerated people, who cherish, in their utmost purity and ardour, those
sacred principles, which have laid the foundation of our freedom, in the blood
of our dearest citizens! The sympathy of these principles, as well as gratitude
for past friendly and important services, should unite the two nations
together, with a tie that it should be deemed criminal to touch.

Resolved unanimously, That greater concessions are made, by this treaty, in
favor of Great Britain, than America, in any former period, could have been
brought to consent to; and which, in her present promising condition, she must
disdain to think of.

Resolved unanimously, That it is the interest and duty of all nations to
cultivate the blessings of peace, and that we deprecate the calamities and
desolation of war; but that war, with all its horrors, ought much to be
preferred to peace, upon such disgraceful and dishonorable terms.

Resolved unanimously, That we hold in high estimation, our fellow citizen
Pierce Butler, and the other nine minority members in the senate, for their
steady and patriotic opposition to the said treaty.

Resolved unanimously, That Jacob Read, and the other nineteen supporting
members, by their endeavors to saddle the United States with the said
detestable treaty, have ren^^^ed themselves, in our opinion, unworthy of any
further public trust of republicans.

Resolved unanimously, That the chairman do sign these resolutions, and that
they be printed, to the intent that our ideas of the said treaty, and our
opinion of its author, supporters, and abettors, may be made known.

ZACHARIAH CANTEY, Chairman.

NUDUM PACTUM. ARTICLE IX.
"IT is agreed that British subjects who how hold lands in the territories of
the United States, and American citi^e^^ who now hold lands in the dominions of
his majesty, shall continue to hold them, etc. as if they were natives."

Any body who has a knowledge of the laws of Engla^^ (and surely the chief
justice of the United States must (...) have some knowledge of them) knows,
that American citizens do not now hold one acre of land in the dominions of his
majesty; for, aliens are incapacitated by the English laws, from holding any
real estate.

"Aliens are incapable of taking by descent or inheriting Wherefore, if a man
leaves no other relations but aliens, his land shall escheat to the lord."
Black. Com. 2 vol. page 249.

It is a fact not less known, on the other side of the question, that British
subjects now hold millions of acres of land in the territories of the United
States.

Where then are the benefits, reciprocally to ensue to the contracting parties?
The Americans have granted a privilege to British subjects, and one too which
is seldom granted by any nation, and received absolutely nothing in return. Yet
this ^^^^cle of the treaty is so artfully worded, that one who reads it, not
knowing the fact to be otherwise, would naturally conclude it to be a fair
contract, where something was given in exchange for something. The reverse,
however, is the truth. As a valuable privilege, therefore, was granted by the
American envo^ extraordinary, to his majesty's subjects, for which he neither
receives, nor stipulated to receive any manner of consideration whatever, why
did he not word the article truly, in the form of a grant or donation, and not
falsely in the langua^e of a contract, where no contract was made? -- Why this
gross imposture, this damnable attempt of imposition on the citizens of the
United States? -- An imposition attempted, not in this article only, but in
every article throughout the treaty. The whole treaty, from the subtle,
specious diction or wording of it, is calculated to hold out the plausible
appearance of mutual advantage to the contracting parties, when, in substance,
the advantage is all on the side of his majesty. The contract, therefore, is
not only a nudum pactum, but a daring, presumptuous fraud.

JOHN DO.

Proceedings in the Senate of the United States.
FROM THE AURORA.
July 24th, 1795. Mr. Backs,
A VERY palpable mis^statement is made in the Gazette of the United States of
the 21st, relative to the proceedings of the ten members of the senate, who
were opposed to the treaty, on Mr. Guna's motion. The motion of Mr. Guna is as
follows:

"Whereas it is alleged by diverse American citizens, that negroes and other
property, to a considerable amount, were carried away in contravention of the
7th article of the treaty of peace between the United States and his Britannic
majesty:

"Resolved, That the senate recommend to the president of the United States to
renew, by friendly negociations with his said majesty, the claims of the
American citizens to compensation for the negroes, and other property so
alleged to have been carried away; and in case the disagreement, that has
hitherto existed relative to the construction in this behalf, of the said
article, cannot be removed by candid and amicable discussions, that it be
proposed, as a measure calculated to cherish and confirm the good understanding
and friendship, which it is desired may prevail between the two countries, that
commissioners, be appointed in the manner directed by the 6th article of the
treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, concluded between the United States
and his said majesty, with authority to ascertain and decide, as well the
interpretation of the 7th article, in this respect, as likewise the amount of
the losses sustained by the alleged violation of the same.

"But the senate are of opinion, that the negotiation on this subject should be
distinct from, and subsequent to, that recommended by their act of the 24th
instant, respecting the trade and intercourse between the United States and his
said majesty's islands in the West Indies."

On motion to divide this motion, and to agree to all that is contained from
the word "whereas" to the word "same" at the end of the first paragraph of the
resolution, the yeas and nays were required, and it passed in the affirmative,
yeas 27, nays 1.

Thus it appears, that the "virtuous ten" must have been in favor of the
resolution, any thing in the Gazette of the United States to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

But let us proceed to the exposition of further untruth, and show, that a
motion was made by one of the vert^^^es, ten, (...) give real and not pretended
effect to the resolution.

A motion was made by Mr. Jackson, to amend the last paragraph of the motion
under the consideration of the Senate viz --

"But the senate are of opinion, that the negotiation on th^^ subject should be
distinct from, and subsequent to, that reco^^^ mended by their act of the 24th
instant, respecting the (...) and intercourse between the United States and his
said majesty (...) islands in the West Indies" -- to read as follows:

"And the senate are of opinion, that the negotiation on (...) subject should
be considered AS PART of the negotiation recommen^^^ by their act of the 24th
instant, respecting the trade and in^^^ course between the United States and
his said majesty's i^^a^^^ in the West Indies."

Whereupon, an amendment, after the division of a motion, was objected to, as
not being in order; and on an appeal to the president, it was by him determined
in the affirmative.

And on the question to agree to the amendment proposed, the yeas and nays were
required, and it passed in the negative.

Yeas 11

Nays 17

On the question to the last clause of the original motion. The yeas and nays
were required -- Yeas 18 -- nays 11. So the question was lost, there not being
two-thirds of the senators present, in the affirmative.

The public will be enabled to determine from the foregoing statement, how far
they may rely on the truth and accuracy of the Gazette of the United States.

The virtuous ten were for exacting a rigid fulfillment of the treaty of peace;
and were for making the compensation for negroes a part of the present treaty;
but the heroes of the Gazette of the United States had different views; they
wished nothing appended to their darling brat, that should prevent it from
receiving the warm embraces of Great Britain, and, therefore, wanted a distinct
negotiation on this subject. British creditors are comprehended in the present
treaty; but justice to American citizens was to be reserved for future
negociations, wholly distinct from the treaty of amity.

When mutilated extracts and positive untruths, are thus attempted to be palmed
upon the public, what are we to suppose of a cause, that must be supported by
such means? The treaty itself is the best commentary upon the views of the
majority of the senate; and no attempt whatever can possibly succeed, with the
treaty before our eyes, to lessen "the virtuous ten" in the estimation of the
people of the United States. They have acted the part of patriots; they have
scorned to make their country tributary to Great Britain; and the people from
New Hampshire to Georgia will be their eulogists. As faithful and upright
servants of the people, the people will do full justice to their merits, and
every such attempt, as that made in the Gazette of the United States, must
bring disgrace and contempt upon the author.

NO ENGLISHMAN.

THE LAMENTATION.
O THE Jacobins! Messrs. printers, the Jacobins! the Jacobins! What shall we
do? The whole continent are turning. Jacobins. For all the continent are
condemning the treaty; and all who do condemn the treaty, are Jacobins. What is
to be done? From Georgia to Maine, they act as if the d -- l was in them; yet I
hope, and trust, and pray, that there is still a chosen few, who have preserved
themselves from the contagion of this universal mania. Only, Messrs printers,
only let the people know who they are, that take the lead in these impious
transactions, and I am sure they will no longer be influenced by them, as I am
sure they do not know them. I will tell them, I will enlighten their dark
understandings, I will show the swinish multitude" that the ringleaders of this
cursed business, are blinded by partiality and hatred; and that they, ever
since 1775, have been prejudiced against our new, I mean our old friends, the
British. To begin then at the fouth; there is that arch rebel, John Rutledge,
many years a member of the old continental congress, in time of war; what
better could be expected from him? is it yet forgotten, that when he was
governor of South Carolina, and the British had possession of Charleston, his
capital, that he hung all the British he could catch; as well as all such as
would not assist him in fighting them? and don't you think he knows, that if
the treaty takes place, and the British again bear rule, that they will hang
him in turn; what better then could you expect from such a man as he?
Self-preservation, our parson says, is nature's first law: and if he knows,
that the British will hang him if they come, is it not natural for him to try
to prevent their coming? It Is true, our president did make him judge of the
supreme court of the United States; but he afterward suffered his own state to
buy him off, by creating him their chief justice with a higher salary. I hope,
therefore, the people will not be influenced by the doings of such a man. As
for old governor Matthews, his colleague, he is not a farthing better; for
don't we all remember how the British sent him in irons to St. Augustine, and
kept him six months in a dungeon, after Charleston was taken. Is it not,
therefore, natural for him to thirst for revenge? In addition to all this, was
be not known, during the whole war, in congress, and as governor of Carolina,
to be among the most inveterate enemies of the British? to such men, therefore,
I hope the people will not trust; and though they assembled a large body of men
in Charleston to oppose the treaty, you may depend on it, those men hated the
British, as much as they did, and were all enraged Jacobins.

Then, again, there is Norfolk and Porsmouth in Virginia, they too have
assembled, and expressed their abhorrence of the treaty. Now every body knows
that, in the late war, those towns were burnt by the British; is it not,
therefore, natural for them to turn Jacobins, and endeavor to keep them out of
their country, that they may not have a chance to burn their towns again? but
all the world must see, that this is an unjustifiable prejudice, and all the
world ought to be above the influence of it. As for Baltimore, has it not been
the asylum of the French; they have an attachment to French principles, because
they are favorable to America. It is plain, therefore, as a pike staff, that
interest governs them, and that they are all Jacobins. Then for Philadelphia,
though they have assembled in thousands and ten thousands, to condemn the
treaty, yet if you examine the first of their committee for drafting
resolutions, your wonder will soon cease; at its head you will find that rebel,
chief justice M'Kean, president of the old continental congress, aided by a
long string of others of the same kidney, all sworn foes to royalty, and
inveterate republicans, brooding on the prejudices they imbibed in our war
against Britain.

FROM THE BOSTON SENTINEL. The Objections to the Treaty, refuted.
No. I.
THE constitution of the United States empowers the president, by and with the
advice and consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the
senate concur.

In pursuance of a power thus vested, the senate of the United States did
consent to and advise the president of the United States, to ratify the treaty
of amity, commerce, and navigation, between his Britannic majesty and the
United States of America, concluded at London, the 19th of November, A. D.
1794; on condition, that there be added to said treaty an article, whereby it
shall be agreed to suspend the operation of so much of the 12th article, as
respects the trade which his said majesty thereby consents may be carried on
between the United States and his islands in the West Indies, in the manner,
and on the terms and conditions, therein prescribed.

A copy of this treaty was sent by Mr. Mason, one of the senators from
Virginia, to the editor of the Aurora, in Philadelphia, that it might be
published.

On Tuesday the 7th of July, the editors of the Chronicle advertised, in the
Mercury, that a copy of the treaty before referred to, was brought by express
from Philadelphia, and was for sale at their office, and at Larkin's book
store, in Cornhill.

On the 8th of July, a notification, issued by order of the selectmen of
Boston, notifying the inhabitants to meet on the 10th, agreeably to the request
of a number of inhabitants, to take into their most serious consideration, such
measures as might be deemed expedient, relative to the treaty pending between
the United States and Great Britain.

On the 9th of July, the editors of the Chronicle published in their paper, the
eight first articles of the treaty.

The foregoing was the only publication of the treaty, prior to the meeting of
the inhabitants on the 10th, except a publication of its supposed contents, by
some one who had read it, and which, on comparison with Mr. Mason's copy,
appears to be incorrect.

On the 10th, the inhabitants met in Faneuil Hall, where, 1500 of the citizens,
without reading the treaty there, voted their disapprobation, and not one
appeared in favor of it.

A committee of fifteen was appointed, "to report the reasons, in writing,
which led to the disapprobation of the treaty."

On the Monday following, being the 13th, the committee reported the objections
of the town, before the reading of which, the treaty was read. -- The
objections were then accepted by the town, without one dissenting voice; and a
vote passed, directing their immediate transmission to the president of the
United States, and expressing "their earnest hope and confident reliance, that
the reasons assigned would have their influence to withhold his signature from
the ratification of this alarming instrument."

The senate met on the 8th June, from which time to the 24th, the merits of the
proposed treaty were discussed, with a^^ the advantages that could be derived
to this discussion, from examining documents that show the real state of our
commere^ -- the relation of this country to others -- the grounds of ou^
complaints against the British, with their answers -- the ground^ of complaint
the British had against this country, with the answers of America. On the 24th,
the senate advised the president to ratify the treaty, in manner and on the
conditions specified in the first part of this paper.

A concurrence of two-thirds of the number present was necessary to constitute
a vote of the senate on this subject; and it is understood, that this majority
included all the senators from New England (except Mr. Langdon, of Portsmouth,
and Mr. Robinson, of Vermont) one senator from New York, all from New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland, one from Kentucky, one from South
Carolina, and one from Georgia. -- Virginia and North Carolina were the only
states in the union, whose senators were unanimous against its ratification.

Unless the present conduct of these senators, in advising the president to
ratify the treaty, has deprived them of the confidence of their fellow
citizens, it may be truly said, that, as individual members of the community,
none stand higher i^ the public estimation, as men of pure morals, found
understanding, industrious and steady attention to those duties, with which
they have been entrusted. Their conduct, as public men, has been tried and
known in times the most critical and dangerous; and has received the just
tribute of applause, from a grateful country, for having preserved it from the
distresses of anarchy and war.

Duty of ourselves demands that we should respect the legal and constitutional
doings of those we have appointed to administer ^ur public affairs; at least so
far as not to declare to the world, "That their acts are highly injurious to
the commercial interests of the United States, derogatory to the national honor
and independence, and may be dangerous to the peace and happiness of their
citizens," -- without the most careful investigation of the subjects, and
without the most substantial reasons in support of charges which so deeply
wound the honor of the government, and the character of those who have
constitutionally done the act, thus boldly accused.

Men who love their country, will endeavor to support its government, at least
will refrain from grossly criminating its conduct, until they have been
convinced that no good reasons can be offered, for that which to them may at
first appear doubtful. Such men ought not instantly to enlist under the hanners
of its avowed opponents, nor hastily surrender their judgments to those who
have uniformly calumniated all those acts, which time and experience have
sanctioned, as wise, and productive of greater prosperity than is enjoyed in
any other country. Men who know the value of character, from a just regard of
their own -- who have sensibility duly to appreciate the worth of public same
-- will be cautious how they attempt to inflict a wound on the reputation of
others, which, if aimed at themselves, would produce the most painful
sensations.

The town of Boston has given its reasons for assertions which have so deeply
wounded the honor of the government; and which assertions, if true, must
extremely weaken the confidence of the people in the superiority of their own
constitution.

Permit, therefore, Mr. Russell, a fellow citizen, through the medium of your
paper, to examine the solidity of their reasons, in proof that this
declaration, that "the treaty, if ratified, will be highly injurious to the
commercial interests of the United States, derogatory to their national honor
and independence, and may be dangerous to the peace and happiness of their
citizens."

The first is, "This compact (meaning the treaty) professes to have no
reference to the merits of the complaints and pretensions of the contracting
parties; but in reality the complaints and pretensions of Great Britain are
fully provided for, while a part only of those of the United States have been
brought into consideration."

The words of the treaty are, that "the parties being desirous, by a treaty of
amity, commerce, and navigation, to terminate their differences, in such a
manner, as (without reference to the merits of their respective complaints and
pretensions) may be the best calculated to produce mutual satisfaction and good
understanding." The words of the treaty are copied here, that, by comparing
them with the first reason of the town, the public may judge of their true
import, and not be induced to bel^^ve, that the two nations met together, with
the design of terminating their differences, and, at the same time, disregarded
the real subjects of controversy.

The great charge in this reason is, that the complaints and pretensions of
Great Britain are fully provided for, while a part only of those of the United
States have been brought into consideration.

It is to be presumed, that the committee meant here, that the minister on the
part of America, never brought into consideration all the complaints and
pretensions of his country. Because, if brought into consideration, and proved
to be unfounded, or, for any reason, waved, it could not be expected, that such
consideration, or the reasons which refuted the complaints, should appear in
the treaty; it would be useless and unprecedented.

That the American minister did not bring them into consideration, is an
assumption of a fact by the committee, for which they have not given any
evidence.

If the correspondence and arguments used by the minister who negociated the
treaty, were before the town, or the committee -- or if they had such
information of their doings, as could be relied on -- it would probably have
been stated. Candor requires, that before a charge of gross neglect is
believed against any man, some evidence should be adduced to support the charge.

That every complaint and pretension of the United States was duly made and
enforced by the American minister, is to be presumed from his known fidelity,
understanding, and patriotism. It may also be inferred from the following
considerations:

The president of the United States undoubtedly gave him instructions on this
head. The report made of the negotiation, would show whether any thing was
neglected on the part of the United States. This report was probably before the
senate.

It is not presumable, that the president would accept the report of his
minister as satisfactory, or consider the negotiation as completed, unless
every matter of importance was brought into consideration; or that the senate
would recommend to the president, to ratify a treaty that was to terminate all
differences, where it appeared to them that the complaints of our own country
were not brought into consideration. Further, it is not probable, that the
minority of the senate, who had before them the whole negotiation, would have
neglected to state this, if it had existed, as a reason for rejecting the
treaty; whereas, in the communication made by Mr. Mason, no such charge
appears, nor in the motions of Mr. Tazewell and Mr. Burr. It may, therefore,
fairly be inferred, until the town or its committee please to give some
evidence to the contrary, that every complaint and pretension of the United
States, was brought into consideration.

The second reason is, "Because, in the stipulation which surrenders our posts
on the western frontiers, no provision is made to indemnify the United States,
for the commercial and other losses they have sustained, and the heavy expenses
to which they have been subjected, in consequence of being kept out of
possession for twelve years, in direct violation of the treaty of peace."

In this reason, the town must intend that no treaty should be acceded to,
unless the British nation would first agree to indemnify the United States for
all losses, that arose from our not being in possession of the posts the last
twelve years.

This would be on the part of Great Britain to acknowledge that the inexecution
of the treaty of 1783, was entirely her fault -- This is probably a matter, she
would dispute; and we are in candor obliged to acknowledge, that the 4th
article of that treaty, which relates to payment of debts, was opposed by some
of the states very soon after, if not before the definitive treaty was signed;
and that it continued unexecuted in some of the southern states, until the
federal government was established. If she can justly impute the first breach
to the United States, our claim of indemnity, for her violation, must be
doubtful. But supposing it otherwise, and that it be clear to us, that she
retained the posts wrongfully, and without any just provocation on our part --
Is it probable that she would so humiliate herself, as to confess she was the
only party who had acted wrong, and avow herself the author or cause of all the
calamities which have, or which we suppose have been derived from the
inexecution of the treaty, and now submit to pay all the damages that had
arisen therefrom?

In the various wars that have taken place for the wrongful detention of
territories; few, if any, are the instances, that the vanquished nation has
paid for the injuries and losses that have arisen from such detention.

The most that is commonly attained, is a restoration of such territory.
Independent nations, owning no superior, qualified to judge of their conduct,
will seldom acknowledge they have done wrong, especially when possessed of
power to support their own cause. It is wise both in a minister, and a nation,
to refrain from insisting on points, which would only produce crimination, and
recrimination, without advancing the great objects of their negotiation. Let
the candid consider, if it is probable, that any reasoning they could suggest,
would have induced Great Britain, to accede to such a stipulation as this
objection supposes.

If not, would it be wise in us to refuse the posts, and still suffer the evils
we feel from being deprived of them -- or attempt to gain them by force? If
successful in this latter mode, is it probable, that, at the end of a war, we
could induce Britain to pay us the losses suffered by the twelve years
detention, added to the duration of hostilities, and the further expenses of a
war, undertaken to regain them? There are few men, who will say such an event
can be calculated on -- If, thou, it is not probable that Great Britain could
be induced by arguments to accede to this stipulation, nor that we could have
attained it by war, it must certainly be considered wise in the minister to
accept the posts, and in the senate to advise the ratification of the treaty,
notwithstanding she did not stipulate to pay the losses consequent on her
detention of them. -- It ought also to be remarked, that although much has been
said about me^^ing a demand of the posts, nothing has been intimated in public,
that a demand should be made for damages, for not relinquishing them before;
much less, that we should refuse to receive them, unless we could be paid for
such damages, or that we would attempt to gain such damages by war; especially
when it had never been hinted, that the United States would hazard a war even
to gain the posts.

A FEDERALIST.

No. II.
THE third reason of the town of Boston against ratifying the treaty, is,
because no indemnification is to be made to the citizens of the United States
for property taken from them at the close of the war, the restitution of which
is provided for by the same treaty.

The words of the treaty of 1783, referred to by the town, are probably these,
"His Britannic majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing
any destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the
American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies," etc. etc.

It is understood, that the United States contend, that this description
applies to negroes, remaining within the British lines after the peace, but
who, having been captured, or invited by proclamation, had fled to the British
during the war. The British government contend for another construction, and
say, that negroes captured in war, or who, invited by proclamation, had taken
refuge with them during the war, could be considered as American property, no
more than ships taken, or horses strayed to them during the war. That, on the
capture of negroes by the British, or the acceding by the negroes to the terms
of their proclamation, they ceased to be the property of the Americans.

If this reasoning of the British be not satisfactory to the people of the
United States, candor will oblige them to admit, that the British government
may think it just, and consequently, a point extremely hard, if not impossible,
to be obtained from them, since the concession would imply a sacrifice of the
public faith, which had been pledged to the negroes. It is not known, that the
British carried away other property.

The amount in value, depending on this point, is greatly exaggerated, having
been stated, in conversation, at many millions of dollars; while it is known,
from authentic documents, that the whole number of negroes, to whom the
provisions in the treaty could possibly relate, fall short of 3000, that being
the total carried away after the peace, including many free negroes, and many
slaves, who, with their proper masters, had taken refuge within the British
lines. Let any man make the probable deduction for free negroes, and those
slaves who accompanied their masters, and consider that the remainder included
those of extreme old age, and the youngest infants, the sick and the well, the
worthless, and those of value, and he must be convinced, however unsatisfactory
the construction given by the British may be to his mind, that the evil is not
of great magnitude, by no means sufficient to press an indemnity for, in hazard
of the property taken from our citizens on the ocean, in hazard of our peace,
and other articles of the treaty, which may be considered beneficial to the
United States.

The fourth reason is, "Because the capture of vessels and property of the
citizens of the United States, made under the authority of the government of
Great Britain, is a national concern; and claims, arising from such captures,
ought not to have been submitted to the decision of their admiralty courts; as
the United States are thereby precluded from having any voice in the final
determination of such cases, and because the indemnification proposed to be
made, is to be sought by a process, tedious and expensive, in which justice may
be delayed to an unreasonable time; and eventually lost to many of the
sufferers, from their inability to pursue it; and because this mode of
indemnification bears no proportion to the summary method adopted for the
satisfaction of British claims."

The first charge here is, that claims arising from captures made on American
property ought not to have been submitted to the decision of their admiralty
courts.

In the year 1753, the king of Prussia complained to the king of Great Britain,
that the property of his subjects had been unlawfully captured and condemned on
the high seas, by subjects of the king of Great Britain. The reply then was,
that the property had been regularly tried in the admiralty courts of Great
Britain, which courts tried causes according to the universal law of nations,
and the stipulations of treaty; that affairs of this kind are and can be
cognizable only in the courts belonging to that power where the seizure is made.

In our own country, the British minister complained to Mr. Jefferson, then
secretary of state, that certain subjects of his king were injured by an
inability to obtain their just demands.

Mr. Jefferson replied, "that no nation can answer for perfect exactitude of
proceedings in all their inferior courts -- it suffices to provide a supreme
judicature, where error and partiality will be ultimately corrected. With this
qualification, we have heretofore been in the habit of considering the
administration of justice in Great Britain, as extremely pure. The
administration of justice is a branch of the sovereignty over a country, and
belongs exclusively to the nation inhabiting it -- When a cause has been
adjudged, according to the rules and forms of the country, its justice ought to
be presumed. -- If any instances of unlawful impediments have existed in any of
the inferior tribunals, they would, like other unlawful proceedings, have been
overruled on an appeal to the higher courts. If not overruled, then a
complaint to the government would have been regular, and their interference
probably effectual. If your citizens would not prosecute their rights, it was
impossible they should recover them, or be denied recovery: and, until a denial
of right through all the tribunals, there is no ground of complaint."

Here it appears, that, in other cases, and with other nations, this has been
thought just by Great Britain: and, in our own country, the doctrine has been
adopted toward Great Britain, and acquiesced in on her part.

It ought likewise to be remarked, that most of the seizures complained of by
the American citizens, have been made by privateers owned by private
individuals; and that every British subject has a right, which neither king nor
minister can deprive him of, to have his cause tried by the courts of his
country; and it is not impossible that some claims may have been made by
Americans, where the property is liable, by the law of nations, to be
condemned. It ought also to be remembered, that the British government made
provision for the regular bringing forward to trial, causes, which, from
certain circumstances of the claimants, had, by strict law, lost their right to
a trial in the supreme courts of admiralty; and that our own government has
sent a person to procure papers and documents from the courts of vice
admiralty, to support the claims of our citizens; to enter appeals, and give
security for their prosecution, free of expense, to the claimants. The trial by
admiralty courts is supported, alluded to, and enforced by many treaties. "In
this method, all captures at sea have been tried, during all the late wars, by
the European powers, and submitted to by the neutral powers. By courts of
admiralty, acting according to the laws of nations, and particular treaties,
all captures at sea have immemorially been judged of, in every country of
Europe; any other method of trial would be manifestly unjust, absurd, and
impracticable." Thus the law and customs of nations have been stated by the
ablest and most respectable civilians of the present age.

It may justly be inferred, that the evils of the unfortunate people, whose
property has been captured, will be redressed, in a manner known and practiced
by other nations, in similar cases, and recognized as right by ourselves; --
that the injuries, apprehended by the town for the sufferers, from the expense
attending the suits, and their incapacity to pursue their claims, have been
fully provided for by the American government.

To provide against evils which this method might not reach, it is expressly
warranted, in the 7th article of the treaty, "that in all cases where adequate
compensation cannot, for whatever reason, be now actually obtained, had, and
received, by the said merchants and others, in the ordinary course of justice,
full and complete compensation for the same, will be made by the British
government to the said complainants."

The other part of the charge, contained in this reason, is, that the mode of
indemnification bears no proportion to the summary one adopted for the
satisfaction of British claims.

The same 7th article of the treaty stipulates, that the declaration of the
president, as contained in Mr. Jefferson's letter, of the 5th of September,
1793, to Mr. Hammond, shall be carried into execution. This letter, which is
annexed to the treaty, states, that having, for particular reasons, forborne to
use all the means in the power of the United States, for the restitution of
certain vessels, the president thought it incumbent on the United States to
make compensation therefore.

The government of the United States, voluntarily forbearing to make use of all
the means in their power to obtain justice for certain British subjects, is
certainly a different case from captures by British subjects, of American
property, on which the British government expressly stipulates, that she will
make use of all the means in her power to obtain restitution from the captors,
of property wrongfully taken; and, if these means are inadequate, from whatever
reason, she will make full and complete compensation to the complainants. The
American government having decided, that the demand of the British minister was
right, chose between two evils, viz. That of compelling restitution from the
wrong-doer when in their power, or making compensation itself. -- It chose the
latter.

The British government chose the former; and Mr. Jefferson declares, in the
letter before referred to, "that where all the means in the power of the nation
are used to obtain restitution, and they fail; he did not mean to give an
opinion, that restitution ought to be made by the government;" but, in this
case, Mr. Jay has induced the British government to use all the means in their
power, and make compensation, when these fail.

It is presumed, that a reference to the article in the treaty, Mr. Jefferson's
letter, and a consideration of the law of nations, as recognized by Europe and
America, will convince all candid men, that the fourth reason of the town ought
to have no weight against the treaty.

The fifth reason is, "Because this compact admits British subjects to an equal
participation with our own citizens, of the interior traffic of the United
States with the Indians, through our whole territorial dominions, while the
advantages ostensibly reciprocated to our citizens, are limited both in their
nature and extent."

It has been well understood, by men acquainted with the country, occupied by
the Indians, within the territory of the United States, and that which falls
within the British dominions, that by far the greatest proportion of furs are
collected within the British dominions. If this is true, much is gained to the
United States by the fur trade, while Britain has nothing in return, but the
liberty of traversing a wilderness, from which no traffic can be obtained. A
little reflection will convince us, that our means of paying for such furs, and
our export trade, opened by this treaty, are really superior to the benefits
derived to Britain, and will prove a source of great wealth to the Americans.

While we are possessed of an extent of sea coast, so immense, compared with
that of Great Britain, it will readily be seen, that the European and Asiatic
goods (the latter of which can be afforded on better terms by us, than the
subjects of Great Britain) exported from the United States, into their interior
countries, must greatly exceed any quantities the British colonists can bring
into the United States on that quarter. The embarrassments attending an
importation from Europe into Canada, New Brunswic, and Nova Scotia, by sea, and
confined as those inhabitants of the countries are in their trade to the mother
country, compared with our advantages of supplying them, by our easy
communication with them, and with every part of the world, will convince all
candid men, that the advantages, of this part of the treaty, are chiefly on our
side.

But still it may be said, they have a right to come into our country, and we
have not a right to enter the seaports of their colonies in our own vessels. If
it appears from an examination of the advantages and disadvantages of the
article of the treaty here referred, to that we receive more than we grant, it
must be admitted that this reason ought not to prevail against a ratification
of the treaty.

By the treaty we are equally admitted into each other's territory on the land
board, for the purposes of traffic. Before the treaty is ratified, neither
enjoys this right. They enter our seaports as freely now, as they can by the
treaty -- we are not permitted to enter theirs. This instrument gives them no
new right on the sea board. It does not diminish any we possess. Under the
treaty, we can carry on commerce with their colonies by land. From reasons
before stated, our trade there must be very advantageous, while theirs in our
territory cannot be disadvantageous.

By this article, therefore, it appears we have gained much, for which we have
given but little, if any thing; for none will pretend, that by the means of the
lakes, the British colonists can under-sell the American merchant; still less
will any pretend that we do not gain immensely more of the fur trade than we
grant.

The sixth reason is, "Because the alien duty upon our merchandise, imported
into the United States by British subjects, in their own bottoms, is, if not
wholly suspended, at least contracted not to be increased."

The 15th article of the treaty contains a stipulation of both parties, that
places their ships and merchandises reciprocally on the footing of the most
favored nations, and merely reserves a right to the British government, to
impose on American vessels, entering into British ports in Europe, a tonnage
duty equal to what British vessels pay in American ports, and such duty as may
be adequate to countervail the difference of duty, now payable on the
importation of European and Asiatic goods, when imported into the United
States, in British or in American vessels.

This must be the article to which the sixth reason alludes -- and it certainly
cannot be "derogatory to our national honor and independence" to be willing to
meet the British nation on terms of equality; when it is considered, that we
have similar articles in our treaties with France, the United Netherlands,
Sweden, and Prussia; that it is common in most of the modern treaties, and
especially was of late inserted in the treaty between France and Great Britain;
at least, it behooves those who make the objections, to show in what consists
our power to compel a nation to trade with us, on terms by which we shall
impose heavier duties on her trade, than we do on others, while she imposes no
heavier duties on us, than she does on others. In general terms, it has been
said, that the treaty was not reciprocal -- here is an objection, that it is
reciprocal.

A FEDERALIST.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
[No. VI.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- OCTOBER 24, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. JURICOLA, No. II. Page 75 2. -- No. III. Page 82 3. -- No. IV. Page 88 4.
The Federalist No. III. Page 95 5. Remarks on Mr. Charles Pinckney's Speech
Page 103 6. Proceedings at Newport, August 19th, 1795 Page 111 7. Observations
on Treaties Page 113 8. Remarks on the Vth Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty Page 116
9. Decius, No. I. Page 118 10. -- No. II. Page 124 11. -- No. III. Page 128 12.
-- No. IV. Page 133 13. -- No. V. Page 136 14. Strictures on the late Conduct
of the Executive Page 141 15. Letter from the Chairman of a Meeting of the
Citizens of Norfolk (Virginia) held August 5th, 1795, to the President of the
United States Page 144 16. President's Answer ibid.
American Remembrancer, etc.
An Examination of the pending Treaty with Great Britain.
No. II.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17.] To the President of the United States of America.
SIR,
IT is respectfully conceived, that there are few points of objection to the
treaty, which require a more dispassionate and full examination, than that
which turns upon the omitted compensation for the negroes taken away in 1783.
It is not pertinent to urge, as has been done, in favor of an erroneous
construction of the treaty of peace, that there is, strictly speaking, no
property in men. It is very unhappy, indeed, but it is also true, that the
census of 1791 proves the existence of such property, as well in the eastern
and middle, as in the southern states; and that the laws of both the
contracting nations, still continue to maintain this property in men, in many
parts of their respective dominions. Were a general manumission instantly to
take place, the ablest friends of the treaty will heartily acknowledge, that
political order, the best result of human wisdom and virtue, would, for a long
time, be banished from our land.

Thus much has been said upon this point, because suggestions of a local
aspect, and calculated to beget heat and to excite prejudices (which, though
truly amiable, are unfavorable to fair discussion) have been occasionally made
by writers on the treaty.

It is understood, that the British government have formerly, or recently urged
the following objections to our allegations, that they first infringed the
treaty of peace by carrying away the negroes from New York.

1st. They have observed, as it is said, that it was an evident misconstruction
of the treaty, and might even be deemed offensive to them, to say that they had
stipulated to commit such a breach of faith, as their delivering up to slavery,
men, who had been induced among them by promises of protection and freedom.

2dly. That the negroes were property in America; that a part of them were
taken in war by the British troops and were consequently "booty" to them, and
no longer the property of the American inhabitants; that the words of the
stipulation are, "Negroes and other property of the American inhabitants."

3dly. That another part of the negroes had come within their lines, and were
to be considered "as strays."

4thly. That the article concerning the negroes in the treaty of peace, might
refer and apply to those negroes which belonged to the American inhabitants
within the British lines.

In considering these answers, which, it is sincerely meant, sir, to state
fairly, a great inconsistency occurs between the first and third reason. In the
first reason it is alleged, that the negroes were induced (i. e. led) within
the British lines; that is, that they went thither for an object aforethought;
for an object promised to them, for an object previously desired by them, for
an object, which was so well understood between the parties, that it could not
be taken away, consistently with the maxi^^s of one of them, concerning morals,
faith, and policy. But in the third reason, it is alleged, that some of the
negroes were as "strays" in the British camps and lines, though induced ( led
or attracted) thither by the strongest allurements and influences, though free
human agents, at least, in that particular; possessing intellectual minds,
knowing the places from which and through which they went, and whither, on
reflection, they intended to go and did go, and at which places of destination,
they accordingly stopped, and demanded the objects, for which they purposely went
thither, and that, too, upon the faith of promises of the British commanders,
which they had heard before they left the places from which they are alleged to
have "strayed."

But further, if any part of the negroes were "strays" they were not "booty"
taken in war by an enemy. Consequently the property of the American inhabitants
was not changed by capture. No capture had taken place, and they ought not to
have been carried away from their owners. All such negroes must have come
within the words used, which are, " any negroes or other property of the
American inhabitants." Moreover as the restoration of strays, on paying
charges, is dictated no less by common honesty and custom, than by the treaty,
it was but a small concession to that spirit of justice, friendship, and
liberality, which was mutually professed at the settlement of peace.

The 4th reason will appear to be quite unfound. The article concerning the
negroes was manifestly intended to restrain the British forces from taking away
certain objects. This could not have been proposed by the British commissioner,
but, indeed, required some delicacy to be brought forward by the American
commissioners, as it might convey an imputation or suspicion of plunder against
the British troops. It is material, sir, that the mind should be satisfied,
that this article was demanded on the part of the United States, because it
must be clear that the American commissioners could not have meant by it, to
bring forward a stipulation to preserve the property of the obnoxious American
inhabitants, who were found within the British lines. It is equally clear, that
the British commissioner could not but consider it as an insult to him and his
nation, if the American commissioners had required a formal promise, that their
generals and admirals should not despoil the unfortunate people within their
lines (in the moment of leaving them) of their negroes and other property.
There is much solicitude for the loyalists, manifested by the British
government in the old treaty, but not for the negroes. A kind disposition to
them probably was not at all wanting; but in the variety and importance of
other objects, they may have been overlooked by the British commissioner at
Paris. The first attraction of attention to the situation of these negroes has
probably been in New York, where the promises of the generals and admirals, and
of the officers commanding the black corpse, brought the case personally home to
some of them, and the negroes themselves would prove strong, though simple,
remonstrants against the measure. Their case was serious and hard, and it was
humane and prudent to let them go, under the idea of a compensation in money.

If it appears satisfactorily reasonable, that the article in question, of the
treaty of peace, could not be particularly intended to prevent the British from
carrying away the negroes belonging to the people within their lines, then it
will follow, that the stipulation could have no meaning at all, unless it
applied to those who had left their master's houses without the lines, and
repaired to the British camps, or were picked up in the course of their
marches: That is, the stipulation could have only applied to those claimed by
our government in all its departments and in every stage of our affairs. It is
held to be conclusive against any construction of a treaty, that such
construction involves "an absurdity;" and surely it is perfectly irrational to
make a solemn stipulation, which has no object to which it can apply or refer.

The words, "any negroes", are very explicit, and do not carry the idea of
property at all. It was the duty of the British commissioner to have proposed a
clear and definite exception of any portion of them to which he thought they
had acquired a title. Not doing so, we have a right to the broad meaning of the
word "any" The United States might consider the negroes in two divisions, one
part as taken in war, and another part (the greatest) as going voluntarily into
the British lines. The property in the latter was not altered or affected by
capture. They were, by the laws, "runaways." The master's legal right was not
impaired. The words, " any negroes," would include both descriptions, and the
subsequent words, "other property," might follow, as a part, at least, of the
negroes continued the property of American owners. Moreover; some of the
negroes were taken upon the high seas, and upon the bays of Chesapeake and
Charleston; and, since the most strict ideas drawn from the laws of property
and war are recurred to, it may be fair to say, that the property in them could
not be changed, until after a regular trial and condemnation in a court of
admiralty in each case. This was done by the American privateer-owners, when
they took negroes in their prizes, and was wanting, no doubt, in many cases in
New York. Those negroes remained, therefore, the property of the American
inhabitants.

When an expression, in so solemn and important an instrument as a treaty, is
constructed and inserted in the utmost latitude (as " any negroes") it is
dangerous to truth, to the harmony of the contracting parties and to their
peace, to narrow it down by inferences from subsequent words. A slight relative
inaccuracy in a following expression may destroy the meaning, utility, and
effect of language, the most clear and unequivocal. In the instance before us,
sir, this really appears to be the case. The words "other property" are made,
by Great Britain, to narrow unduly the preceding words. Taking in all that has
happened and all that was talked over, the passage might have been fairly
construed thus: all captured and runaway negroes and property of the American
inhabitants.

The conduct of this government, at the moment of the fact, was attended with
unanimity, was decided, and clear. Two opinions were not entertained upon the
subject. A very able friend of the pending treaty (Mr. Hamilton, of New York)
moved a resolution on the 23d May 1783, in his place in congress, "that a
considerable number of negroes, belonging to the citizens of these states, have
been carried off contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said
(preliminary) articles." This motion was seconded by Mr. Izard (of South
Carolina) and carried without a division. Consequent measures were, at the same
time, adopted by congress to obtain satisfaction from the British government.

Your own opinions and convictions, sir, on this point, at that time, are
generally understood to have been decided, that the carrying away the negroes,
as it was done, was an infraction of the treaty. Your own memory, sir, your
correspondence with congress and with the British commanders, and your
instructions to Mr. Benson, Lieutenant Colonel Smith, and Mr. Parker, the
American commissioners, place within your power the sure means of ascertaining
the ideas you entertained upon the subject.

From the three unsuccessful motions in the senate, made by Mr. Burr, Mr.
Tanewell, and Mr. Gunn, which severally had for their object further amicable
negotiation for the value of the negroes, and for one or the other of which
three motions every member of the senate (except, it is believed, two who were
sick) voted, it may be considered as the unanimous opinion of the senate, that
this claim was not placed by the treaty, upon a just and satisfactory footing.
But, sir, the circumstances preceding the treaty of peace, throw considerable
light upon the tr^^ meaning of the article relative to the negroes. It appears
from the extracts and minutes in Mr. Jefferson's "Papers relative to Great
Britain," See Carey's Edition, pages 100 -- 103.
which accompanied your message to congress, of the 5th of December, 1793, that
the American commissioners at Paris, in 1782, had held up to the British
commissioner, general claims for negroes and other property carried away in the
course of the war from the several seaports, which had been occupied, as posts,
by the British forces. It appears, that the retrospective claim was not
u^^imurely admitted into the tr^^ty; but this discussion with Mr. Oswald will
go far so convince an impartial judgment, that his ideas in the stipulation
against the further carrying away of negroes and other property, were that no
removal of the black people, who had not been ^^man^pated by the American
inhabitants, was to be permitted by the British commanders, in the intended
evacuation of New York, wherein it was well known to both parties, that great
numbers were collected. Had this been refused by the British commissioner,
without an offer of their value, it is easy to pe^ceive, that the American
commissioners would not have agreed to remove the lawful impediments to the
recovering of the British debts. The United States would profit by a rigid
adherence to strictly legal ideas in the treaty of peace, because all debts
legally extinguished, had so completely ceased to be debts, that the fifth
article could not apply to them. These were many.

But, sir, the propriety of the British commanders holding the negroes taken on
land as "booty," admits of some observation. Civilized nations do not now deem
it proper, that their forces should take as booty, the property of private
persons, not actually sound in arms. It is not at all uncommon to pay
individuals for horses, forage, fuel and provisions. The shocking effects of
the principle of "booty," have been commuted for the more humane measure of
contribution. The war was of a peculiar character and nature; and for that and
other reasons, it was not to be expected, that, in the moment of
reconciliation, Great Britain was to lose sight of these ideas, nor that the
would be governed by summum jus, in her stipulations with the United States.
Her agreement not to carry away any more negroes, was a measure consistent with
"the liberal, manly, and candid manner" in which Mr. Oswald is declared, by Mr.
Adams, Doctor Franklin, and Mr. Jay, to "have conducted the negociations for
peace." It appears reasonable to suppose, that a commissioner, so
characterized, would be desirous to remove from the final act of amicable
separation, to which both parties had agreed, every thing which might wound the
American feelings, or keep alive the painful sensibilities, which had resulted
from the immense destruction of an invasive war. He well knew, that the
American commissioners had represented the parts of this country which owed
money to Great Britain, as in some degree incapacitated from paying their
debts, by the loss of the negroes, which had already been taken away: and
though he might be averse to admit the large schedule of losses of which the
negroes, previously removed, formed a great part, he might naturally compromise
the claim for the past and for the pending, by agreeing in the most
latitudinary terms and ideas, that the troops of his nation should
inoffensively and harmlessly depart without carrying away " any negroes or
other property of the American inhabitants." Upon critical reflection, it will
be perceived that this expression is not entirely wrong, though inaccurate,
seeing that there was one description of the general mass of negroes to be
left, who are now admitted to be property by both parties: namely, those
belonging to the inhabitants within the lines.

Writers upon the interpretation of treaties may be properly consulted upon
this subject. They justly admit us to reason from the general views of the
contracting parties. These have been already noticed in the preceding detail,
and it is hoped, sir, that the length and particularity of the statement will
be excused on account of the great importance of the facts, as evidences of the
highly probable or real views of the parties.

It is another rule of interpretation, that when late exceptions are made, by a
promising party, to the most extensive meaning of the words used, he may be
reminded, that he ought, at the time, to have modified the promise, by altering
the expression. " Any negroes," including all without exception, the party
promising cannot now narrow the meaning of those words, by suggestions from his
own mind or by calling in a subsequent expression to limit the right of the
United States.

It is also a rule, that neither party has a right to interpret. a treaty as he
pleases. So that differing in their ideas, as the two governments do, the
United States have a right to some equal mode of settling the claim. Two
feigned cases, one to be tried in the highest court of each country, and to
determine the matter in favor of that party which might prove successful in
both, are suggested with deference and some doubt. If the courts differed in
their decrees, we should be, at least, as well as we are. Commissioners, with
all the lights derived from the two hearings, might then terminate the matter.
Now Great Britain prescribes the sense of the article contrary to our ideas,
and, of course, contrary to rule. (See Vattel, book 2. chapter 7.)

It is to be remembered, that the rules of interpretation, laid down in the law
of nations, are considered as binding upon all reasonable governments.

It has already been remarked, that every interpretation, which leads to
absurdity, is to be rejected. On this rule, it may be further observed, that it
would be really absurd to suppose, that the British commissioner meant to avoid
injury to the raisers of our produce, or that the American commissioners meant
to save the planters and farmers from being incapacitated from paying their
debts, by restraining the carrying away of the few domestic slaves belonging to
the people, residing in New York.

Proposing to continue the examination of this very important point in a future
paper, I have the honor to subscribe myself, with unfeigned and perfect respect,

Sir, Your most obedient, and Most humble servant. JURICOLA.

No. III.
IT is proposed, sir, respectfully to offer to you, in this paper, some further
reflections upon the article, in the treaty of peace with Great Britain,
relative to the negroes.

It appears to be fair, in the construction of the treaty, to consider what
would have been the effect of reasoning, similar to that opposed to the United
States, if resorted to in construing other parts of the same instrument. The
American artillery was, by the same article, to be left in all the evacuated
fortifications. Let us suppose, as was indeed really the case, that the cannon,
originally belonging to all the fortifications in America, had been cast in
Europe. It might have been urged, that these were never American in one sense,
and in another sense, that they had ceased to be American, having become
British by capture. Then the article about American artillery would have become
absurd, for it would have been a formal stipulation, without any object, to
which it could apply. This case is very strong, because the artillery
appurtenant (in the strict legal and orthographical sense of that word) to the
fortifications, was originally the property of the old royal government, had
been assumed, with the powers of government, by the people, had been thus
acquired, by those who were one party to the treaty, by force, and had been
taken in battle after the declaration of the independency of the United States,
from the armies of that sovereign body politic by the armies of the other
sovereign body politic, in the course of an existing and known war; the said
artillery being instruments of war belonging to the adverse power, and not
private property appertenant, by its nature, to agriculture and menial
household service.

In like manner, the same article and sentence of the treaty of peace obligate
Great Britain to restore and deliver all archives, records, deeds, and papers,
belonging to any of the states or to their citizens, unto the proper states and
persons to whom "they belong;" and this is accompanied with a declaration, that
it shall be so done, although the said objects, so stipulated to be delivered,
may have been, and were, acquired during the course of the war. Here we
perceive, that the objects of the stipulation are considered as belonging to
those from whom they were previously acquired in the course of the war. If the
names and nature of the articles were different, it still will appear, that no
precise distinctions against the proper or owning rights or claims of the
Americans were meant to be set up. Had the arguments, or distinction now used
against the United States, been at all contemplated by Mr. Oswald, he would
not, in the same sentence, have expressly stated other objects, acquired by his
nation in war, "to belong" to the American states and private persons.

The reasonings, in the books upon the law of nations, in regard to booty, have
been generally applied to clearly personal property of alien enemies, taken by
the army of one country in its marches, battles, sieges, and assaults, from the
citizens of the other country. There is an absolute and undeniable peculiarity
in the object in question, and in the manner and circumstances by which the
British troops acquired it, constituting a real difference between it and
either the ordinary objects of "booty," on the one hand, or the manner of
making "booty" on the other, as contemplated and allowed by the military
articles in the law of nations. The difference in quality between this and
every description of personal property whatever, is manifest and great. And
although this fact places the American interest, in the present question, in a
most painful light, yet this disagreeable circumstance cannot impair the
stipulations of a treaty between two powers, both actually maintaining and
acknowledging, at the time of the contract and ever since, the force of those
laws, which relate to the object. -- Laws countenanced by the one, as a parent,
in the infancy of the other -- laws, which, ere the manhood of the United
States was acknowledged by the parent country, they had marked with a
determined hand and a sincere heart, for gradual abolition and extinction.

Such and so great is the difference between this species of property and all
others, that we must apply to it, with proportionate circumspection and candor,
all the ordinary rules and reasonings about the subject of "booty," of war.

But if there should be found a great difference between this and the objects
of military booty, creating reasonable doubts, whether it can be completely
subjected to the rules concerning booty, the difference, in regard to the
manner of acquiring ordinary military booty and that of acquiring this object,
is much more considerable and important. It was not by force of arms, nor by
stratagem, nor by surprise, nor by the ordinary and allowed operations of
enemies, but it was by sending to places to which arms or military stratagem or
enterprise were not extended, and there openly loosening the bands and laws of
that civil society, which had been established by the British and American --
by the party attracting it, and by the party deprived of it. It is also to be
remembered, that those bands and laws of society then were, and still are
existing unimpaired in the dominions of the party so acquiring it.

There are methods of obtaining the possession of the property of an alien
enemy, which would render the property so acquired, not "booty of war." For
example; a military officer of one nation remaining for a time within a town of
an hostile nation, under the sanction of a passport and flag, carries off the
whole military chest of the enemy of his nation: or, a detachment of the troops
of one nation, obtain the military chest of their enemy, from its escorting
party, solely and confessedly by means prohibited by the laws of war. Will
property acquired in these ways be considered, as "booty" of war? Or will it be
considered as the acquisition of irregular individuals, by no means to be
retained by the acquirers, but to be restored to the owner, particularly so far
as it shall be possessed at the moment of reconciliation and peace? The
acquisition of ^merican property, by offers of emancipation, is believe first
to have taken place under the governor of Virginia before the declaration of
independence, who probably under a dangerously incorrect idea of the power of
maintaining martial law, went into the distinct and very different operation of
an attempt to effectuate, by his proclamation, the annihilation of a legal
property, of great aggregate value. When a practice has been commenced by one
in very considerable station, it is too often followed by others, without due
enquiry into its legality and propriety.

The governor of Virginia was not a person, on several score^, who might be
expected cautiously to settle new and nice matters, upon grounds perfectly and
absolutely correct, in the outset of a warm and distracting civil contest,
which it then was. At the present time, no prerogative or power, founded in
common or statute law, occurs to recollection, by which the chief executive
magistrate of Great Britain, or of a British colony (without the rest of the
legislature) could abolish any right of property existing within his
jurisdiction, and that without indictment, information or conviction of crime:
much less could he destroy the existing legal relation between any two of those
classes, who form, together with others, the body of members of the civil
society. Persons legally bound to others for a term of years, or for a longer
time, could not solely by his executive power, be released therefrom. It is a
measure which may be dispassionately affirmed to destroy the bands of the
society -- a measure which the legislature only (if that (...) effect -- a
measure, as it should appear to reason, no^ pract^^ure in peace, no^ a^^owa^e
in war, and abstained from by most of the British governors of that time, the
pain of which, and part of the injuries of which, the stipulation of the treaty
of peace was well calculated to remove. There are very few, indeed, it is
believed, sir, of the wise and good of either country, but what now sincerely
wish, that the measure of thus calling forth the unhappy blacks, had never been
resorted to.

A brief and simple remark, sir, aptly follows the preceding examination of the
strict legal ground on which the object in question stood, as property or not
property: That, as the British commissioner first used words of promise,
including all the negroes, and as he afterward follows with the words "other
property," he must have considered all the negroes as property, notwithstanding
the changes of situation, which they had undergone. It does not appear, by the
notes of the American commissioners, that he ever opposed to their complaints
or representations about the negroes carried away, in the several preceding
years, that they had been, or, indeed, that those remaining were, legal booty
of war, and not objects for compensation. The reason of a stipulation, that is,
the motive which led to the making of it, and the end then proposed, is
considered, and justly, as one of the most certain means of establishing the
true sense; and great attention, says Vattel, ought to be paid to it, whenever
it is required to explain an obscure, equivocal, and undetermined point, either
of a law, or of a treaty, or to make application of them to a particular case.
We are not left, in this case, to vague conjectures. The injuries which one
party had sustained, by the attracting and carrying away of numbers of negroes
by the other party, the bitterness of spirit it had occasioned, and the desire
to prevent such injuries, which could no longer wound an enemy, on account of
the return of peace, and which would have gone far to banish the necessary
spirit of reconciliation, rendered it a matter of found sense and reasonable
business, to exclude rigid ideas about comparatively inconsiderable objects of
property, useless to the British government, and to deliver up all the negroes,
to which no private British claim was made. The difficulty of the faith pledged
to the negroes, absent and unrepresented, was very probably overlooked, amidst
the many and great objects which were to be adjusted. And here it may be
observed, that, if Great Britain had promised an impossibility, which promise
might have taken place, an equitable compensation, or the relinquishment of the
consideration promised therefore by the United States, ought to have settled the
matter. It will appear, from the papers of the time, to every person, who has
faith in the truth of Mr. Adams, Dr. Franklin, Mr. Jay, or Mr. Laurens, that
this consideration was, the removal of the legal impediments to the recovery of
the British debts. Leave us these descriptions of our property, and take you
those, was the natural language: the quid pro quo. The American commissioners
agreed to every article to which their conceptions of their powers extended.
And here it is very material, indeed, to observe, that, if the course of the
business and the communications between the American and British commissioners
had not effectually and accurately fixed the design of the stipulation, it is
wisely permitted by the law of nations, in order to promote the peace of
mankind, to conjecture the meaning of the parties. Now no suggestion or
conjecture, as to the object on which the stipulation could operate, is
offered, except that the offended American commissioners may have thereby meant
to require Great Britain to engage, that she would not despoil the unfortunate
people within their lines, at the moment when she was leaving them to undergo
serious difficulties, on account of their being found in that situation. This
construction, perfectly odious as it regards Great Britain, the rules of
interpretation of the law of nations, forbid. To the objection drawn from the
odium, in which the necessity to ask of them such a stipulation would have
involved the British, is to be added the objection, strong indeed in my
judgment, that the American commissioners would not demand a stipulation,
exclusively in favor of those with whom they were very highly offended, and
omit to secure a great mass of property, much of it belonging to those
political friends with whom they had gone through the war, and whose case was
particularly recommended to them by congress.

It will be just remarked here, that the stipulation does not say, the negroes
and other property, but any negroes, or other property. In a general view, the
words, the negroes and other property, would appear to be more nearly and
accurately relative, than the words, any negroes or other property. The word
"other," placed as it is, has rather the appearance of a casual incorrectness,
than as intended to limit the sense of the broadest possible words, which
precede it, viz. "any negroes," leaving us room to believe, that Mr. Oswald did
not make doubts or difficulties concerning the ideas of property or ownership,
notwithstanding all the circumstances which the negroes might have undergone.
It must be admitted, too, that the British idea of the interpretation does not
free the word "other" from incorrectness. For "any," taken alone, will include
slaves, and free and indented negroes, and yet "other," followed by "property,"
does, in their sense, include only one description, being a very small
proportion of the whole number of the negroes. This may appear like
wire-drawing the subject; but such appearances are inevitable, in cases
involving verbal criticism.

Another, and great, difficulty would result from not extending the stipulation
beyond the slaves of persons within the British lines. Peace being concluded,
their negroes could not be removed, whether British or American property; so
that, as to them, the stipulation was, in a second view, unnecessary. There
would, therefore, be no object, on which the stipulation could operate. The
rules for interpreting the law of nations, it is believed, do not permit any
subsequent words to be so construed, as to render a preceding stipulation or
entire provision null and void.

It appears not improper to remark, that one party cannot reasonably plead,
that a thing is odious, which he has contributed to create in the country or
conduct of the other party, and which is continued to be maintained by law in
his own dominions. To enslave men is, indeed, in every view an offensive and
disagreeable business; but in the sense of an odious stipulation under the law
of nations, any power which maintains by law the purchase of men, never before
slaves, and transports them from their connections, cannot plead, that a
stipulation could not be intended in a certain sense, because it might make
them return men, set free, back into slavery. It is not here meant to insinuate
the slightest reproach to Great Britain on this subject. It is confidently
believed, that she will steadily pursue a safe and suitable plan of abolishing
the slave trade, and slavery itself, throughout her dominions. In regard to the
odiousness of the breach of faith, it has been already observed, that it is
probable the particular situations of all the negroes were not adverted to. No
faithless intention toward them is believed to have existed in the British
government or commissioner. The United States did not long insist upon a
specific performance of the stipulation. There is no reason, therefore, to
doubt, that they would have cheerfully acquiesced in an equitable compensation,
instantly upon its being desired; and nothing but compensation is now possible.
When a stipulation is made by an agent, employed as Mr. Oswald was, on a
sudden, a very able merchant, but not a lawyer, nor versed in diplomatic
business, distant from the scene to which the negotiation relates, and,
consequently, not impressed with every minute circumstance, that had occurred
in the operations of the two powers, in a distant country, it is not unnatural
to suppose, that he might have contracted for an unobserved point or two, which
could not with propriety be complied with, on account of engagements to which
he did not advert, or even on account of the impossibility of performance. If
the matter stipulated were ever so unfavorable (and in that sense odious) or if
it were impossible, the right of the other party in a clear case, to have the
unfavorable or (as the law of nations terms it) the odious stipulation
executed, or the impossible one compensated, would be in full force. The United
States, waving the execution of the odious inadvertent stipulation from a
becoming respect to the feelings and honor of the other party, evidences an
accommodating disposition, to settle the matter by equitable compensation.

Several important observations, on this point, of some length, yet remaining,
I conclude for the present, with assurances of the sincere and perfect respect,
with which

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient and most humble servant,
JURICOLA.

No. IV.
IT has been observed by an able writer (under the signature of Camillus) who
favors a ratification of the treaty, without any further amendments, that
negroes, by the laws of the states, in which slavery is allowed, are personal
property. He, therefore, argues, that, like horses and cattle, and other
movables, they were liable to become "booty." But, sir, this opinion of
Camillus, though on a point cardinally important to the argument, if against
him, appears to be incorrect. In Virginia, negroes did not go to the executors
of the deceased, but passed, by the laws, with lands and other real estate, by
descent, to the heir at law. They were also subject to the same laws of dower
as real estate. They were likewise capable of being entailed, according to the
laws concerning real estate. This situation of the laws, was in that very
quarter, wherein the British governor, alluded to above, commenced that
executive infringement of them, which has formed the unsound foundation of the
opinion, that the blacks could be so attracted or induced from home, as to
become "booty of war." It is very important to this argument, that above half
the slaves, in the late American provinces, belonged to the people of Virginia,
where the foregoing state of law prevailed.

It is not only clear, that a conciliating mind, like Mr. Oswald's, must have
considered it as highly eligible for Great Britain, so to conduct the act of
separation from this country, as to leave no cause of dissatisfaction on
account of so irritating a matter as spoil; but it is certain, that in his
transactions with the United States, he must have considered them as part of
the British empire, resisting its general government, and not as an alien
enemy. This must have been his notion of the matter; for the parliament in
1782, held it necessary formally to authorize the executive power, to
acknowledge the future existence of this country, as a distinct political
sovereignty: and his mission was founded on that act of the parliament.
Moreover, congress considered this unrelinquished pretension, as so important
and proper an idea for them to provide against, that about the same time they
resolved, that such an acknowledgment, ought to precede a negotiation. From
these facts on both sides, it is clear, that the two parties, even while
opposed in arms, were not precisely in the situation of two alien hostile
powers, different from, and unconnected with, each other, de jure, de lege, and
de facto. Before the declaration of independence, the laws of war had but a
certain extent of operation, on account of the municipal laws: and it is
important to observe, that Great Britain, to the last hour of the war, strictly
adhered to this idea in her deportment toward the United States and to foreign
nations, who aided them. Wherefore, as she had some considerable advantages in
the contest, from that principle, she cannot regularly set it aside, in order
to apply the laws of "booty" of war, to this property of the other party, which
was not acquired by military means. It has been observed, that she did not
deliver up ships in consequence of the treaty, and no doubt this very
principle, constituted a part of her reasons; she, considering the vessels of
the United States as condemnable for breaches of the statutes passed by her
parliament, to shut the American ports and prohibit intercourse. Private ships
and cargoes were constantly condemned on the ground of those municipal laws, or
the laws of the empire, as she held them, and not upon the laws of war and of
nations.

Here it appears necessary, to notice by the way, an inadvertent, but material
incorrectness in a writer on the treaty, wherein ships are mentioned as the
only species of property, which does not become booty to an enemy, by the mere
capture or acquiring of possession. It cannot be doubted, that all property
whatever composing the cargoes of ships, all money and baggage of passengers,
all passenger slaves, being the servants of passengers or of the ship's
officers, and all slaves who are mariners or a part of the crew of the ship,
must be libelled and condemned, in a court of admiralty, and cannot be held by
the laws of booty. There is one description of property, which has never yet
been seized or retained by any civilized power, whether taken by land or sea;
and that is, servants or apprentices, bound for terms of years. Yet Lord
Dunmore's proclamation is believed to have extended to bound white persons. It
would be particularly painful and inconvenient to Great Britain, and especially
on the breaking out of a war, if the time of service of the numerous
apprentices on board her private ships, which terms of time are the fair and
actual property of their masters, should be libelled in the courts of
admiralty, of a foreign country, and decreed to be the lawful property of the
captors. This may place in a clearer light, the mighty evils which may be
induced by destroying the legal relations, subsisting between persons in the
same civil society, by a military proclamation, resorted to by the executive
power in a domestic quarrel, or by a foreign enemy in an ordinary war. To take
apprentices and bound servants on land, and to make the right of their time of
service "booty" of war, would extend the evil, though it accords with the
principle of the British proclamation. To transmit such proclamations into
countries remote from the reach of arms, offering freedom from their
indentures, to all such servants and apprentices, as should leave their
masters' houses, thereby dissolving the bands of society, and the existing
municipal laws of property, would lead, in a few years, to modes of warfare,
which would immensely increase its dreadful calamities.

There existed formerly in the kingdom of Great Britain itself, a description
of slaves, well known to lawyers by the name of Villeins. These slaves were
subject to the laws of real estates, and not to the rules of distribution
concerning personal property. They were included among the hereditaments of
that day. This is conceived to be an important circumstance to discountenance
the general soundness of the idea, that a British commissioner could reasonably
deem slaves to be personal property.

The conduct of sovereigns holding slave countries, may be considered as
important on this subject. In the numerous and frequent wars between the
European nations, having West India colonies, the measure of emancipating the
blacks had never been adopted, as a proper and justisiable mode of warfare. It
is not irrelative to this argument to remark, that Mr. Oswald was a great West
India merchant, and he may have remembered, that the blacks, in the conquered
and restored islands, always followed the lands, and were also restored.

Further: A circustance of great importance indeed to Great Britain and her
slave colonies, in relation to this very description of property, was pending
during the time of the American negotiation at Paris. A number of valuable West
India islands had been taken by the French from the British in and between the
years. 1778 and 1782. These were, St. Kitts, Grenada, the Grenadines, St.
Vincents, Tobago, Dominica, Nevis and Montserat. To these may be added, New
Providence and the Bahamas, taken by Spain. Many of the slaves on those
islands, by the arguments offered against the United States, were "booty."
Their case was that of capture before the capitulations or without a
capitulation, in ordinary war between two distinct sovereigns, not commenced by
an unlawful attempt to abolish a legal interest by an act of a secondary
executive magistrate, and continued by military commanders and others,
infringing the legislative jurisdiction, if their jurisdiction extended to such
an act for the consideration moving thereto. It is possible, that the
apprehension of so embarrassing a difficulty, and so deep an injury to the
British West India islands, which were to be restored, may have contributed to
influence the British commissioner to be silent about impediments to the
American claim to "ary" of the negroes. Certain it is, that Great Britain
derived extensive advantages from the circumstance of the negroes on the
restored islands, not being considered as booty; and equally certain it is, and
highly meriting the candid consideration of Great Britain, as to the past and
future, that the deeply indebted planters of those islands, could not have paid
their debts to their British creditors, had considerable numbers of their
negroes been kept from them upon the plea, that they were booty to the armies
of France.

It is of very great importance to this American claim, and to the argument in
favor of the United States, that the laws existing in regard to the whole body
of the negro slaves belonging to Great Britain, at the time of the preliminary
treaty of peace, considered them in the light of real estate. They descended
with the lands to the heir, and were subject to the laws of dower, as lands.
They were not put on the same footing as personal property. The laws of
Jamaica, Antigua, and Barbados, are here referred to. Those islands were the
greatest and most respectable British West India colonies, having, by
accredited accounts, in 1782, near 300, 000 slaves. It is to be observed, that
of all the West India islands, those three alone, remained to Great Britain on
the 20th November, 1782; all the rest and the Florida slave colonies, were
taken by the French and Spaniards. The captured islands were returned in the
ordinary general terms; and in numerous instances, the question of slaves being
booty, and the right of carrying the slaves away, might have been raised by the
French and Spaniards, upon the principles now urged by Great Britain, against
the United States.

It is likewise of some consequence on this subject, that the French colonial
laws, which were founded on the customs of the city of Paris, contemplated this
new description of property, in certain respects, with some of the ideas
attached to immovable property. The plantations and negroes thereon, of
persons dying intestate, vested in the heirs, and could not be sold during
their minority. But the goods and chattels (as we call them) could be sold. It
is also understood, that they were distinguished by the laws concerning dower,
settlements, and the return of estates of persons, dying without issue, to the
source, from which they came to the deceased.

Some ideas concerning the right of poslliminium appear to have an important
relation to this case. Upon the foundation of that right, the Roman law (the
parent stock of the civil law and law of nations) treated slaves, taken in war,
in a manner opposite to that in which things, now called personal property,
were treated. They were not subject to the rules of booty, which worked a
change of property by the mere acquiring of possession, as is the case with
respect to those things at present termed goods and chattels; but slaves were
returned, like real estates, contrary to those rules, to their former owners,
on a pacification. This idea in the ancient law of nations (with the laws of
villeinage) has no doubt had some influence in fixing the practice of leaving
the proprietors of the captured West India islands in possession of their
slaves, in all cases wherein their lands were not confiscated. Although the
islands of. Grenada and the Grenadines were conquered, without a capitulation,
by France, in 1778, no pretense was set up by the French on returning those
islands at the peace of 1783, according to the treaty, that the slaves were
retainable and might be carried away by them as "booty" of war, because not
included in the words, which returned the territory. The position, that the
property in a captured slave remains to an owner, so as to give a sufficient
foundation to claim him in case he shall be in the first owner's country at the
close of the war, receives the greatest countenance from the ancient law of
nations, and from the recent proceedings thereunder between Great Britain and
her ordinary enemies. Wherefore, it seems that the proclamation of Lord Dunmore
is as destitute of support from ^he law of nations, and the practice thereon,
as from the municipal statutes of his former government.

There still exist, unhappily, throughout the world, too many instances of
perpetual and hereditary slavery. No quarter of the globe is entirely free from
it. Whatever may be the virtuous dispositions of many individuals and of
several nations, it is evident, that this painful practice cannot be ended in a
day; nor would too sudden an abolition promote the comfort of those unhappy
men. While it is permitted to continue, it will add infinitely to the misery of
slaves, if they are to be considered hereafter, like the cattle on a farm, as
capable of becoming booty in war; and it must subject to distraction and utter
ruin, all those vulnerable and defenseless islands and colonies, in which these
unhappy people form a large majority of the population.

On a calm review of the grounds of this American claim upon Great Britain, it
will appear, that the acquisition of the blacks by the British forces was
commenced and largely executed by an unprecedented act of a civil governor,
contrary to the laws of the land by which he was bound; that it was continued
by unprecedented acts of the British military commanders, contrary to the law
and usage of notions, by which they were bound -- that any description of
property thus irregularly acquired against the municipal law and the law of
nations, could neither have been rendered the property of the acquirers, nor
capable of being disposed of by them, nor capable of being retained by them;
but that it ought to have been restored by them, even if it were, strictly
speaking, personal property; and that consequently, had it been indisputably of
that description, it could not have been carried away, because of the manner in
which it was obtained. It will also appear, that a majority of the description
of property in question was held, in the United States, as real and inheritable
estate, consequently not subject to the laws of booty; that this was
particularly the case throughout the whole of the late jurisdiction of the earl
of Dunmore; that the ancient law of England made the villein or English slave
likewise inheritable estate, and passed him like the lands; that the laws of
all the remaining. British West India islands in 1782, contemplated the negroes
as real estate; that the French colonial laws considered them, in several very
important particulars, like immovable property; that the ancient Romans held
them to be, like lands, within the laws of postliminium, in opposition to the
rules concerning "booty" in war; that the prescriptive law of nations, as
established by the practice of Great Britain, France, Spain, etc. restored them
after war, as and with real estates, not only in capitulating islands,
conquered from each other, but even, as in the case of Grenada and the
Grenadines, in islands conquered unconditionally, or without capitulation; that
therefore, by those general pre-established rules, both written and
prescriptive, which bound the French not to carry away the negroes from the
restored British islands, especially from Grenada and the Grenadines, the
British were bound not to carry away from the United States any negroes, which
were acquired from the Americans, even if nothing had been said of negroes of
other property in the treaty of peace.

It is moreover hoped, sir, that it has been made to appear to have been the
real intention and meaning of both parties to the treaty of peace, that no
negroes should be carried away. This is evidenced, it is conceived, by the
representations, before and at the moment, of the American commissioners, and
by the omission of counter representations, and the consequently implied
acquiescence of the British commissioner; likewise by the words of the treaty
itself in regard to the negroes, fairly construed and interpreted by the rules
drawn from reason and the law of nations, and supported by similar provisions,
concerning the American artillery, archives, papers, etc. and lastly, this idea
of the meaning of the parties appears to be rendered necessary and inevitable
by the impossibility of finding any other meaning, which either party could
think it useful or proper to make the subject matter of a stipulation.

How far this measure of the British commanders, if really contrary to the law
of nations and to the treaty of peace, is the first fact of the nature of an
infraction on either side, and how far it ought to be compensated, if it was an
infraction of the law of nations or of the treaty, though it should prove not
to have been the first breach of the treaty, remains to be considered.

I have the honor to be, With sincere and perfect respect, Sir, Your most
obedient and most humble servant, JURICOLA.
THE publication of JURICOLA's Examination was dis^ontinued, when the
ratification of the treaty was announced.



The Objections to the Treaty, refuted. [CONTINUED FROM PAGE 72.]
No. III.
THE 7th reason is, "Because the commerce we have hitherto enjoyed in India, in
common with other nations, is so restricted, that in future it will be of
little or no substantial benefit to our citizens."

In the first place, it ought to be remarked, that, according to the rights
claimed by all nations, having colonies, to which all other nations have
acceded, we have no positive right to go to any of the colonies of the British
crown; and that, unless such right is obtained by treaty, the British may
inhibit our trading, or even entering the ports of their colonial possessions,
without affording any just cause of complaint. The right of confining the trade
of colonies to the parent country, and excluding all strangers from any
participation therein, is as old and as universal, as any claimed by the
present commercial nations of Europe.

By our treaty with France, his most christian majesty agrees to continue to
the subjects of the United States, the free ports which have been and are open
in the French islands of America: in all of which free ports the said subjects
shall enjoy the same agreeably to the regulations which relate to them.

An arret of the king of France, on the 30th of August, 1784, declares the free
ports in the islands of America, and the regulations they shall be subject to
-- the size of vessels -- the articles they may carry in, and bring away. The
vessels are to be sixty tons at the least, and the merchandises, wood, salt,
beef, fish, rice, maize, vegetables, skins, furs, rosin, pitch and tar. Salt
beef and fish are subjected to a duty of three livres per quintal, beside the
general duties on the cargo: which three livres are converted into a bounty on
the French fishery. The articles, permitted to be taken away in return, were
limited to tassia and melasses -- and goods imported there from France.
Commissioners were to be appointed to reside in these free ports, to see that
the regulations were strictly complied with; and the more securely to guard the
trade, the merchants and captains of vessels, residing in those ports, were
authorized to choose from among themselves, commissioners who should assist in
watching the foreign vessels and denouncing negligencies. By our treaty with
the United Netherlands, it is is expressly agreed, "that the United States,
their subjects and inhabitants, shall leave to those of their high
mightinesses, the peaceable enjoyment of their rights in the countries,
islands, and seas, in the East and West Indies, without any hindrance or
molestation." It appears, then, that the right of excluding foreigners from a
direct trade to their colonies, and confining the trade of the colonists to the
mother country, is not only practiced among all the European nations, but has
been expressly recognized by the United States of America. Hence it clearly
follows, that every relaxation of the colonial system must be considered as a
favor to that nation, in whose behalf it is so relaxed. This used to be our
reasoning on the arret of ^he king of France, admitting us, in common with
other foreigners, into the West Indies, however limited in the tonnage of the
vessels, and in the cargoes permitted to be imported and exported.

This is considered to be the permanent state of things. In times of great
scarcity in the islands, they have been free for the importation of certain
other articles. In times of war, the French have generally opened their
colonies to all foreigners, because it is more important to have their seamen
on board their ships of war, than be the sole suppliers and carriers for their
colonies. During the last war, in the year 1779, the French opened the trade of
their West India islands to neutral nations: the consequences were alarming to
the merchants of France; and representations were made against the measure from
Bourdeaux, Nantz, and other large towns; and immediately on signing the
preliminary articles of peace, this permission to neutral nations was withdrawn.

The same was done at the Havannah. While Louisburg and Canada were colonies of
France, they were not allowed a direct trade to the West Indies. And such has
been the jealousy of European nations respecting their colonies, that France
once passed a decree, ordering the governors of their West India colonies to
seize and confiscate ships and cargoes coming within a league of the shores of
their islands.

The right we enjoy, without treaty, of going into the British East Indies, is
merely permissive in that nation. The trade has been but of few years. -- Lord
Sheffield, in his argument against admitting the Americans into the West India
islands, remarks, "That the Americans have no more pretensions to go to our
West India islands, than to our East India settlements; yet the latter would be
thought a very extraordinary step."

The sentiments of this writer have been much adopted by the British
government, relative to their West Indies, since the revolution, and may,
therefore, give us some idea what that nation thinks of our right to a commerce
with their East India settlements. If Great Britain should refuse to admit our
vessels into her East India possessions, it would be no just cause of complaint
on the part of the United States. France and Spain, as has been shown, opened
the trade of some of their colonies, during the last war, to all neutral
nations; and immediately on return of peace, that trade was again confined to
the parent countries. Neither the United States, nor any other nation, who had
enjoyed the benefits of this free trade, pretended to claim a continuance,
because it had been permitted to them, or to deny the authority of these two
nations to prohibit them entering their colonial possessions, much less to make
complaint at being denied a privilege, before indulged to them.

Having, then, no rights of commerce in the British East Indies, which that
nation may not take from us, without just cause of complaint on our part, let
us consider what are the restrictions imposed on the trade by treaty, and
whether it will not continue to be a substantial benefit to our citizens,
notwithstanding these restrictions.

By the 13th article, there is an express stipulation on the part of the
British king, that we shall freely carry on a trade with the British East
Indies, paying a tonnage duty on our vessels, no higher than British vessels
pay in American ports, and no higher duties on the importation and exportation
of their cargoes, than shall be payable on the same articles, when imported or
exported in British vessels; the articles exported to be carried to the United
States, and there unladen; and both parties, whenever it shall be found
necessary, shall adopt such regulations as shall be necessary to the due
observance of this stipulation.

Two questions arise on this part of the article -- first, supposing the trade
to be absolutely confined to the carrying of merchandise of any sort, not
absolutely prohibited, to the British East Indies, and the importing from those
settlements, directly into the United States, all articles not absolutely
prohibited.

Is a trade, thus limited, substantially beneficial? We must either procure the
produce of that country, directly from the East Indies, making payment there,
in such articles as shall be convenient for us to carry, and suited to their
market, or we must buy them in Europe, and pay for them there.

Taking for granted, then, that there is no profit on the cargo carried to the
East Indies (though sometimes very great profits are made on the outward cargo)
let it be considered, that, in the first place, we procure all our East India
goods at the first cost, from the hands of the producer. In the latter, they
are purchased with all the additional charges of freight to Europe,
commissions, and profits of every man concerned in procuring them in India,
sending them to Europe, and selling them there; and when it is remembered, that
the trade from Europe is exclusively vested in companies, which pay an immense
sum for this monopoly, and is at vast expense for the support of military and
civil establishments, to secure their trade and possessions, and the orderly
management of their concerns; all which must be charged on the goods, before
they are sold in Europe; it cannot be doubted, that the direct trade to and
from the British East Indies, will continue to be substantially beneficial.
Indeed, it is a well authenticated fact, that East India goods are twenty-five
per cent. cheaper in the United States than in Europe; and, if imported from
Europe by us, the charge must be made of at least ten per cent. more, which
would arise for commissions and exchange. It is clear, then, that we should
procure our East India goods from thirty to forty per centum cheaper, under
this article, than without the permission to go to the East Indies, which it
secures to us; the difference may be fairly called a substantial benefit to our
citizens. This is the case in times of peace; in time of war the difference
will be greater, the charges in Europe being greatly accumulated by war-freight
and insurance.

The other question that arises on this article, is, are we, that is to say,
both nations, constrained to keep this trade thus limited? Has not Britain the
power to grant, and the United States the capacity to exercise, the right of
carrying East India goods to Europe, if both parties consent? When two make a
contract, in which no other is interested; may they not dissolve it, if both
please? If dissolve it, may they not grant to each other larger and greater
benefits than are stipulated in the contract? Does stipulating to grant a
right, by an individual or a nation, preclude a power to extend that right, or
grant or permit the exercise of others? Is there any moral or natural
incapacity in the United States, to receive an extension of the commerce,
granted in that article? Is there any in Great Britain to grant? The answer
must be clear, and will readily show, that the having certain rights, by
express stipulation, cannot interfere with the grant or permission of others.

Has any other power a right, then, to prohibit Britain from permitting, and
America from exercising, other rights? It is not pretended there is any.

If the treaty is ratified, and Great Britain shall choose to demand of us to
make such regulations as will insure to them, that the vessels of the United
States shall carry the goods laden in the East Indies, to the United States,
and there unlade them, we shall be bound to do it. But as this is a stipulation
on our part, and for her benefit, if she chooses to wave it, and clear out our
vessels from her ports for Europe, they will have a right to go there. The
custom house clearance would be an express consent on her part, and our right
could not be contested by any one.

A mistake of the treaty, has induced some people to suppose there are more
restrictions on this trade, than is fairly warranted by the article.

It has been supposed, that the coasting trade of India, now enjoyed, is
henceforth absolutely interdicted. The words are, "it is also understood, that
the permission granted by this article, is not to extend to allow the vessels
of the United States to carry on any part of the coasting trade of the British
territories." The legal, natural import of these words is, by virtue of this
article, no right shall be claimed to the coasting trade of the British
territories in India. The words are intended to prevent a right by implication;
which the generality of the terms, expressing our authority to trade there,
might be construed to include. It certainly takes away no right drawn from
other clauses. If a right to the coasting trade of India, can be founded on
other principles, or derived from other sources; this article certainly does
not infringe that right: for the words are, "that the permission granted by
this article, is not to extend," etc. We are surely then in possession of all
the rights we were entitled to without the treaty.

Great Britain, unless the treaty is ratified, may restrict us from the
coasting trade of her territories in India, and also from all trade there, even
that of direct importation and exportation. If the treaty is ratified, she will
possess, notwithstanding that, the right she had before, and no greater, to
prohibit us from that coasting trade; but she will not possess a right to
refuse us the direct trade of importation and exportation from her East India
settlements. Before the treaty is ratified, she may permit to our vessels the
coasting trade -- after it is ratified, she may permit the same.

By our treaty with the United Netherlands, we recognized, in express terms,
their colonial ^ights in the East and West Indies. Nobody ever doubted they
were free to permit, and we to exercise, the right of ^^ading to their
colonies: and accordingly they have permi^ed to us, and we have enjoyed, a very
lucrative, tho^^^ restricted trade to some of them, especially to S^^ua^^ and
Demarara.

The 8th reason offered by the town against ratifying the treaty, is, "Because
in every stipulation respecting our intercourse with the colonial possessions
of Great Britain, the whole commerce of the United States, in such intercourse,
is colonized in return."

The writer of these remarks is at a l^ss to comprehend the precise meaning of
the town in this reason. Does it mean that if we are permitted to trade with
the colonies of Great Britain, we can trade with those colonies only, or that
we cannot export the articles we obtain there, from the United States to any
other country?

Some nations have surrendered the whole commerce of their colonies to an
exclusive company; others, without establishing an exclusive company, have
confined the whole commerce of their colonies to a particular part of the
mother country -- whence no ship was allowed to sail, but either m^a^fleet, and
at a particular season; or, if single, in consequence of a license. Other
nations leave the trade of their colonies free to all their subjects, who may
carry it on from all the different parts of the mother country, and who have
occasion for no other license than the common dispatches of the custom house.

This is an account of the conduct of parent countries to their colonies, by
the celebrated Adam Smith, in his treatise on the wealth of nations. Anderson,
in his origin of commerce, speaking on the same subject says, "By every
principle of justice, of the law of nations, and the customs of the other
powers of Europe, who had settlements and di^^ant dependencies, the mother
country had an exclusive right to trade with, and to forbid all others from
having any intercourse with them. Such an exclusive right cannot be denied to
be the very essence of colonization."

The above quotations are made for the purpose of obtaining a clear idea of the
rights of nations having colonies, and the obligations and restrictions of such
colonies; that by examining the state of our commerce under the treaty, we may
conclude, whether, conformable to any just idea affixed to the terms,
"colonizing commerce." it can be truly said, "that the whole commerce of the
United States in such intercourse is colonized in return." By colonizing
commerce must then probably be understood, restricting commerce to a particular
country, and particular people.

The 3d and 13th articles of the treaty appear to be the only ones that respect
our trade to the British (...) the 3d, we may trade freely by land in their
colonies, (...) carry there all sorts of goods, and bring back any thing in
return We are still free to procure the like articles, from any other part of
the world -- and what we bring from those colonies, we may export wherever we
please.

There is no restriction as to the articles to be imported into their colonies,
or exported from them by us, nor as to the place to which we may export the
articles, so brought from them.

The colonists may come into the United States, in the same manner, and for the
same purposes, as we enter their territories: but there is no restriction that
we will sell only to them; or which gives to them any exclusive privilege, that
the same rights granted to them by treaty, we are not free to grant to all the
world.

The 13th article gives us a right to trade to the East Indies; but contains no
contract, that we will not buy elsewhere, the like articles, that we procure
from their settlements -- neither does it say, that they shall have the
exclusive privilege of trading with us -- and the merchandises brought into the
United States, from those settlements, are as free to be exported to any part
of the world, as though that article did not exist -- There does not appear any
thing like that sort of restriction on us, or exclusive right to them, that can
justify the terms, "colonizing the whole commerce of the United States, in such
intercourse, in return."

The 9th reason given by the town, is, "Because the clause by which the British
government reserves to itself the right of imposing on American vessels,
entering British ports in Europe, a duty which shall countervail the difference
of the duty payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods, into the
United States, in British or American bottoms, places it in the power of that
government, to enable British subjects to become the importers of Asiatic and
European goods, into the United States, to the exclusion of our own citizens."

It is really difficult to comprehend how the reservation here mentioned, can
be attended with the consequences suggested by the town.

If our vessels enter their ports on equal terms as we permit their vessels to
enter ours, it is hard to conceive, that we should be the losers -- we make a
rule, which the treaty supposes more against them than the rule by which they
assess our vessels. It is not probable that a nation of equal power, would
consent to terms manifestly unequal; neither is it reconcilable with the
common principles of equity and justice, for a nation to object to that part of
the bargain, which reserves equal rights. At any rate, it may be fairly stated,
that it is no objection to the treaty; for it gives Great Britain no new powers
on this subject. She possesses a right of countervailing the difference
mentioned, without any aid of the treaty -- and may exercise it whenever she
pleases. By the treaty she obligates herself to impose no higher duties on our
vessels, than she does on those of all other nations.

The 10th reason is, "Because, although the terms of said treaty appear to be
reciprocal in many instances; yet, from the local situation and circumstances
of the United States, and the pacific system of policy they have adopted, that
reciprocity is merely nominal and delusive."

The town leaves the world to conjecture what are the consequences flowing from
the local situation and circumstances of the United States, and the pacific
system they have adopted, that render the reciprocity purported by the terms of
said treaty, to be merely nominal and delusive. Perhaps the president may see
them from the assertion of the town; but surely it was due from the town to the
people of the United States, to point out the delusion which had been
overlooked by the minister and government of the United States. Not being able
to detect this delusion without further light, the writer must pass over this
reason, with a request to his readers, that they would not assent to this
assertion, without examining the treaty for themselves, and at least, desiring
the committee or selectmen of Boston, to expose the fraud before they pass
censure on their whole government, for being deluded blockheads, or something
worse.

The first part of the 11th reason is, "Because it prevents the United States
from imposing any further restrictions on the British trade alone."

If it were not the town of Boston, so respectable for wisdom and good sense,
that offered this reason, one would hardly suspect that the reason originated
in any thing, but a disposition to prevent all pacific arrangements with that
nation. For no one will believe, that Britain, or any other nation, who is not
an humble, vanquished suppliant -- would ever consent to make a treaty, by
which she should place us on the same terms as the most favored nations; and we
reserve to ourselves the right to treat her, on terms less favorable than we do
others. In our treaty with France, the United Netherlands, Sweden, and Prussia,
we have reciprocally agreed to place each other on such terms. It is not
wonderful that Mr. Jay could not induce the British nation, to bind themselves
to treat us, as well as they do others, and leave us at liberty to treat them
worse than we do ^^^ers, when they give up privileges in Europe, equal to what
we received from other powers, with whom we had treaties, and some very
important ones, not received from them; such as a trade with the East India
settlements, and their colonies on the American continent. The 6th and 9th
reasons, and this part of the 11th, may possibly serve as a comment on the 10th.

A FEDERALIST.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Remarks on Mr. Charles Pinckney's Speech, See Vol. I. page 5.
Delivered at St. Michael's Church (Charleston) the 22d July last, on the
Subject of the Treaty: published in the City and State Gazettes of the 4th
August, 1795.
IT has been said, by a writer much admired, that "however useful jealousy may
be in republics, yet when, like bile in the natural, it abounds too much in the
body politic; the eyes of both become very liable to be deceived by the
delusive appearances which the malady casts on surrounding objects." From this
cause, probably, have proceeded many of the fears and apprehensions excited by
the treaty.

The speech in question begins with a violent attack on the president, for
having committed two breaches of the constitution, the one in having appointed
the chief justice of the United States, envoy extraordinary to Great Britain;
the other in having given him instructions, respecting a treaty, without
consulting the senate.

1st, No part of the constitution is quoted to show that the appointment of Mr.
Jay infringed it: but an inference is drawn from a supposed inconsistency in
sending a man to negociate a treaty, respecting which he might be called on to
give a judicial opinion. This objection might as well have applied to his
original appointment as chief justice, having previously negociated a treaty,
respecting which he might be called upon to give an opinion from the bench. The
objection would be as good against appointing any man a judge who had ever
negociated a treaty, as against appointing any man a negociator who had been a
judge. Perhaps the objection would be as strong against placing on the bench
any man who had publicly expressed an opinion on a treaty, which he might be
required to consider as judge, or a member of the legislature who had been
concerned in making a law, which he might afterward, as judge, be called upon
to expound, or, in short, a hundred other such cases. Had there been a
constitutional incompatibility, in that case, the instant Mr. Jay accepted his
commission as envoy, he would have ceased to be chief justice; because, where
the constitution creates an incompatibility, it vacates instantly one office,
by the acceptance of the other. Either, therefore, there was an
incompatibility, or there was not. If there was, then the instant Mr. Jay
accepted his commission as envoy, he ceased to be chief justice; and all the
noise about sending the chief justice, was idle and ridiculous; if there was no
incompatibility, then all the noise about violating the constitution, was
equally idle and ridiculous. Was there a greater violation of the constitution
in taking one of the judicial department to be an envoy, than one of the
legislature? yet Mr. Monroe, being senator, was appointed minister to France.
The constitution is silent about both; the inconsistency applied equally to
both: But there was not a whisper of disapprobation at the appointment of the
latter. Personal, and not public motives, account for this difference. Mr.
Monroe, indeed, resigned his office of senator, after his appointment: Mr. Jay
might have done the same. At the time of the appointment, the same objection
applied to both; it depended on the discretion of both, to resign or not. Last
year, the governor of Pennsylvania sent the chief justice of that state as a
special envoy or commissioner, to negociate terms of peace with the insurgents,
and to make a treaty or convention, respecting which he might be called upon,
as chief justice, to give an opinion from the bench. The president, at the same
time, sent one of the judges of the supreme court of Pennsylvania, o^ the same
mission: not a syllable of disapprobation was uttered against either
appointment. The probable evils which have been threatened by the chief justice
of the United States remaining on the bench, after negociating the treaty, are
done away; for he has actually resigned.

2d, The president is charged with having violated the constitution by
withholding from the senate a knowledge of the instructions he gave to Mr. Jay.
The speech tells us, "that it was supposed by some of the members, that the
president ought to have submitted to them the whole of the business upon which
Mr. Jay was to have been sent; but a motion to that effect was brought forward
and negatived:" The senate, who are certainly competent judges of their own
rights, and not likely to surrender them, then conceived they had no right to
call on the president for the instructions. The speech tells us, "that many of
the members of the senate were of opinion, at that time, that Mr. Jay was sent
for the purpose of obtaining compensation for the depredations in the West
Indies, to demand the delivery of the posts, and the execution of the treaty of
peace; and to require a stipulation that our vessels should not in future be
liable to seizure or condemnation on any pretense;" and the conclusion drawn,
is, that those and others, alone, were the subjects on which Mr. Jay was
supposed by the senate to be sent to negociate; and yet in another place it
tells us, that a motion was made in the senate, to require the president to
submit the whole of the business upon which Mr. Jay was sent; consequently, the
senate must have believed that th^se were not the only objects, about which he
was sent. The speech then lays down this doctrine, in positive terms, "that the
constitution gives no power to the president to commence a negotiation, withou
previously submitting his intentions and instructions to the senate, requiring
their advice, and receiving their assent;" and the words of the constitution
"to make treaties, by and with the advice and consent of the senate," are the
text for this strange commentary.

The extent of the position is, "that the president has no power to enter into
any negotiation whatever, without previously consulting the senate and
receiving their opinion, advice, or assent, as well with respect to the
necessity of such a negotiation, as to the propriety of his instructions;" a
position, inconsistent with the very principles of our constitution, as well as
of every other among civilized nations; repugnant to the practice which has
prevailed since the first operation of the present government, and to the
practice which now prevails in France, where democratic principles are carried
to the utmost extent; a position which would reduce the president from being
the supreme executive of the union, to the mere organ and instrument of the
senate.

By the constitution " the executive power is vested in the president of the
United States." Were there no limitation to this power, in relation to
treaties, there would result to the executive, as such, the power of making
treaties. But the constitution, in specifying the powers of the president, has
wisely limited this power, and has declared, after mentioning the various
duties of the president, some of which he may perform without the intervention
of any other branch of the government, that "he shall have power, by and with
the advice and consent of the senate, to make treaties."

This limitation of the executive power cannot be extended further than the
clear import of the terms; it can apply only to the making of treaties, and not
to the negociations which precede them. The president may, therefore, of his
own mere motion, commence or enter on any negotiation, and give what
instructions he may think proper to his agent; but the negotiation, when
completed, cannot constitute or make a treaty, which shall be obligatory on the
nation, without the advice and consent of the senate, that is, without they
consent to the treaty which he shall lay before them, and advise him to ratify
it. This construction is the just one, is consistent with reason and propriety,
has been the construction put upon the constitution by the senate themselves,
in all the treaties which have been made since the year 1789, under the present
government, and is the practice established even by the republic of France,
where the committee of public safety, their present executive, without
consulting the convention, negociate with foreign powers, and conclude
treaties, which are afterward laid before the convention, to be ratified, as
appears by the report on the subject of negociations, by Cambaceres, lately
published, and by their proceedings in the treaties with the grand duke of
Tuscany and the king of Prussia. A contrary construction would be replete with
difficulties and embarrassments, which would nearly prevent the formation of
any treaty, or would deprive our government, in its negociations, of those
advantages of secrecy, dispatch, and the chance of events, which all other
governments possess. The doctrine laid down in the speech is, that "no
negotiation can be commenced, no instruction can be given, without the previous
consultation and approbation of the senate." In order to test th^^ doctrine by
the touchstone of reason, let us enquire into in operation. The senate consists
of thirty members and the vice president of the United States, residing in
various parts of the union, in New Hampshire and Georgia, in Vermont and
Kentucky, and, in a few years, will have members living in the province of
Maine and in the South Western Territory: this body has, like the other branch
of the legislature, its stated annual session, at the close of which the
members return to their respective homes and families. It is not a stationary
privy council to the president, residing at the seat of government; and, except
in the cases of consenting to treaties and appointments, it has no executive
duties whatever to perform; it is, by the constitution, a branch of the
legislature; and is only added, as a restraint on the executive, in the two
cases mentioned. Suppose, then, instructions submitted to them by the
president, in relation to a certain negotiation, and approved and transmitted
to Europe; various occurrences may, immediately on their arrival, require a
change in them; the loss of a battle, the death of a king, the removal of a
minister, or other circumstances intervening, to change the present posture and
aspect of affairs, may turn the tide of events, so as to require an entire
change of instructions. As in the field, so in the cabinet, there are moments
to be seized as they pass, and they who preside in either, should be left in a
capacity to improve them: to discern and to profit by these tides in national
affairs, is the business of those who preside over them. In all these cases,
should the president be required to convene the senators, from the borders of
the St. Croix to the St. Mary's, and from the Atlantic to the Ohio or lake
Champlain, to reconsider and renew their instructions, it is evident, that the
opportunity would be lost; secrecy and dispatch, so necessary in negociations,
would be unattainable; and it would require ages to bring any treaty to a
conclusion. Such a construction would be a felo de se; for it would amount to
this, that no treaties should ever be made; which was certainly not the
intention of the constitution. So often and so essentially have we heretofore
suffered, from the want of secrecy and dispatch, that the constitution would
have been inexcusably defective, if no attention had been paid to those
objects. Those matters which, in negociations, usually require the most secrecy
and the most dispatch, are those preparatory measures, which facilitate the
attainment of the objects of the negotiation. The constitution has so wisely
disposed of the power of making treaties, that, although the president must, in
concluding them, have the consent of the senate, yet he can, in the first
instance, have every advantage which may be derived from dispatch, secret
intelligence, or change of events. Suppose, that, during the recess of the
senate, circumstances in Europe were suddenly to exist, which would offer a
most favorable opportunity for a treaty; if the president were restrained from
even instructing our ministers, on the subject of a future negotiation, without
convening the senate, the opportunity would be irrecoverably gone; and the
doctrine goes all the length of this; for it precludes the entering on any
negotiation whatever, without the previous and precise instructions of the
senate.

Such would be the embarrassments and dangers resulting from that position; on
the other hand, by leaving it to the executive to negociate, and to the
executive and senate to conclude, every advantage is secured, every
disadvantage is avoided; for, if the senate do not approve of the treaty, they
can reject it, and desire the president to renew the negociations: and this can
be no possible cause of war, as the speech supposes; for foreign nations, with
whom we negociate, will know that the articles, signed by the minister, are of
no effect, until ratified by the president and senate; it is always expressly
declared, that they shall not be binding, until ratified by the president and
senate.

We find, then, by the constitution, that the executive power is vested in the
president; and I have advanced, that every power of an executive nature is
incident to the president, where it results from the nature of the federal
government, and is not limited and restricted by some special provision. The
association of the senate with the president, in relation to this point, is
limited merely to the making treaties, which are then the supreme law of the
land; and does not extend to the entering on, or commencing negociations, which
are not the law of the land, but mere instruments of writing, mere obligations
in embryo, which have no effect or validity, and do not become treaties, until
approved by the senate. The difference between commencing a negotiation and
making or concluding a treaty, is too obvious to be questioned: the limitation,
then, being confined to the making or concluding the treaty, all the other
preparatory powers result to the executive, as such, by virtue of the
constitution.

The opinion of congress in 1789, in an analogous case, where the interposition
of the senate was much more plausible than the present, may throw some light on
this subject. A proposition was introduced by a member, whose bias in favor of
the most democratic principles is well known; in which the power was given to
the president, of removing all executive officers at his mere will and
pleasure. It was objected to, on the idea, that as, by the constitution, the
president could not appoint those officers without the consent of the senate,
so it was intended by the constitution, that he could not displace them without
the consent of that body; the various inconveniences which would flow from
this construction were in reply enumerated; and it was urged, that, the
constitution being silent on that point, the power necessarily resulted to the
president, as the executive power, it being an executive trust: on this
principle, the motion passed both houses, and is now the law of the land.

The right of the senate to advise the president to enter into a negotiation,
is a distinct question, and not involved in the present consideration, and,
therefore, unnecessarily introduced; the only question, pertinent to the
subject, is, whether he may commence a negotiation, without their advice; and
of this the preceding reflections leave no doubt.

It is said in the speech, that the right given to the president, So nominate
to offices, has already placed in the hands of one man, all the honors and
offices of the government; and that this is an unexampled power in any thing
that had even the appearance of a free government.

If this power is a salutary one, we should rejoice at his p^^ssessing it; if a
pernicious one, why did the convention give it? who is to blame, but those who
created it -- who so much to blame, as those who wished his power to be out of
the reach of the people for eight or ten years, instead of four? The
convention, some say, without authority, presented us a constitution which we
were obliged to adopt or reject in toto, a government to bind us for ages: the
president, by constitutional authority, as has been shown, presented to the
senate a treaty, the most injurious part of which must expire in two or three
years; which is the most culpable? if there are dangerous powers in the
constitution, the convention, certainly, for creating them, not the president
for conforming to them. The nomination to offices is certainly a high trust;
but it may be questioned, whether it gives the influence attributed to it:
where there is one appointment, there are often a dozen disappointments --
where one friend is made, a dozen enemies spring up -- and human experience
would justify us in suspecting, that disappointments will have created more
enemies to the president, on this occasion, than appointments have ever
procured him friends. The remark, that the power is unexampled in any thing
like a free government, is altogether erroneous. In Pennsylvania, the governor
makes all appointments, except sheriffs and coroners, without any countroul. In
New York, the governor nominates nearly all officers to the council of
appointment, consisting only of four members, and has besides a casting vote.
In Massachusetts, Vermont, and Maryland, the governor, with the consent of the
council, makes nearly all appointments.

The opinions of Mr. Jay, are next animadverted on, in the speech, as
disqualifying him from being a proper envoy to England. If Mr. Jay's supposed
partiality to that country, and supposed dislike to France, were objections to
his being sent to Great Britain, undoubtedly Mr. Monroe's avowed partiality for
France, and his avowed hatred of Great Britain, were at least as powerful
objections to his being sent to France; yet Mr. Monroe was selected by the
president, for that very reason, and the choice was generally approved of. It
did not follow, that, because Mr. Monroe would have been willing, in the
senate, to have voted advantages to France, without any equivalent, that, in
the execution of his trust, as envoy, he would not have stood out to secure us
advantages by treaty; neither did it follow, that, because Mr. Jay, like a
conscientious man, declared his opinions, as a judge, when his duty required
it, he would not forego his own opinions, and, in pursuance of his
instructions, as an envoy, do the best he could for his country. instructions,
as an envoy, do the best he could for his country. -- According to the
reasoning in the speech, Mr. Jay should have been sent to France, because his
dislike to that country would have stimulated him to concede nothing to it, and
to wring from it every thing he could; and Mr. Monroe to England, for similar
reasons. -- Others, however, who had more correct ideas on the subject,
conceived, that this would have been an inversion of the natural order of
things, and of the accustomed course of diplomatic proceedings, which has been,
to send to foreign courts persons likely to be acceptable to them. Had Mr. Jay
been sent to France, and Mr. Monroe to England, the probability is, that both
appointments would have given offense. More stress, however, is laid on Mr.
Jay's supposed dislike to France, than circumstances would warrant. If Mr. Jay,
in his negociations at Paris, in 1783, found the then minister, Count de
Vergennes, disposed to sacrifice the essential interests of the United States,
to the then over-bearing policy of France -- and, ten years afterward, found
citizen Genet (in 1793) at Philadelphia, trampling under foot the authority of
the president, and the independence of our government -- and, on both
occasions, expressed his disapprobation of their attempts -- it does not
thenceforth follow, that he bears any dislike to the French nation, or would be
desirous of engagements hostile to her interests. Indeed, the care with which
it is expressly declared, in the treaty with Great Britain, that no part of it
shall be construed, in any respect, to interfere with our former treaties, is a
proof of a contrary disposition; and one of the highest panegyrics which has
ever appeared on Mr. Jay, is from a Frenchman, celebrated for his republicanism
and patriotism, Brissot. Neither does it follow, that opinions, expressed by
individuals at home, would preclude them, on foreign embassies, from asserting
claims, inconsistent with those opinions; if so, Mr. Jefferson would have been
a more improper negociator than Mr. Jay, on one of the most important, and, to
some, most offensive parts of the treaty; for he had expressly and publicly
recognized the right of the British nation to capture the property of their
enemies (...) board our ships. But ministers speak the language of their
employers, and are governed by their instructions, to which their own private
opinions always yield: there can be no doubt, that Mr. Jefferson would have
exerted all his great talents to accomplish that important point, of free ships
making free goods, notwithstanding he had acknowledged the law of nations to be
otherwise. The remark, therefore, that Mr. Jay was devoted to the interests of
the British, is an unfounded calumny against a man, who, however mistaken he
may have been, in sacrificing too much to the preservation of peace, or however
he may have under-rated our strength, or over-rated that of the other party, or
however misinformed or uninformed he may have been, is believed, by all who
know him, to possess a purity of mind and an integrity of heart, which cannot
be affected by the little attacks of private pique and resentment, or
disappointed malignity; whatever opinions the public may entertain of his
talents, certainly his yielding the point "free ships not making free goods,"
which the speech calls the worst part of the treaty, will not place him on a
worse footing in the public estimation, in the event contemplated by the
speech, than his supposed competitor, Mr. Jefferson, who explicitly abandoned
that point, when secretary of state, whose partisans, in combination with all
those, whom Mr. Jay's ungracious manners have ever offended, eagerly avail
themselves of the present clamor, to build up the reputation of the one on the
ruins of that of the other.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Proceedings at Newport, In Town Meeting holden by adjournment on the 19th of
August, A. D. 1795.
THE committee appointed at a town meeting, legally convened on Friday last, to
take into consideration the treaty now pending between Great Britain and the
United States, having reported their opinion thereon, it was Resolved, That
this meeting do approve said report; that a fair copy be made out; that it be
signed by the moderator, and that the town council of the town of Newport be
requested to transmit the same to the president of the United States without
delay, as the sense of this meeting on said treaty, together with this resolve.

REPORT.
The committee, to whom was referred, by their fellow citizens, the
consideration of the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, now pending
between his Britannic majesty and the United States, report, That they have
considered the said treaty with attention, and disapprove of the same, for the
following reasons:

Because the detention of the western posts has been very injurious to the
United States, and for which no compensation is contemplated in said treaty.

Because the 3d, 13th, 15th, and 17th articles of the treaty, which regulate
the trade, commerce, and navigation between Great Britain and the United
States, are most decidedly advantageous to the former, and will be very
destructive to the commerce and navigation of the latter.

Because the 4th and 5th articles render the boundaries of the United States,
as settled by the treaty of 1783, doubtful, and may occasion a great loss of
territory to the United States.

Because the demands of British creditors are fully attended to, and their
complaints redressed, agreeably to the stipulation of the treaty of 1783;
whereas the claims of the American citizens, for property carried away, by the
British, in violation of the same treaty, are passed over in silence.

Because the mode pointed out for American citizens to obtain compensation for
the spoliations committed on their commerce, is remote, expensive, and
uncertain; which in justice, we conceive, ought to have been immediate and
complete; whilst the stipulations for restitution to be made by the United
States, for the property taken by privateers equipped in said states, or
captured within the limits thereof, is speedy and energetic.

Because, by the 9th article, a privilege is bestowed on the subjects of Great
Britain, in expression reciprocal, but, considering the difference in the
circumstances of the two nations, wanting an equivalent, and invading the
rights of individual states.

Because we think it impolitic, to give up by treaty, the power of attaching
British property in the United States, in case of national differences and
discontents.

Because, in this treaty, certain articles of export are considered as
contraband of war and just objects of confiscation, which, in our own treaties
with other nations, are considered as ^^ree.

Because the 23d and 24th articles are calculated to embroil the United States
with the French republic, and will probably make our seaports the scenes of
riot and disorder. They also ten^ to make a common cause between the United
States and Great Britain, and to distress our allies.

Because no provision is made in the treaty to protect and secure our seamen,
that valuable class of citizens, from being impressed into the British service;
and no stipulation is therein contained for the relief of those now detained on
board British ships of war.

Your committee would further observe, that the treaty contains many sentences
of doubtful construction; that it is deficient of the reciprocity, which ought
to be the basis of all contracts; that it is an infraction of the friendship
and gratitude which the republic of France may justly claim from the United
States, and that it may be ruinous to the agriculture, manufactures, and
commerce, of the United States.

Committee.
Oliver R. Warner, Edward Simmons, Thomas Rumreill, Samuel Vernon, John L.
Ross, Thomas G. Pitman, Caleb Green, Joseph Briggs, Christopher Ellery,


FROM THE BOSTON CHRONICLE. Observations on Treaties.
Messrs. Adams and Larkin,
I MUST request the attention of the public, through the medium of your
Chronicle, to the following passage in the federal constitution; it is in the
2d section of the sixth article. It provides, "that this constitution and the
laws of the United States, made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or
which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the
supreme law of the land; and the judges, in every state, shall be bound
thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of any state, to the contrary,
notwithstanding."

It must be visible, from this passage, that treaties stand precisely on the
same footing with other laws, and have no authority over them. They are
supreme, nor as they refer to the federal constitution, but simply in their
relation to the constitutions and laws of any state; and the judges are
directed thus to consider them. How far they may be extended, so as to alter
the local constitution, is a very delicate question, and of great importance to
be considered; for if their power extends to the full length which the
president seems to suppose, in his answer to the town of Boston, there is not a
government in the union, the constitution of which does not lie at the mercy of
the executive power, supported by two-thirds of the senators, provided the
republican form is retained. The federal constitution, it is true, has
guaranteed a republican constitution to every state in the union; but this
provision is extremely vague and indefinite. Republican forms of government may
be more tyrannic than monarchical. The governments of Holland and Venice, were
not so free as the ancient government of France, or the present government of
England.

If the president, with the advice and consent of two-thirds of the federal
senators, has an absolute power to make treaties, they may sweep away all the
laws and constitutions of the several states, without any check from the one I
have already mentioned.

Every body knows, that the federal constitution, at the time of its being
proposed, was not fully approved by a large majority of the people; although it
was then adopted, from the presumed necessity of some form of government being
accepted at that period. The power, with respect to treaties, was not then
understood; it was acknowledged by its friends, to have been a mere appeal to
the common sense of the citizens, on a fair experiment of its merits. It admits
of improvement and alteration, by an article inserted in it. If the
construction of that article by the president, respecting his power to make
treaties, be just, it is high time the inhabitants should demand a revision of
the federal compact -- that new checks should be provided, to restrain this
exorbitant power.

But if the president, with two-thirds of the senators, are now vested with an
absolute, uncontrouled right to make treaties, obligatory to the utmost extent,
what then are the powers to restrain them? It is provided, in the first article
of the federal constitution, that the congress "shall" regulate foreign trade.
The English trade is a material part of our foreign commerce. The treaty, which
the president has ratified, virtually declares, that the congress shall not in
future regulate our trade with Great Britain. The constitution provides also,
that the legislature shall regulate our trade with the Indian nations; may not
the president and senate make such a treaty as shall also wrest that important
privilege from the house of representatives, and thus monopolize all the
patronage and benefits annexed to it?

Either the treaty is constitutional, or not; if the latter, it is a nullity;
if the former, the powers of the whole congress can be controuled, and even
annihilated, by a part.

Under the old confederation, we were distinguished by our imbecility at home,
but we appeared with dignity abroad. In our diplomatic arrangements with
foreign nations, we certainly were infinitely superior to what we had a right
to expect. We were then in our childhood, and yet the vigor of our policy had
the stamp of adolescence. Every treaty we then formed, and we formed four with
four of the most considerable nations in Europe -- with France, with Holland,
with Prussia, and with Sweden -- recognized the rights of a free trade, as an
essential claim, resulting from our independence, as a nation, and of our
remote situation from the vortex of the European politics, in which we were
determined never to be involved. But how contrary is this conduct to our
present! While the right of a free navigation is maintained in those national
engagements, to the utmost latitude, our late treaty with England has set them
all aside, and placed our navigation on so precarious an establishment, that
nothing but the distresses or generosity of the French republic can save us
from total ruin. In this late specimen of out talents in negotiation, we have
counter-worked, at a stroke, all we have been doing from the first moment of
the revelation. What will hinder the French from taking the same freedom with
our trade which the British are now taking every moment?

Before this treaty, we had necessity to plead; but we have now consented to
permit the exercise of a power over our navigation, which has never yet been
acknowledged by a nation. The British now have a right, by compact, signed and
sealed, to every thing they wished to do, and infinitely more than they ever
expected to obtain. They are permitted to take our provisions bound to France;
will not, then, the French take our provisions bound to England, Spain, and
Portugal? The British are permitted to take and condemn all our naval stores,
found in our vessels; will not the French and Dutch claim the same privilege?
The British are permitted to take and condemn French goods in American bottoms;
will not the French and Dutch cruisers take and condemn all English goods, in
the same manner? It is well known, that nearly all outward bound commodities,
of the growth or manufacture of Great Britain, are shipped on credit to these
states, and are insured in England previous to their exportation. All these
vessels are thus rendered liable to capture, and the goods to condemnation. For
every treaty with the powers enumerated, stipulates, with great precision, that
no future privilege shall be extended to another nation, which shall not
equally extend to them. If this be the case, and I have no doubt of it, and the
republic is not restrained by more than common generosity, she will do as the
British do; their conduct will be her rule; and our blind confidence in our
present corrupt policy, will be rewarded by an extent and variety of sufferings
beyond example.

DIPLOMATICUS.

Remarks on the Vth Article of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
IN the treaty announced in the public papers, between his Britannic majesty
and the United States; it appears by article the 5th, that the river St. Croix,
our eastern boundary, is to be ascertained by commissioners appointed in the
manner following: "One commissioner shall be named by his majesty, and one by
the president of the United States, by and with the consent of the senate
thereof; and the said commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third, or,
if they cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and of the two
names so proposed, one shall be drawn by lot, in the presence of the two
commissioners." Not being present, nor informed, what notice was taken of this
part, at the late meeting of the inhabitants of this town, it may not be amiss
to suggest a few hints, on this subject, by one who has endeavored for some
time past, to obtain information respecting the dispute.

The mode of settlement seems more like a reference, or arbitration; with this
difference, that, like a lottery, it will p^^ponderate on the side, which draws
the lucky prize, and, of course, will give force and sanction to the claim.

It is a fact, incontrovertible, that the Eastern River of Passamaquady, called
by the Indians, Mag-ga-gau-da-wick, was known by public notoriety, for the two
last centuries, as the true St. Croix. There are records of a settlement made
between the courts of Versailles and St. James, about the years (...) and 1622,
establithing this river; and the several treaties between the two nations,
until Nova Scotia was last ceded to Britain, confirmed it. Since which, some
local disputes arose between Massachusetts and Nova Scotia, but were always
terminated the same way. Even during the administration of Governor Bernard,
who was well known never to favor the interest of this country, it was then
proved by indisputable evidence to be the veritable St. Croix; and though it is
not essential, in this case, still it may be observed, that when the Royalists
moved from Penobscot to St. Andrews, the entrance of Shuduck river) in 1783, it
was publicly noticed among themselves, as presumptuous, being uncertain of a
right in so doing. What has been done, since the revolution, on this subject,
is too recent, and so well known, it needs no comment.

Thus the boundaries were, and ought to be established. Consequently that
valuable extent of territory, which lies between the said St. Croix, and the
river Shuduck (which the British now call the boundary) is the indubitable
right of Massachusetts.

As this article in the treaty now stands, the claim is made equal; so that
should the commissioner on the side of the United States draw the person he
proposes, we may have a chance to secure what was before our own -- if, on the
other hand, the British commissioner draws the person, Britain obtains a
property, she has no title to, separate from her connections with
Massachusetts. From these circumstances, it may be easy to conclude, that those
commissioners, or arbitrators, should have been independent, disinterested
persons, unconnected with the dispute; authorized to hear both parties, and
determine accordingly; but if it is executed under the present -- it is like a
man who takes a purse of money from his pocket, lays it on the table, and calls
to another to draw lo^s who shall have it.

The author of this is no way influenced by any person or party, but writes
from a full conviction of the importance of the subject to this country. He
presumes that from inadvertence, or imperfect information, this part has not
been properly attended to, and relies, that, in due time, such attention will
be paid to the object in contemplation, that our country may not be deceived,
and deprived of any of those advantages and rights, which, in justice, are its
due.

BOSTON, August, 1795.
Reflections on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
No. I.
IT was not difficult to foresee that the treaty with Great Britain would
excite much public discussion -- It is only to be lamented, that the knowledge
of it has been withheld so lon^^ that the investigation can now answer no other
valuable purpose, than to bring the president acquainted with the sentime^^^ of
his fellow citizens. It was also easy to foresee, that the leaders of a certain
party would strenuously advocate every article. No one, except themselves,
augured any good from the miss^^^ of Governor Jay. The joy they manifested upon
the first new of a treaty, while its stipulations were a profound secret, (...)
the arts which were practiced, to make the public believe, that America had
obtained complete redress, and that without (...) unreasonable concession on
her part, evidenced a determin^^^ to spare no pains to obtain its ratification.
Those, however, (...) originally opposed the embassy, early predicted, that it
w^^^ terminate in a fruitless negotiation, or in a treaty highly d^^^vantageous
to this country. This sentiment was strengthen^^ what little transpired of the
correspondence between L^^^ Grenville and Mr. Jay. America saw with concern, a
ci^^^ who held one of the most dignified offices in her gift, addre^^^ his
majesty in the style of a suppliant, and placing her sole r^^^^^ce on the
magnanimity, justice, and benevolence of a monarch, whose conduct toward her
had ever been marked (...) breach of faith, rapine, and cruelty. The treaty is
at (...) arrived: the same influence which procured the embassy, (...) been
industriously exerted to obtain its ratification. These e^^^ have succeeded too
well; twenty senators have agreed to all but one article. I shall make no
reflection on these gentlemen, who for this purpose were a bare majority. But
the manner in which the business was conducted, leaves too much room to fear,
that the most important interests of our country have been sacrificed to
gratify party zeal. It is, certainly, somewhat extraordinary, that long before
the treaty was known, the vote of each of these gentlemen was reckoned upon
with the utmost certainty. -- It is not my intention to acquit those who oppose
the treaty from their share of this baneful spirit.

The censure of many is accompanied with too much acrimony. There is, however,
another class, who will probably decide upon its merits: I mean the moderate
men, and real patriots, who, scorning to be be led by others, will take the
trouble of judging for themselves. To persons of this description, these
remarks will be addressed. Previous to discussing the treaty itself, we must
not pass unnoticed the mysterious secrecy which has inveloped a transaction of
the last moment to the happiness and prosperity of America. -- Is not this
secrecy, alone, a proof that the senate conceived it disgraceful and
prejudicial to the United States? The public clamor which they saw would be
excited, might have deferred them from the hardy step of giving it their
assent; whereas, they well knew, that if it was not divulged until ratified,
many, who might have been violent in their opposition, would, as good citizens,
submit to it as soon as it became the supreme law of the land. There might be a
propriety in the secrecy observed by the president; but the senate ought to
have afforded the public the same opportunity of judging of it, which they have
of canvassing every bill in its passage toward a law. Instead of this, they
take care that no part of it shall transpire, except the time limited for the
surrendering the western posts, and that some kind of provision was made for
indemnifying our merchants. Neither Governor Jay, nor the senate, were at any
pains to conceal these points of the treaty, while they carefully withheld the
sacrifices which were to be the price of those benefits. The senate, indeed, go
further, and, as if afraid or ashamed of what they had done, enjoin their
members, even after their act of ratification, not to make any part of it
public; and Mr. Mason, who deserves the thanks of his country, is censured for
disregarding an injunction, which was nugatory in its nature, and reflected no
great honor on the legislature of a free people.

Another preliminary remark may be made here, as it will assist in forming a
just estimate of this convention. It is this, the first impressions made by the
perusal of it, were universally unfavorable; all men, and all ranks, united in
condemning it -- A gloom, co-extensive with its circulation, took place. --
Those who were silent as to its defects, could not forbear to express a wish,
that it had never been made, and readily agreed, that we should be much better
without it. Had a petition immediately been prepared to be presented to the
president, against its ratification, nine merchants in ten would have signed
it: and not a mechanic would have refused. When the people with one voice
condemn a measure, of which they are competent judges, it furnishes a violent
presumption against the expediency of it.

This general clamor, and discontent alarmed the envoy, and those, who had
predetermined to support him. Recourse was had to their usual industry and
arts. Some took their stand at the coffee houses, others ran about the streets;
but notwithstanding their diligence, the most vigorous exertions and prudent
conduct on the part of its opponents, were necessary to prevent Mr. Jay's
effigy and the fruits of his negotiation from being consigned to the flames in
one part of the city, New York.
while the British merchants were feasting him in another.

We come now to the treaty. The preamble itself, is not free from objection.
The differences between the two countries are to be terminated "without
reference to the merits of their complaints." This is surely an unprecedented
mode of setting public or private controversies (especially in the time of
peace) the merits of which should never be lost sight of, and ought ^^ form the
basis of a settlement. It is easy to see why Great Britain wished to keep them
out of sight. -- Whoever reads the correspondence between Mr. Jefferson and Mr.
Hammond, (...) admit, that the former has, in a satisfactory, candid, and
elegant manner, answered every excuse made by the British, for their
non-execution of the treaty of peace. The futility of one of her claims was so
gross, that it needs only to be mentioned to receive our disapprobation: among
other matters, Great Britain ^^^imed compensation for the estates of the
loyalists, wh^^ had been confiscated during the war, and sold afterward, Mr.
Jefferson, in a course of reasoning which forces conviction, (...) is eminently
the case with all the controversial performances ^^ that great statesman, shows
that those sales amounted to (...) infraction on our part. By the treaty,
congress were only bo^^d to recommend to the different states a restitution of
confi^^^^ property. This recommendation was not binding upon the (...) they
might comply with it or not, as they pleased. Indeed, congress, as he observes,
could only recommend; and so was it understood by the British commissioners, as
this matter underwent a very full discussion. Such, also, was the understanding
of the British ministry and parliament -- Thus it appears, that this claim was
without foundation; and yet it was placed upon an equal footing, by this
extraordinary preamble, with our demands for negroes wantonly stolen -- ships
most wickedly plundered -- and a great extent of territory wrongfully detained.

Article II.
The second article would have been better and less liable to future difficulty
and construction, if it had defined particularly from what places his majesty
was to withdraw his troops, instead of saying generally from within the
boundary "lines assigned by the treaty of peace:" for it appears, that those
very lines are a matter in dispute, and hereafter to be settled. As this
boundary will, certainly, not be adjusted by next June, it will furnish a
pretext for holding those sorts a few years longer, and put us to the expense
of a second embassy. Why not declare, that Michillimackinac, Detroit, Niagara,
Oswego, Oswegatche, Point-au-ser, Dutchman's point, etc. should be delivered
up? This would have been explicit; but, as we progress, we shall find, that
precision and perspicuity are not very striking features in this ministerial
lucubration. The time limited for their evacuations is another objection to the
article; it is too remote to hope for its performance. If peace takes place
this summer, none will be surprised if Great Britain continues her garrisons
where they now are! Nor is it very pleasing, that the inhabitants within this
territory may remain in it, and continue British subjects.

That clause of this article, which permits us to extend our settlements within
the said boundary, is also by far too indefinite The exception to it may be so
explained, as to defeat the permission altogether. It is in these words,
"except within the precincts or jurisdiction of any of the said posts:" who is
to determine, how far this jurisdiction may extend? Lastly, as the treaty of
peace gave us these posts, what great benefit is obtained by this article? Who
would regard the second promise of a man who had already, without any excuse,
violated the first?

Article III.
The advantages conceded to Great Britain, by the third article, are much
greater than those which we derive in return. Considering the extent of the
United States, it is evident, that the mutual liberty here granted, to pass by
land or inland navigation into each other's respective territories, upon this
continent, is a much greater acquisition to Great Britain than to us; not only
the territory of the former is small, when compared with our own, but the whole
fur trade, which we might have secured to ourselves, will now not only be
participated by, but probably fall altogether into the hands of, British
traders, notwithstanding our country is much more extensive, and our rivers and
lakes more numerous, than those of Great Britain, into all of which she has
free admission; the latter has taken care, very unjustly, to exclude our
vessels from the "seaports, harbors, bays, and creeks of his majesty's said
territories," and also from "such parts of the rivers as are between the mouths
thereof and the highest port of entry from the sea, except in small vessels
trading between Montreal and Quebec." Where is the consideration for this
manifest inequality? A British trader may set out from Canada, traverse our
lakes, and pass with his merchandise down the Hudson or Delaware to New York or
Philadelphia, with his own vessel. Why ought we not, in return, to have the
free navigation of the Saint Lawrence and other British rivers? Instead of
this, we are stopped, in our passage down, at the highest port of entry, and
must there hire British vessels to pursue our voyage, or sell our cargoes for
the best price we can get.

There is a curious proviso, in this article, which deserves notice. Upon a
cursory reading, it appears to lay Great Britain under a similar restraint, but
the least attention will discover this not to be the case. It is this, "
British vessels from the sea are not to be admitted into our rivers beyond the
highest port of entry for vessels from the sea." What can Great Britain wish
for more? would her sea vessels ever attempt, if permitted, to go further than
the highest port of entry.

That part of this article, which interdicts the laying of duties on peltries
brought by land or inland navigation, is also highly unequal and
disadvantageous to America. The peltry, which we shall carry through the
British dominions, considering the construction of this article, must be
inconsiderable indeed -- while we may expect, that very great quantities will
annually be brought through the United States, by his majesty's subjects, all
of which must pass free of duty. Nay, under this article, Great Britain may
import into any part of the United States, European, East and West India goods,
upon which we can impose no other or higher duties, than are payable by our own
citizens.

The fourth article concludes nothing; and the fifth leaves too much to chance.

Article VI.
The mode of adjusting the sum due to British creditors, agreeably to the sixth
article, will be unjust toward those states which have interposed no lawful
impediments in the way of recovering such debts, as they must also bear part of
the burden, and thus suffer for the delinquency of others. Whoever reads Mr.
Jefferson's letter to Mr. Hammond, of the 29th May, 1792, will acquit the
United States of much, if not of the whole of the censure which has been so
liberally bestowed by Great Britain, for the non-payment of British debts,
which has been urged in excuse by her, for the infractions of a treaty, which
were committed long before she could have known what America had done, or would
do, upon this head. Mr. Jefferson has taken infinite pains to investigate this
matter, which he has done not only like a statesman, but a consummate lawyer.
It results, from his researches, that, Great Britain having broken the treaty,
by a refusal to evacuate the upper posts, and carrying away more than three
thousand negroes, some of the states, urged by dire necessity, and the
calamities of a long war, only modified the recovery of debts -- 1. By
indulging their creditors with longer and more practicable terms of payment. 2.
By liberating their bodies from execution, on delivering property to the
creditor, to the full amount of his demand, on a fair appraisement. 3. By
admitting, in some instances, the payment of executions in paper money. 4.
That, notwithstanding these regulations, which were moderate and of short
duration, it was at all times perfectly understood, that treaties controuled
the laws of the state. That the federal and state judiciaries have so decided;
that, upon this principle, the courts are every where open to British
creditors, who have been, for some time, in the habit of recovering their debts
at law.


These statements, and the deductions of Mr. Jefferson, are supported by the
opinion of some of the first lawyers in the different states, which are
subjoined to his letter. If, then, no lawful impediment exists in the way of
these debts, why not leave the creditors to the ordinary course of law, and why
fix a stigma on the United States, by providing for an infraction of the treaty
of peace on their part, which, at present does not exist. Great Britain was
unwilling to omit so favorable an opportunity of extorting from our minister a
concession, of which she will, one day or another, make proper use. It is also
to be regretted, that the article of interest has been passed, sub silentio, in
this part of the treaty.

Mr. Jefferson has shown, in the letter alluded to, that interest, being no
part of the debt, may be disallowed in many cases, and has cited a great
variety of instances, from English law books, in which it is not given; some of
which apply with too much force to the situation of the parties in question,
not to be mentioned. He observes, that a great national calamity has been
adjudged a sufficient cause to suspend the payment of interest; that, in the
present case, the law of the creditor party had cut off the personal access of
his debtor; that the transportation of his produce or money to the country of
his creditor was interdicted; that, where the creditor pre^^nts payment of both
principle and interest, the latter, at least, is justly extinguished; that the
departure of the creditor, leaving no agent in the country, would have stopped
interest of itself -- the debtor not being obliged to go abroad to seek for
him; that

The declarations of congress and our plenipotentiaries, previous to the
definitive treaty, and the silence of that instrument, afford proof, that
interest was not intended on our part, nor insisted upon by the other; and
that, upon the whole, it was the proper province of the judiciary to determine
in what cases interest ought or ought not to be allowed.

If these positions of Mr. Jefferson be defensible, we cannot but wish that
this article had been more explicit, as too much is now left to the discretion
of commissioners, some, and perhaps a majority of whom, will be British
subjects, and even British creditors.

DECIUS.

No. II.
Article VII.
THE seventh article is wholly exceptionable. It places at too great a
distance, the compensation to which our citizens are entitled, for the most
unheard of and atrocious acts of piracy; they are thus not only kept out of a
large part of their capitals, for a long time, but any species of restitution
becomes extremely precarious and problematical. The captures being, in many
cases, admitted to be unjust, the British government should, at least, have
advanced a sum on account, to be distributed immediately among those who had
suffered. Never was a claim better founded; never was time more favorable to
enforce it: if Great Britain can procrastinate, until a peace, the settlement
of her depredations, her views will be answered. By refusing or delaying, upon
one frivolous pretense or other, to nominate commissioners, the whole article
may be rendered abortive. -- Complaint will then come too late. -- If we
permit, I had almost said, if we give her a right, to insult and plunder us,
when we are at peace, and she involved in war with the most powerful nation on
earth, it will be but prudent to acquiesce, when she is restored to the state
in which we now find ourselves.

The other branch of this article will also bear very unequally on the United
States; if they are to be charged with all the prizes therein referred to, no
one can foresee what will be the amount. It is said, that, long since, Mr.
Hammond stated the demand at eighteen hundred thousand pounds sterling. It is
no excuse in those who defend the treaty, to say, that the president had
already pledged the government to this measure; he had no right so to do; and
we are now enquiring, not what the president has done, but what is proper and
incumbent on the United States. -- It will be difficult to show that a neutral
nation is obliged to go the lengths which the present treaty imposes upon us.

Article IX.
This article infringes the rights of the different States, and impairs the
obligation of private contracts; nor is it reciprocal, except in appearance and
on paper. It has long been the policy of the English law to exclude aliens from
holding real estates of inheritance. We have pursued this policy, and the
reasons, assigned by Blackstone, apply much more forcibly to America, than to
his own country. -- "If," says he, "an alien could acquire a permanent property
in lands, he must owe an allegiance, equally permanent with that property, to
the king of England, which would probably be inconsistent with that which he
owes to his own natural liege lord: besides, that thereby the nation might, in
time, be subject to foreign influence, and feel many other inconveniences."
Considering the population of Great Britain, and the energy of her government,
supported by a standing army, there can be no great danger, at present, from a
relaxation, on her part, in this principle; but with a country, whose
population is as thin as ours, and whose government is yet in its infancy, too
great care cannot be interposed to prevent the influence which the too easy
acquisition of real property cannot fail to give to foreigners. I am aware,
that this article does not extend to future purchases; but, even limited as it
is, it is unjust and unequal. Unequal, because no American has been hardy
enough to purchase real estates in Great Britain, while millions of acres are
held by her subjects in this country, who knew, at the time of the purchases,
the risk which they ran in making them. Unjust -- because, if the present
proprietor be an alien, the land is already forfeited to the state which
originally granted it, "by way of punishing him," says Blackstone, "for his
presumption, in attempting to acquire any landed property;" or, which will be
yet a harder case, it may have already been granted to some of her citizens. In
either case, it is not easy to conceive upon what principle such a stipulation
could find place in a treaty of commerce. Had the agreement referred to f^^^^
acquisitions, it would have been impolitic and unequal, (...) no individual
hardship or loss would have resulted from it. (...) has been said, that a
provision similar to this, is to be found in our treaties with other nations;
as far as it is retrospection^ it is not true; and it will be found, upon
examination, th^^ generally speaking, personal property alone is the object of
the articles alluded to in those treaties. The United States have treaties of
amity and commerce with France, the United Netherlands, Sweden, and Prussia.
The first was made, flogr^^^ bello, in 1778, when it would have been
justifiable in the United States to have made some sacrifices to obtain the
friendship and assistance of so powerful a nation; but, to their honor be it
remembered, that, scorning to take advantage of the distressed and embarrassed
situation of America, they made with her two treaties; the direct end of one of
which was, to secure her independence; and the object of the other was, to
extend her commerce, and was botto^^^ upon the broad basis of perfect
reciprocity and equality. This will appear more abundantly hereafter, when we
come to compare other parts of this treaty with the one lately ma^^ with Great
Britain. As far as it respects the article now (...) consideration, it may be
doubted, whether any of the subj^^^ or citizens of the countries just mentioned
can hold a fee ^^^ple, in real estate, without being naturalized. Let these
treaties speak for themselves.

By the eleventh article of the French treaty, "the inhabitants of the United
States shall not be reputed Aubains (...) France, and, consequently, shall be
exempted from the (...) d' Aubains, or other similar duty, under what name
soever. -- They may, by testament or otherwise, dispose of their (...) moveable
and immovable, in favor of such persons as they please; and their heirs,
subjects of the United States, may succeed them ab intestat, without obtaining
letters of naturalization." -- "The subjects of the most Christian king shall,
is the said states, enjoy an entire and perfect reciprocity, relative to the
stipulations contained in this article." This article, then, only speaks, of
goods moveable and immovable -- The term immovable, as connected with goods,
can never be extended to a fee simple in lands. -- The distinction between
chattels r^^^ and personal, is well understood by lawyers -- the former are
immovable, and the latter moveable; but neither comprehend an estate in see in
lands -- "Chattels real," says Sir Edward Coke, "are such as concern the realty
-- as, terms for years of land, and the like; and these are called chattels
real, being interests issuing out of or annexed to real estates, of which they
have one quality, viz. immobility, which denominates them real; but want the
other, viz. a sufficient legal indeterminate duration:" and this want it is
that constitutes them chattels. "The utmost period," says Blackstone, "for
which they can last, is fixed and determinate, either for such a space of time
certain, or until such a particular sum of money be raised out of such
particular income, so that they are not equal in the law to the lowest estate
of freehold, a lease for another life." Conformably to this construction, the
lawyers with us have ever advised the citizens of France, either to be
naturalized, before they purchase real estates, or to obtain an act of the
legislature for the purpose. Thus it appears, that all the advantage of this
article, with France, is on the side of America; for, without any stipulations
for the purpose, a French citizen might, at common law, hold a chattel real,
and dispose of any property in goods, money, and other personal estate, as he
pleased, and, if he had died intestate, this personal property would have
descended to his representatives; whereas, without it, the king of France, upon
the death of an American, would have been entitled to all he was worth, by the
droit d'aubaine, or jus alibinatus.

In our treaties with the United Netherlands, Sweden, and Prussia, this right
to hold and dispose of property, is, in express terms, confined to personal
estate, which, it is obvious, their citizens would have enjoyed, without any
treaty for the purpose: Of course, in all of them, the provisions are favorable
to America. This article would not have deserved so much notice, but with the
view of detecting the fallacy of those, who attempt to justify some of the
exceptionable parts of this treaty, by a reference to what they call similar
stipulations, in those which already bind us to other nations. More fallacies
of this kind will be detected in the sequel. It will also serve to show, what
reliance is to be placed upon the assertions of the author of certain "Candid
Remarks on the Treaty," which appeared in the Daily Advertiser of the 4th
instant. -- This writer asserts, that, by the 9th and 11th articles of our
treaty with France, we have agreed to " an absolute abolition of alienism, in
respect to the holding of lands; so that a Frenchman may purchase, take, hold,
and convey lands within the United States, as an American citizen." -- The
truth is, that the ninth article regulates certain fishing rights, and says not
a word on the subject under consideration, and we have already seen, that no
such right is granted by the 11th article, whose object is confined to goods
alone.

DECIUS.

No. III.
Article X.
THIS article, like many others, has the appearance (...) reciprocity; but when
the situation of the two countries is attended to, this apparent equality
vanishes, and Great Britain alone derives advantage from it. It provides, that
"neither the debts due from individuals of one nation to individuals of the
other, nor shares nor moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the
public or private banks, shall ever, in any event of war or national
differences, be sequestered or confiscated." The advocates of this clause
contend, that it is unjust and impolitic, that such confiscations should ever
take place, and that, therefore, America has conceded nothing. This is begging
the question; for if it can be proved to be lawful, ju^^, and politic, to
sequester to the public use, property in this situation, it may reasonably be
asked, why have the United (...) agreed to abstain from it without an
equivalent on the part of Great Britain. It is true, Great Britain promises the
same forbearance on her part; but upon a moment's reflection, it will occur,
that this promise, even if observed, is in reality no consideration. Millions
are due to the subjects of Great Britain from the government and from
individuals of the United States while, comparatively speaking, our citizens
hold nothing in the British funds or banks, and have few, if any demands upon
the subjects of that nation. Let us now examine the right of (...) nation in
this respect. Bynkershook, and most respectable writ^^ on this subject,
recognizes the right of a nation to seize the property of its enemies found
within its own limits in whatever form it exists, whether in action or
possession. The following i^ a liberal translation of his own words. "Since it
is a condition of war, that enemies may be deprived of all their rights, it is
reasonable that every thing of an enemy found among his enemies, should change
its owner and go to the treasury. It is, moreover, usually directed, in all
declarations of war, that the goods of enemies, as well those found among us,
as those taken in war, shall be confiscated. If we follow the mere right of
war, even immovable property may be sold, and its price carried into the
treasury, as is the custom with moveable property. But i^ almost all Europe, it
is only notified that their profits during the war shall be received by the
treasury; and the war being ended, the immovable property itself is restored
by agreement to the former owner." Quest. Jur. pub. lib. chapter 7. And again, in
the same chapter, "what I have said of things in action be^^^ rightly
confiscated, holds thus, if the prince really exacts from his subjects what
they owed to his enemies, it is rightfully paid; if he shall not have exacted
it, peace being made, the former right of the creditor revives. Accordingly, it
is for the most part agreed among nations, that things in action being
confiscated in war, the peace being made, those which were paid are deemed to
have perished, and remain extinct, but those not paid revive, and are restored
to their true creditors." The doctrine of Vattel accords with that already
cited. "He who declares war," says he, "does not confiscate the immovable
goods possessed in his country by his enemy's subjects. In permitting them to
purchase and possess them, he has, in this respect, admitted them into the
number of his subjects; but the income may be sequestrated for hindering the
remittance of it to the enemy's country." And again, "when Alexander by
conquest became absolute master of Thebes, he remitted to the Thessalians, an
hundred talents, which they owed to the Thebans. The sovereign has naturally
the same right over what his subjects may be indebted to his enemies. Therefore
he may confiscate debts of this nature, if the term of payment happens in the
time of war; or at least he may prohibit his subjects from paying while the war
lasts." Book III. chap. V.

Mr. Jefferson, also, who is not apt to advocate a doctrine merely because it
suits his present purpose, when speaking of the rightful acts of war, says, "It
cannot be denied, that the state of war strictly permits a nation to seize the
property of its enemies found within its own limits, or taken in war, and in
whatever form it exists, whether in action or possession." I shall not conceal,
that, although this practice is strictly permitted by the laws of nations; yet
those sovereigns of Europe, who act with good faith, have generally departed
from this right, so far, that public funds are generally exempted from
confiscation, and seizure. Great Britain, however, regardless of the conduct of
other nations, has, if we are rightly informed, confiscated or sequestrated,
during the present war, debts of both these descriptions; although Vattel says,
that a state ought never to touch the sums which it owes to the enemy. From
what has been said, it results, that the United States, in case of a war with
Great Britain, have an undoubted right to confiscate any debts due by their
citizens to the subjects of Great Britain, and that if they choose to adopt the
conduct of that nation, they might confiscate or sequester the property which
they hold in our funds.

Indeed this right, in its fullest latitude, may fairly be contended for, from
the care which Lord Grenville has taken to restrain the exercise of it. It is
worthy of remark, by the 21st article of the treaty lately made between the
French and Dutch republics, it is agreed, "That the French republic shall use
their good offices with foreign powers in favor of the United Provinces, in
order to obtain payment of the sums due them before the war." -- And in an
English ministerial paper, published since this treaty, it is said, "that the
declaration of war, on the part of the Dutch, is considered, at the present
moment, as by no means unfavorable for the interests of England; as it
furnishes her with the best reasons for confiscating an immense property in
that country belonging to Holland."

If then it be strictly permitted to sequester and confiscate property of this
species, why surrender the right without an equivalent? Why give up this
powerful means of self-defence, and that to a nation, who, from the first
moment of her being obliged to acknowledge our independence, has treated us
with the most persevering contempt? "It is with concern" says Mr. Jefferson in
his letter to Mr. Pinckney, "I am obliged to observe, that so marked has been
the inattention of the British court to every application which has been made
to them on any subject by this government (not a single answer, I believe
having ever been given to one of them, except in the act of exchanging a
minister) that it may become unavoidable in certain cases, where an answer of
some sort is necessary, to consider their silence as an answer." Why then, I
repeat, should we surrender to such a nation the most powerful weapon of
defense which is placed in our hands? Is it unjust or impolitic to confiscate
the property of a nation, which, without any pretense, plunders us of ours on
the high seas? Is it not more unjust and impolitic to lay our citizens at their
mercy? For such must now be their unfortunate situation, as we have parted with
the only means of making them retribution. It is well known, what a powerful
effect was produced in England by the bare proposal to sequester the British
debts. The clamor excited against the ministry, by the persons who would have
been immediately affected by it, produced a revocation of some of the obnoxious
edicts of which we complained. And yet, as if our fleets were able to cope with
those of Great Britain, and protect our trade, we have voluntarily, and without
consideration, sacrificed this powerful engine of defense and terror, although
it was almost the only effectual one within our power. If in any case, it be
impolitic or unjust, we can forbear on such occasions to exercise the right;
and we might then deserve some credit for our forbearance; but when bound by
treaty to forego, much of the credit, which would otherwise be due to our
moderation, will be lost.

One observation more, and I have done with this article. The secure footing
upon which bank stock is placed by it, will render, it an object with the king
of Great Britain, as a source of influence, as well as of interest. He had
already speculated in our funds. It will not, therefore, be surprising, if,
after this, he or his minister should invest a very large sum in this way; nay,
what is to prevent him, considering the length of his purse, from engrossing
all the shares of these different institutions which have multiplied so
wonderfully since the peace, or at least a sufficient number to secure the
uncontrouled direction of them? I leave it to others to picture the distressed
and abject situation of our country, should her whole capital be administered
by his Britannic majesty, or by those of his appointment. How will our public
operations be cramped in time of war, or upon any sudden emergency, should his
majesty deem it inexpedient to accommodate the government with a loan, at the
same time, by withholding from our citizens put it out of their power to supply
her wants? Even, in time of peace, it must be humiliating to an American to be
obliged to British directors for a loan. They will, sometimes, no doubt, be
most graciously accommodated with a small sum, provided there be more than
sufficient to answer the extravagant demands of his majesty's most loving
subjects. These evils may appear to some, distant and chimerical. Some,
however, are already felt; for of what countrymen are the directors generally
composed? and others will follow a ratification of the treaty, as naturally as
an effect does its cause. I am aware, that in the bank of the United States,
and in some others, a non-resident stockholder cannot give his vote by proxy
for a director. This difficulty will easily be obviated, not indeed by his
majesty's personal attendance, although such a visit might not be impolitic,
but by holding this species of stock in the name of his ambassador, who will
always be on the spot. If it should be necessary to divide it a little, in
order to extend his influence, he will not be at a loss for friends. Some of
our senators may think it an honor, and perhaps a duty, to hold part of the
royal stock in their own name, and to represent and obey the real owner in all
matters which relate to their respective institutions.

These ten articles are to be permanent. We might, therefore, reasonably hope,
that in some of them, at least, could be found an advantage to the United
States. But we search for it in vain. The more we examine the instrument, the
greater is our surprise and concern, that our interests have been so little
attended to, and that Great Britain has given us no one thing in return for
concessions which are important to her, and will sooner or later be severely
felt and reprobated by America.

One palpable omission is discoverable in the perpetual part of this contract.
It has occurred to every one, and respects the compensation which was due to
our citizens for the negroes which were carried away, at the peace; as by the
seventh article of the treaty of peace, his Britannic majesty stipulates, that
be would with all convenient speed and without causing any destruction or
carrying away any negroes or other property of the American inhabitants,
withdraw all his armies from the United States. Notice was received by Sir Guy
Carleton of this treaty in the beginning of April, 1783, after which no negroes
should have been carried away -- Yet, as early as the sixth of May, a large
number had been already embarked for Nova Scotia, of which General Washington
complained, as a violation of the treaty -- In Sir Guy Carleton's answer, dated
12th May, 1783, he admits the fact, but supposes he had no right to deprive
them of their liberty. He mentions, however, that he had preserved an accurate
register, by which the name of the proprietor, and the value of the negro,
might be ascertained, in order that an adjustment might take place by
compensation, if it really was the intention of the treaty, that they should be
restored. Under this pretext, Sir Guy embarked, between the months of April and
that of November, when the evacuation took place, three thousand negroes, who
were inspected by our commissioners, and a very large number more, in public
and private vessels, of whom they were not permitted to take inspection. --
"Here then," says Mr. Jefferson, "was a direct, unequivocal, and avowed
violation of this part of the seventh article, in the first moments of its
being known -- An article which had been of extreme solicitude on our part, and
on the fulfillment of which depended the means of paying debts, in proportion to
the number of laborers withdrawn; and when, in the very act of violation, we
warn and put the commanding officer on his guard, he says directly, he will go
through with the act, and leave it to his court to adjust it by compensation."
Yet this compensation, after being delayed twelve years, is formally abandoned,
in a manner as direct, unequivocal, and avowed, as that in which the infraction
was committed, and that, too, in a moment when all America believed Mr. Jay was
sent to demand justice for this, among other grievances -- Our only consolation
for this palpable sacrifice, is the reflection, that if compensation for the
negroes had been granted, some very extravagant consideration would have been
exacted by Great Britain, and, in all probability, obtained, considering the
complaisant mood in which the negotiation appears to have been conducted on our
part. Perhaps, then, i^ is owing to this omission, that the treaty wants one
other exceptionable article. I shall only add here, that the negroes carried
away, registered and unregistered, could not have amounted to less than five
thousand, who, at two hundred and fifty dollars a man, were worth one million,
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; a sum more than sufficient to pay all
the old British debts, due from American citizens.

The eleventh article stipulates, that there shall be, between the two
countries, a reciprocal and perfect liberty of navigation and commerce, under
certain limitations and conditions, expressed in the articles which follow.

We are happy, at length, to arrive at an article, which promises something
like reciprocity and perfect equality. We hope our envoy will not again lose
sight of these corner stones of a treaty, and that Great Britain, tired or
ashamed of obtaining every thing she has yet asked, will manifest a disposition
somewhat more liberal than has yet appeared. The reader will judge whether this
has been the case. His expectations, however, must not be too sanguine, or his
disappointment may be still greater than mine was.

DECIUS.

No. IV.
Article XII.
AS even a majority of the senate, who do not appear to have been very
difficult to please, have disapproved of this article, few partisans of the
treaty can be found hardy enough to advocate it. The doctrine of passive
obedience and non-resistance, which is again becoming so fashionable, ought to
teach them the propriety of being silent; for how can the senate do wrong? But,
notwithstanding the negative of the senate, and exceptionable as it is in every
part, some few there are, who have represented it as a vast acquisition to this
country, and express great regret at the stipulated suspension. Some indeed
say, that the advocates of this description neither received their birth,
education, or attachments, in this country. It is matter of surprise to no one,
that those should be pleased with the treaty, who boast the honor of receiving
their first breath in any part of the British dominions. But that Americans
should be found so lost to a sense of dignity and their country's interests, as
to coincide in sentiment with them, is matter of serious concern.

By this article, his majesty consents, that it shall be lawful, during the
war, and two years after, for Americans to carry to any British West India
island, from the United States, in their own vessels, not exceeding seventy
tons, any merchandise of the growth, manufacture, or produce of the United
States, which it is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands, from the
said states, in British vessels. This permission, insignificant as it is, may
at any time be defeated, by the British parliament declaring, that British
vessels shall not export h^^^ (...) from the United States, in British bottoms;
at that moment, our right to carry those articles will cease, and the West
India trade be confined to her colonies; but, if such interdiction does not
take place, surely many vessels of this size will not be concerned in this
trade, and, of course, the whole will be carried on in British bottoms. Not
even an Albany stoop will be permitted to visit those islands. This article
will not only confine to British bottoms the trade between these states and the
West Indies, but, as if it was a real advantage to America, we have stipulated
not to export, to any part of the world, even our own cotton, nor any melasses,
sugar, coffee, or cocoa. But as this article was not ratified, owing to the
firmness of one of the majority, a senator from Massachusetts, it cannot be
necessary to pay it a very minute attention. We cannot, however, suppress our
astonishment, that an American ambassador should have set his signature to an
article so pernicious and disgraceful to America. We become almost willing to
pardon the member from Boston, for supporting the other articles, ruinous and
unequal as they are, for his steady opposition to this one. While we are upon
the West India trade, it cannot be impertinent to contrast the conduct of the
French republic with that of Great Britain. On the 19th of February, 1793, the
national convention decreed: 1. "That all the ports of the French colonies be
open to vessels of the United States of America." 2. That all produce, exported
or imported in "American vessels, on going out or entering in the colonies, or
in France, pay the same duty as that borne by French vessels." 3. "That the
executive power negociate with the congress of the United States, to obtain, in
favor of the French merchants, a like reduction of the duties granted by the
present law to Americans, and thereby more closely cement the benevolent ties
which unite the two nations."


While we admit the liberality of our ally, and execrate the opposite spirit of
Great Britain, we are at as great a loss to account for the coldness and
neglect with which our government received and continues to treat these
generous overtures, as for the anxiety which some of its members discover, to
form a commercial connection with the other nation, upon principles directly
^^^^^^d to the equality held out by the first. The tim^ (...) arrive, when
America may wish her government had acted ^th^^ (...).

Article XIII.
By this article, our commerce with the British "territories in the East
Indies," is regulated. Vessels belonging to American citizens, are to be
admitted and hospitably received, in all the British seaports in the East
Indies, and may freely carry on trade between those territories and the United
States, in all articles of which the importation or exportation to or from
thence shall not be entirely prohibited; under a restriction not to export,
when Great Britain is at war, without the permission of government, any
military or naval stores or rice.

"Our vessels are to pay in the said ports no higher tonnage duty than is paid
for British vessels in our ports, nor are we to pay higher duties or charges,
on the importation or exportation of merchandise, than is paid on the same
articles, when imported or exported in British vessels; but it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories, to any port or
place, except to some port or place in America, where the same shall be
unladen. Nor are our vessels to carry on any part of the coasting trade of the
said British territor^^^. Nor are we to settle or reside there, or go into the
interior parts, without permission of the British government ^^^ab^ished there.
We may also touch at the island of Saint Helena, for refreshment, subject to
such regulations as the British government may, from time to time, establish."

This being the article, about which the friends of the treaty have exulted
most, it was thought proper to give it pretty well at length. It has been
asserted, that, by it, important commercial rights are secured to our citizens,
in their navigation and trade with the British East Indies. To form a just
estimate of these advantages, attention must be had to the commerce of the
contracting parties, at the time of forming the treaty. If it is placed on a
better footing, we have gained, provided we have not paid too great a price.
But if our commerce in the East Indies is restrained by this article, it will
be somewhat difficult to point out any advantage we have acquired by it. The
merchants, who are certainly the most competent judges in these matters,
contend, that the trade of the United States to the East Indies, is placed on a
much worse footing than before. They assign, among others, the following
reasons: 1st, That American vessels carry a small proportion of salted
provisions to Bombay, where they take in cotton and sharks fins on freight to
China, which was so considerable, as to enable them to lay in a return cargo to
great advantage. A ship of five hundred tons would clear thirty thousand
dollars.

2d, The American ships going to Bengal, frequently found very advantageous
freights to some free port in Europe. The customary freight was from ten to
fifteen pounds sterling a ton. It is supposed that nine-tenths of our trade to
the British East Indies was carried on in this way.

3d, The direct trade of Bengal and Bombay was trifling until the sugar
plantations in the West Indies were destroyed. We then imported sugar from the
East Indies to advantage; but on the restoration of peace. this trade cannot be
pursued but to a disadvantage -- the voyage being too long, the sugar not so
strong as that of the West Indies, and the supplies from the islands being
sufficient for any use we can make of them, the former not answering to refine.
Saltpetre is an article which we may import to advantage: in peace we want but
little of it, and in war it is prohibited.

DECIUS.

No. V.
COTTON is low in the East Indies, but not of a good quality. It will not
answer for importing, while we can have that of the West Indies and our own,
the staple being too short for water spinning. White goods, with some gold and
silver muslins, may be imported from Bombay and Calcutta, and some printed
muslins from Madras; but the consumption of this country would not require
three cargoes in a year, unless we printed them. The French use many; but they
import them to print, and vend them in Europe and the West Indies. Almost all
white goods may be had on the Hoogley, just above Calcutta, at a place called
Besunpoor, a Danish port, on lower terms than at Calcutta, also at
Chandanagore, a French port, at the mouth of the Ganges. From the Isle of
France we import coffee and indigo; they raise cotton, which, for the reasons
above mentioned, is seldom imported, and because it answers better in China.
Coffee answers well, as the price is lower and the quality better, than that
from the West Indies. We export to that place, salted provisions, and some
naval stores; and our vessels are frequently employed in carrying slaves and
cattle, from Madagascar and the Main, for the use of that colony.

From this cursory view of our commerce with the East Indies, it appears, that
were we excluded altogether from the British settlements, we could obtain the
same articles upon as easy or better terms, at other ports. This must be the
reason, why Great Britain has so long permitted the trade in question; or
perhaps a better one is, some immediate benefit she derives from it; for it
will not be contended, that a nation who has done us no one act of kindness,
during twelve years of peace, has been influenced in this part of her conduct,
by affection for us, or any other worthy motive. Notwithstanding, then, that
this trade has heretofore been carried on, by the mere permission of the
British government, it was no more precarious, or likely to be interrupted or
stopped, than the trade we carried on with her European ports. As well might it
be said, that Great Britain had hitherto merely permitted us to export her
manufactures, and to run in debt every year to her merchants, and as this right
may be restrained or prohibited whenever she pleases, it is a great acquisition
to have secured it, in such way as to be liable to no interruption. If, then,
it be true, that we enjoyed the East India trade in as great a latitude before,
as at present, with the addition of the coasting trade of that country, which
principally rendered it worth pursuing, why relinquish the latter, without
acquiring any extension of the former? for as to its permanency, it has already
been shown, that it was as much so, as the interest of Great Britain could
render it. Nay, why not only give up the carrying trade; but stipulate
expressly, that we will carry to no part of the world, except to the United
States, the East India goods we export from the British settlements. I know it
has been said, that we are not restrained by this article, from exporting from
the United States, the goods we bring from those factories in the have Indies.
It is much to be regretted, that in an instrument of this kind, any room should
be left for construction or for doubt, as to the true mea^^^g and intention of
the parties. This is too frequently the case with this treaty, which,
considering the power with which it is made, should have (...) ^^^ab^y precise,
and free from every doubtful and equiv^^^al expression. We know too well, that
if construction is resorted to, Great Britain, being the more powerful nation,
will be able to put her own upon it; and we have too much reason to fear, from
what has already happened, that even those who now contend for a contrary
construction, will be complaisant enough, to accede to the one adopted by the
English ministry. For we have men among us, and they are called patriots, who
have justified that nation for her repeated violation of faith to this country,
and particularly for her non-observance of the treaty of peace, although Mr.
Jefferson, not by reasoning alone, but by facts, has proved that she was not to
be justified in a single instance.

It is from this conduct of some of our citizens in office, that Great Britain
has been encouraged to persevere in her faithless system toward us, and to
demand from us stipulations which an unfortunate war of ten years ought never
to have extorted from us. It was a circumstance of additional misfortune to the
United States, that the late envoy, for reasons which will never perhaps be
developed, was among the foremost in justifying the conduct of Great Britain.
From his efforts, therefore, it was impossible for Americans to expect
favorable terms. I acquit him, however, and that most sincerely, of any bribery
or corruption, in this negotiation, so strongly charged upon him by many. I
rather believe, that he has been cajoled into the measure -- and that from a
belief that any treaty whatever, with Great Britain, would be pleasing to a
certain party among us. Rather, therefore, than disappoint the expectations of
those people, he has affixed his seal to an instrument, which must meet the
marked disapprobation of every man in America, except such only as form the
British faction, from whom alone, the United States have to apprehend any kind
of danger to their constitution and liberties. This dissatisfaction manifested
itself in a most emphatical manner, on the late anniversary of our
independence. Even on that auspicious day, when it is usual to bury personal
animosity, and to check the effusions and gall of party spirit, how unanimously
have different societies and companies, without any previous concert, not only
in this city, but in other parts of the state and union, expressed their
abhorrence of the measure! Toasts, significant of their displeasure, have
already appeared from every part; and among the variety which that day gave
birth to, is one to be found, which discovers even a partial approbation of the
treaty? Not even the merchants, who had invited Governor Jay to a public
dinner, before the c^nt^nts of the treaty had transpired, had the complaisance,
after his excellency's retiring, to lisp a syllable in its favor, either by a
t^ast or in any other way.

Alarmed at an opposition so sormidable, and conscious, that the measure cannot
be defended, those who feed a peculiar interest in forcing it upon us, begin to
resort to their old cry of anti-federalism. A calm observer, in the Daily
Advertiser of the 11th, remarks, that "a few weak-minded persons have been
imperceptibly led astray, and almost sacrificed their principles on the altar
of faction and disappointment, under the garb of republicanism; they have
wisely chosen the late treaty for their rallying point, and over the back of
this hobby horse, aimed a deadly blow at the constitution." -- Instead of
answering the numerous objections which are daily made to the treaty, this
writer aims an undistinguished consure against all who oppose it. All those who
cannot see what those champions have not yet discovered themselves, that the
treaty is an eligible one for this country, are, forsooth, weak-minded, or
anti-federalists. -- It is not easy to discover any connection between the fate
of this treaty and the constitution. The true friends of the constitution may
be opposed to the treaty, as, on the other hand, its enemies may advocate it:
whether this be really the case, is left to the people, if they be not too
weak-minded, to determine. Be not deceived, fellow citizens; those who oppose
the treaty, are as firm friends to the constitution as any among you; they know
its excellencies, and are not afraid to speak of its defects, as time and
operation discover them; for what human work is perfect? They wish not only
that it may be maintained, but that it may be defended from the encroachments
of a set of men, who, while accusing you of a desire of overthrowing the
government, are destroying the first principles of our association, and by
constructions, usurpation, and otherwise, are either assuming to themselves or
granting to others, powers and authorities not warranted by the constitution.
Is there a man among us who has ever advised you to oppose any measure of
government? Do we dispute the right of the senate and president to make
treaties? No; but we insist upon the right (and it was the exercise of this
right which secured our freedom and independence) of giving our sentiments upon
any act which it is proposed to make the rule of our conduct and the supreme
law of the land; we claim the privilege of petitioning and remonstrating
against a measure, which ignominiously sacrifices to our first and greatest
enemy, our just demands, and must, in time, prostrate at her feet, our very
sovereignty and independence. We think we are not to blame for exposing to view
the secret machinations of one branch of the legislature to form a disgraceful
connection with any nation. In sine, we claim the right of thinking for
ourselve, uninfluenced by office or other unworthy considerations, and we thank
God, that the unbiassed voice of America, as far as it has been heard, from the
several states where our disgrace has been published, is on our side. -- We
rejoice at this circumstance, because such united and unconcerted marks of
displeasure, we yet hope, may induce the president to suspend his sanction, and
thereby give himself a new title to the endearing appellation of the father of
his country.

But it is time to return to the 13th article -- we left it in doubt, whether
Americans could carry to Europe, or elsewhere (except to their own country) the
articles they export from the British East Indies; for, if they cannot, it is
conceded, that such a restriction, together with a formal dereliction of the
coasting trade, were considerations too valuable and disproportioned for the
permission given us in the former part of the article. I say, we cannot, and
that, confused as the phraseology is, it will admit of no other reasonable
construction. "It is expressly agreed (these are the words of the treaty) that
the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the articles exported
by them from the said British territories (or, in other words, any British East
India articles) to any port or place, except to some port or place in America,
where the same shall be unladen." If, then, the articles have been exported by
us, from the British territories in the East Indies, under which clause is it,
that we claim a right to carry them to Europe, or elsewhere? If such privilege
was intended, why oblige us to unlade them in the United States? or why not, in
express terms, secure the permission? Hence it follows, that this article,
instead of extending our commerce, may be regarded among the most obnoxious of
the treaty; and I am well informed, that our merchants, who are immediately
concerned in the East India trade, view it in that light: British factories
will soon be established in our principal seaports; and, in a few years, the
whole of this trade must fall into their hands. Well might Mr. Pit boast, on
the floor of the house of commons, that he was not ashamed of his treaty with
this country; his still in finance has been long admitted; his abilities, as a
negociator, ought never hereafter to be called in question.

DECIUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
FROM THE BOSTON CHRONICLE. Strictures on the late Conduct of the Executive.
To the President of the United States of America.
SIR,
YOU must be sensible that no measure of the British, since you was engaged in
politics, has been more generally reprobated by the people of America, than the
late treaty; which, not only as it respects the eventual surrender of this
country into the hands of our inveterate enemies, the British, but even the
secret mode of conducting this business, has naturally led the citizens to view
it with a peculiar jealousy.

The apparent objects of Mr. Jay's mission, are so opposite to what he has
accomplished in his treaty, that it was not conceived possible that you would
justify his conduct. The objects of it we have under your own communications.
It is therein declared, that you meant to give "solemnity" to his mission. You
arrested the proceedings of congress on this explicit declaration, that you
intended to vindicate the rights of the people, and express their "feelings."
The confidence placed in you, reconciled even the advocates for other measures,
to the issue of your solemn appeal to the British court. This is so evident to
have been the voice of your constituents, at the time Mr. Jay was appointed,
that even the tories suspected that something interesting would take place in
vindication of our national honor; and that you would feel yourself bound to
support your proclamation, agreeably to the modern law of nations. But, strange
to say, your ambassador has destroyed the very ground upon which your
proclamation was founded, and has made a treaty in direct violation of it. You
mentioned the modern (...), on the contrary he has expressly declared the
reverse. You was so particular on this point, as to italicise the term
"modern;" but in opposition to this declaration, he has consented to the
ancient law of nations, which is, no more, nor less, than the particular law of
Britain.

When your proclamation was first issued, several towns met to approbate it;
and even many of those persons who are now addressing you in behalf of the
treaty (whose political principles, by the way, have, in no instance, been
remarkably friendly to the rights of the people) were in favor of the
proclamation. -- But, as if some strange fatality attended the affairs of
America, those very persons are for relinquishing the spirit of your
proclamation, which they were so anxious to support, and are now urging you,
contrary to the sentiments of ninety-nine hundredths of their fellow citizens,
to ratify a treaty which destroys the very essence of it.

Wherein, sir, has Mr. Jay been successful in his negotiation, that you or they
can approbate his conduct? You was either mistaken in your proclamation, or Mr.
Jay must be guilty of acting contrary to his instructions. But the latter does
not appear, and yet it is said, that you have ratified his treaty, while
nothing is handed to the public to convince them that you was mistaken in
vindicating their neutrality upon the " modern law" of nations. This, at least,
we ought to be gratified with; for notwithstanding the confidence placed in
you, we are left in a disagreeable dilemma; for if we justify the treaty, we
must condemn your proclamation; or if we are in savor of the proclamation, we
must reprobate the treaty.

We request of you then, sir, to let us know the reasons, why you cannot
vindicate your primary conduct, before we are obliged to accede to the
propriety of Mr. Jay's negotiation. If you was precipitate in your
proclamation, by guaranteeing to the United States, their neutrality, on the "
modern law of nations" -- if you was equally hasty in declaring that Mr. Jay
was sent to vindicate, with firmness, the rights of the United States -- if
these things were done without mature deliberation, and you are now obliged to
retreat, "We, the people," as friends to you, and to themselves, would thank
you to let them know the reasons, why you have altered your sentiments?

In politics, as in religion, we ought to be furnished with some arguments of
the "hope that is within us;" but as the treaty business stands at present,
your friends are puzzled to vindicate your conduct against the common sense of
that class of citizens, who reason from no other source than what they conceive
to be the welfare of their country.

About the same time that Mr. Jay was sent on his embassy to England, to
vindicate our rights, Mr. Monroe was sent to France, with an explicit
declaration, to draw closer the bonds of alliance between the two republics. In
this instance, the people were pleased. Mr. Jay went to demand indemnification
on the principles of our being a neutral nation, agreeable to the "modern law;"
while Mr. Monroe was sent to form a more intimate alliance with France. A
benediction accompanied your commission on this occasion, that "God would take
the republic under his holy keeping." But it seems, that while the French were
willing to enter into the most beneficial commercial alliance with America,
they were disregarded, when at the same time Mr. Jay was hurrying on his
business, under all the advantages of his most gracious majesty's levees, and
the entertainments of Pit, and his condjutors. -- And still further, when he
arrived in America, be is closeted under all the injunctions of profound
secrecy, and the decisions of the senate are urged to be ratified "without
delay," with only the suspension of one article.

What, sir, are the people to think on this procedure; or what are the French
to conjecture? Must not the latter suppose, that there is an earnest desire to
link this country in a treaty with England, rather than with them? You cannot,
sir, suppose that the French are so blind, as not to notice this apparent
partiality; and provided they should resent it, or consider it as an insidious
piece of conduct on our part, it would be a serious question among the
citizens, to assist part of the government, in opposition to that nation which
helped us when we required their assistance.

These, sir, are important considerations. They require a serious deliberation
before they are rejected. The Americans feel an attachment to France, and they
cannot be easily turned aside from wishing them success. They have every reason
to respect the French, and they have as cogent reasons to reprobate the
English. We esteem you, sir, for what you have done, in company with the
American army, and the French navy and soldiers; but you may excuse the
citizens of America, if they still retain an affection for their allies, and
are unwilling, through the instrumentality of any man or body of men, to come
again under the control of the British.

We fought to obtain our rights, and we trust in heaven that we shall be able
to hand them down to our posterity. It is of but little consequence by whom we
are sacrificed, whether by Lord North or Judge Jay.

On this question, we mean to respect you; but the liberties of America have
been purchased at too dear a rate to be lost without a strugyle for their
maintenance.

A REPUBLICAN.

LETTER From the Chairman of a Meeting of the Citizens of Norfolk (Virginia)
hold August 5, 1795. TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
Norfolk, August 6, 1795. SIR,
BY direction of a meeting, held at the courthouse of this county, yesterday,
I transmit their proceedings relative to the treaty of amity, commerce, and
navigation, between the United States and his Britannic majesty, now under your
consideration; they are so expressive in their sentiments of the consequences
attending the adoption of it, that I hope your opinion will coincide with their
wishes, and that they will have their weight, with others on the same occasion,
to prevent the evil tendency that is predicted, by a ratification thereof.

With sentiments of the highest respect, I am, Your most obedient servant,
Those. NEWTON, Chairman.

PRESIDENT's ANSWER.
United States, Philadelphia, August 31, 1795. SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 6th instant, enclosing the proceedings of
the meeting at Norfolk on the 5th, relative to the treaty lately negociated
between the United States and Great Britain -- on subjects so complex and
relative a nature as those embraced by the treaty, a diversity of opinion was
to have been expected -- my determination, which is known to have been in the
affirmative of the treaty, as advised and consented to by the senate, was
formed after the most mature deliberation and with a sincere regard to the
public good. Though it cannot be uninteresting to me to know, that the wishes
of a part of my fellow citizens have been contravened by this decision; yet, if
the purity of my intentions will entitle me to their approbation, it has not
been forfeited on the present important occasion.

With due respect, I am, Your obedient, G. WASHINGTON. Thomas Newton, Esquire

[No. VII.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- NOVEMBER 14, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. STRICTURES on the President's Circular Answer Page 147 2. Decius, No. VI.
Page 154 3. Remarks on Charles Pinckney's Speech Page 160 4. Gracchus, No. I.
Page 174 5. Camillus, No. XVIII. Page 176 6. -- No. XIX. Page 181 7. -- No. XX.
Page 186 8. Tully, No. I. Page 199 9. State of Opinions on the Treaty Page 201
10. Observations on the Disposition of Administration to France and England
Page 203 11. Remarks on some of the probable Consequences of Mr. Jay's Treaty
Page 207 12. Atticus, No. I. Page 210 13. -- No. II. Page 212 14. Remarks on
Treaties Page 215 15. Reply of the President of the United States, to the
President of the Boston Chamber of Commerce Page 216
American Remembrancer, etc.
STRICTURES On the President's Circular Answer.
The two branches ought not to substitute for their own conviction, the
opinions of others. --

President's circular answer.
I BELIEVE there never was a bolder absurdity published, than, that in a
representative government, the representative body is not bound by the opinion
of the body constituent: for if it be true, that the representative body be not
thus bound, representation is neither trust nor agency, but another name for
the worst species of despotism, where the will of the many is controuled by the
opinion of the few. It is true, that many specious sophisms have been invented
within these few years, to quibble away the sovereignty of the people of the
United States: but my conscience impels me to believe, that the man who cheats
his fellow citizens out of their liberties, by false logic, is a more
detestable character, than he, who, with a false key, opens the doors of his
neighbor's house, rifles him of his substance, inasmuch, as liberty is more
precious than wealth.

The only writer I know of, who has written expressly on this subject, is Noah
Webster, junior, Esquire, attorney at law. This gentleman says, in his fourth
chapter on governments, "That the people ought not to give binding instructions
to representatives. That the right of election is the only constitutional right
which they can, with propriety, exercise." These positions, he says, convey the
same idea; and, if true, they contravene, in some measure, a fundamental maxim
of American politics, which is, that the sovereign power resides in the people.
Most unquestionably, if these positions are true, then is the maxim false. But,
says this gentleman, "I am not desirous of subverting this favorite maxim: but
I am very desirous it should be properly qualified. The people have a right to
advise their representatives in certain cases, in which they may be well
informed: but this right cannot often be exercised with propriety or safety;
nor should their instructions be binding or their representatives." Here is a
right which cannot often be exercised with propriety or safety, and, when
exercised, is not binding: a right, qualified by the logical dexterity of a
lawyer, to be no right at all: a camelion kind of ^ight, which, like the
consciences of some folks, assumes all shapes, but the shape of consistency and
of truth. But what is the reason that this is a right and no right -- that it
is to be exercised and not exercised -- that it is a right, and not binding --
and, like Mr. Dexter's republicanism, means any thing or nothing? Why,
forsooth, "because people live remote from each other, and cannot always be
acquainted with the general interest of the state; they cannot know all the
reasons which may be offered for or against a measure, by people in distant
parts of the state: they cannot tell at home, how they themselves would think
and act in a general assembly of all the citizens." So that because every man
is not omniscient and omnipresent, the people are to be deprived of all
control over their own representatives. According to this doctrine, legitimate
human government never can exist. Let us consider the tendency of these
arguments. It is admitted, that, where the whole society can convene, there is
no necessity of representation. But, according to Mr. Webster's arguments, a
society could avail itself of no benefit or purpose, by actual convention of
the whole; every individual being excluded, by his doctrine, of the right to
vote; for as he cannot know the interests of the whole, therefore, he cannot
decide upon any question in which those interests are involved. This doctrine
of Webster's is very similar to Blackstone's doctrine of the community of
goods. The earth and all things thereon, says Blackstone, was given by the
creator to man, in common; but as it was given to man in common, no man could
exercise private or particular dominion over any part of that which was given
in common, without violating the community of goods; since the property
belonged equally to all. But as it is plain such a community of goods in
practice, would be a mere nullity; so is Mr. Webster's community of interests.
A whole society meet in convention, to decide upon the interests of the whole:
but this decision is impossible to be effected, according to Mr. Webster's
doctrine; for the individuals, or the parts of the society, cannot vote;
because they are not the whole; but the whole includes all the parts;
therefore, the whole cannot vote, because the parts cannot; therefore, neither
the parts nor the whole can vote; therefore, the whole is a mere nullity.

We are every day told, that a representative is not only to represent the
persons who elected him, but he is to represent the whole state; and,
therefore, he cannot be bound by the opinion of his electors. If the fallacy of
this argument be not already sufficiently exposed, we might deny that it can
apply to the United States; as it contains the position of universal
representation, which can only be bottomed upon universal election, a thing not
known in these states.

What sort of a representative would a person chosen in the district of Maine,
or the territory north west of the Ohio, make for the people of South Carolina
or Georgia? It is evident at first blush, that such a representative might know
no more of the interests of his pretended southern constituents, than the man
in the moon; and if a knowledge of the interests of the whole, be essential to
enable a part of the people to give, with propriety, binding instructions to
their representatives, surely a little knowledge is necessary, to constitute a
man a representative of the whole; and how is the inhabitant of the district of
Maine, to discover a knowledge of the interests of the people of Georgia? It
may be answered, through the medium of the representatives of the people of
Georgia. But may not the representatives of Georgia, deceive the inhabitant of
the district of Maine on this subject? and is it not absurd to the last degree,
to say that a representative ought to desert the interests of his own electors,
with which he is well acquainted, in order to guard the interests of a people
foreign to him; who are represented by express delegations from themselves; and
of whom all his knowledge must be taken upon the trust of other people? Such
arguments, of universal representation, cannot apply to the United States;
because the local divisions of states still exist, and the representation is
founded upon local and not general principles. If, indeed, the representatives
were elected out of the whole union, they would be general, and not local
representatives; but even then, the principle, that the representative body is
bound by the will of the body constituent, will hold good: as this principle is
commensurate with every possible degree of representation. If the
representative is local, he may be restrained by local instructions. If he is
general, or continental, he may be restrained by general, or continental
instructions.

But it is said that a man ought not to be settered with instructions, but
should be suffered to go independent to congress. I can form to myself the idea
of the animal, represented by Horace, that had the body of an horse, the head
of a man, and the wings of a bird, but a trustee independent of his truster, an
agent independent of his principal, or a representative independent of his
constituent, is a thing that I cannot conceive; and to say that a
representative ought to go to congress unfettered with instructions, is very
much like saying he ought to go to congress, not to represent his constituent,
but to represent himself.

This sort of logic, that in a free country a representative is bound to
represent himself, prevailed to such a degree, about the time that the federal
government was formed, that a person chosen to represent Sandwich, in
Massachusetts, in convention, refused to be fettered, as he called it, and
resigned his appointment, because his constituents instructed him to vote
against the federal constitution. Among the reasons urged by Mr. Bourne, the
person in question, for declining the service of his fellow citizens, are the
following: "Under the restrictions with which your delegates are fettered, the
greatest idiot may answer your purpose, as well as the greatest man. The
suffrages of our fellow men, when they neither repose confidence in our
integrity, nor pay a tribute of respect to our abilities, can never be
agreeable." I am not disposed to question the sincerity of Mr. Bourne, on this
occasion. His conclusions are, however, totally false; for it does not follow,
because a representative is bound to express the will of his constituents,
that, therefore, the greatest idiot will answer the purpose as well as the
greatest man. Generals of armies, and admirals of navies, are almost always
bound by instructions, and yet it never entered any man's head, that an idiot
was a proper person to command an army or a fleet; and if such commander breaks
his orders, he is sure to get broke himself; and the maxim in commerce is, to
break your owners rather than to break your orders. In short, whatever
Webster's or Bourne's notions of ideotism may be, it is evident, that the
wisest man will always discharge the duties of a representative best, however
his instructions may be. The rest of his arguments are equally stupid: for the
suffrages of our fellow men are, in themselves, the most sacred deposits of
confidence in our integrity, and the most transcendent tributes of respect to
our abilities, which we can possibly receive. And yet Mr. Webster tell us, that
he would rather be the author of this stupid address, than all the labored
dissertations written upon the federal constitution.

If the representatives from any district are not bound by the opinions of such
district, but, on the contrary, are bound to consider the interest of the
United States, generally, then it may be asked, with what propriety can the
district displace the representative, at the next election? and yet the
districts are vested, by the constitution, with this power. Here are
representatives, bound to attend to the general interests of the whole
continent, and yet subject to be displaced by the districts, for such
attention. It is evident, that the constitution, by apportioning the
representation to particular states, i^ tended, that the particular interests
of each state should be specially attended to, by the representation flowing
from it. And all arguments, controverting this evident principle, are more
sophistry, calculated to deceive, and pave the way for hereditary
representation, or a representation for life. For, if the principle is once
admitted, as constitutional, that the representatives from any state are bound
to attend to the general interest of the United States, the interest of their
own state to the contrary notwithstanding, I see no reason why congress may not
declare themselves hereditary legislators for the United States, exnecessitate
rei; because, if they are bound to maintain the general welfare, they ought not
to be controuled by partial interests: and as the exercise of election
manifests such control, it ought to be abolished.

As this is a very important topic, I shall follow Mr. Webster a little. "The
very doctrine of representation in government, excludes the right of giving
binding instructions to deputies. The design of choosing representatives, is,
to collect the wisdom of the state; the deputies are to unite their councils;
to meet and consult for the public safety. But positive instructions prevent
this effect: they are dictated by local interests, or opinions formed on an
imperfect view of facts and arguments; in short, they totally counteract the
good effects of public deliberations, and prevent those salutary measures which
may result from united councils. They make the opinions of a small part of the
state, the rule for the whole; they imply a decision of a question, before it
is heard; they reduce a representative to a mere machine, by restraining the
exercise of his reason; they subvert the very principles of republican
government. And, further, a representative is bound by oath to act according to
his judgment, and for the good of the people: his instructions forbid him to
use his judgment; he must then abandon either his orders, or his oath; perjury
or disobedience is his only alternative."

In answer to all this, it may be said, that arguments, equally specious, may
be urged against the consistency of the attributes of the deity, the exercise
of religion, the utility of virtue, or even against the possibility of our
existence. But appearance is not reality, nor is specious sophistry, truth. If
a man says two and two make five, and the half of five is three, I say, the man
is either a fool or a knave; that he either is himself deceived, or seeks to
deceive others. So, when Mr. Webster tells us, that the doctrine of
representation excludes the right of giving binding instructions to deputies,
he either does not understand the common acceptance of the word
representation, or he means to play the sophist. The meaning of the word
representation, is, bearing or exercising the character or power of another;
and if the doctrine of bearing or exercising the character or power of another,
excludes the bearing or exercise of such character or power, then a thing is
and is not; after which deduction, it would be folly in any man to reason with
Mr. Webster, were not the public interests involved in the decision.

But "The design of choosing representatives, is, to collect the wisdom of the
state. This statement is not correct; it ought to be the will (...) the state;
for, however the wisdom of a state may be suppered to be manifested, in the
debates of a legislative body, yet the decision is by vote, which is the
expression of will, and not of wisdom; as many persons decide by vote, upon a
question, in the discussion of which they have been totally silent. And it
frequently happens, that a minority have all the wisdom and truth on their
side, but are obliged to submit to the will of the majority.

Again, "The deputies are to unite their councils, to meet and consult for the
public safety; but instructions prevent this effect." I will be bold to assert,
that there never was on earth an union of councils, upon any great and
interesting question; and, until liberty is swallowed up in despotism, there
never will be. The celebrated declaration of independence was carried by a
majority of one only; the federal constitution met with much opposition, and
the senate of the United States was equally divided, upon every question, for
several weeks of the last session; so that, to effect this fancied union of
councils, which is as little to be expected as a similarity in all our faces
and dispositions, and which, if effected, would prove the most intolerable of
all tyrannies, the people of the United States are to be prevented from all
control over their representatives.

Again, "They make the opinions of a small part of the state, a rule for the
whole." An assertion of this kind could only have proceeded from a man, who,
being educated in the habit of indiscriminately supporting truth and falsehood,
has lost all distinct perceptions of both, and is calculated to confute, not to
convince. If the representatives in congress, from any particular state, had
the privilege of voting exclusively, and that such votes of one state should
bind the whole, there might be some truth in this assertion; but, when the
whole representatives, from all the states, vote on the same question, it is as
difficult to conceive how a part can rule the whole, as it is to conceive that
a part is greater than the whole.

But, "a representative has sworn to act according to his judgment; and his
instructions forbid him to use his judgment; hence perjury or disobedience is
the alternative." Oaths have been thought necessary, in courts of justice, as
obligations binding on the consciences of men, over which the court can
exercise no other control; but the exercise of office is another matter, and,
I presume, the control, which a properly organized body constituent has and
preserves over its representatives, supersedes the necessity of oaths
altogether. But even if it did not, a man's judgment might, without any
violation of his conscience, dictate to him the impropriety of setting up his
own will, in opposition to the will of his constituents.

It is the fate of sophists, to be eternally contradicting themselves; and this
very gentleman, who has exhausted so much rhetoric, to prove the impropriety of
instructions to representatives, after telling us, that the powers of a
representative should be wholly discretionary, when he acts as a legislator,
says, "but, as an agent for a town or a small society, he may have positive
instructions. His constituents, in the last case, are competent to instruct
him, because they are the whole body concerned; but, in the first instance,
they are but part of the state, and not competent to judge fully of the
interests of the whole." I would beg leave to ask him, if a town is a whole
state? it is not. How, then, can a town, according to Webster's principles,
give instructions? it cannot. But, after spinning out forty pages of sophistry,
he concedes all that is contended for, to wit, that towns may give binding
instructions, because they are the whole body concerned. But, in what sense, is
a town the whole body concerned? in no other sense, but that the whole town is
the whole body constituent; and no sensible man ever thought, that any part
less than the whole, or a majority of the whole body constituent, could, of
right, give binding instructions to the representatives; but the whole body or
a majority of the whole body constituent may; which, I believe, I have
sufficiently proved, and is conceded by Mr. Webster.

Reflections on Mr. Jay's Treaty. [CONTINUED FROM PAGE 140.]
No. VI.
Article XIV.
BY this article, "the subjects of his Britannic majesty have liberty to come,
with their ships and cargoes, to the lands, countries, cities, ports, places,
and rivers, within the whole extent of the United States, to enter into the
same, to resort, remain, and reside there, without any limitation of time, also
to hire and possess houses and warehouses, for the purpose of their commerce,
and in which they are to enjoy the most complete protection and security." As
this article excludes a British subject from no part of the United States, it
might be expected that our citizens, in return, should enjoy the same liberty
of trading to and residing within every part of the British territories. -- No
such thing -- By it we can only go to a small part of his majesty's dominions,
viz. those in Europe, where we have been in the habit of going ever since the
peace, without any treaty, and without any molestation, Great Britain finding
her interest in permitting us so to do. -- Our envoy, ever true to the
principle of inequality, which he has made the basis of his treaty, has brought
it into conspicuous action in this place; as if anxious to circumscribe our
commerce, he never loses an opportunity of imposing some restrictions or
limitations on it.

Article XV.
Upon this article, no other observation is necessary, than that it tends very
unnecessarily to shackle the government, in regulating our commerce with
foreign nations, which, by the constitution, is vested in congress, and that it
must always have been a matter of much solicitude with Great Britain, to
prevent our passing such discrimination laws, on this subject, as circumstances
and necessity might render proper. -- The reader is left to discover what
benefit we can derive from it. -- Passing over the 16th article, which
regulates the appointment of consuls, we come to those parts of the treaty
which have ever appeared to me the most exceptionable. I mean those which
regulate our intercourse and comme^^^ with other nations, in times of British
wars. Was a stranger, unacquainted with the history of the two contracting
parties, to peruse this compact, he would imagine the United States were almost
constantly engaged in war, and that her envoy, jealous of the neutral situation
of Great Britain, and afraid of the supplies she might furnish to the enemies
of his country, had taken care to impose every restriction he could think of,
on her commerce and action, during those periods of hostility. What would be
his surprise, if, after drawing this conclusion, he was informed, that the
United States, except the war which emancipated them, have never been embroiled
in any foreign quarrel? That, on the contrary, the ambition or injustice of
Great Britain urges her to take part in almost every war which breaks out in
Europe or Asia; that America is nearly 3000 miles from the scene of action, and
the vortex of European politics; that she is a peaceable, commercial nation;
that her interest consists in observing a strict neutrality, not by withholding
all supplies from the belligerent powers, and sullenly shutting her ports
against them all, but by an open, unreserved, and equal communication and trade
with all of them. Instead of this, we shall find, in some of 'the articles
which follow, the most unheard of restrictions upon our commerce, and the most
wanton sacrifices of the thousand advantages which we were entitled to, as a
commercial country; principles, which this country, in common with several
other maritime powers, had advocated and adopted, for a series of years, have
been most wantonly abandoned. Articles, which were never before esteemed
contraband, have been inserted in the black list; and such is the constant
spirit of the parts to which I allude, that not an American vessel can cross
the ocean, in time of war, without manifest hazard of becoming lawful prize to
a British cruiser. -- A more minute attention to this part of the treaty, will
but too much justify observations, which, at first view, may appear harsh and
ill-founded. To elucidate more fully the striking inequality of these parts of
the treaty, they will be contrasted with those which we have with other
nations. -- The task will be painful and nauseous; in every line we shall
encounter some new sacrifice; at every period, we shall execrate the result of
a mission, which has fixed an indelible stain upon our national honor, and
published to the world, that we no longer deserve to be free.

Article XVII.
"It is agreed, that, in all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained,
on just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the
enemy any of the articles, which are contraband of war, the said vessel shall
be brought to the nearest or the most convenient port; and if any property of
an enemy shall be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs to
the enemy, shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed
with the remainder, without any impediment. And it is agreed, that all proper
measures shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or
cargoes so brought in for adjudication, and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification, adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters or owners of such
ships."

In this article we have solemnly relinquished a point, which, to us, was of
more value than the amount of all the depredations on our trade, added to the
immense sums due to us, for the negroes, and to the losses we have sustained,
by the detention of our posts. As a neutral and trading people, and as a
nation, likely, with common prudence, ever to continue at peace with all the
world, we should have insisted, even at the risque of war, especially when
making a treaty, that free vessels should make free goods. With what people are
we afraid of going to war, that we are so anxious to restrain the vessels of
Great Britain from carrying their effects? There is but one country with which
our government appears solicitous to embroil us, and that is France. Should
such a war really take place (which God forbid, as it would certainly be
followed by a civil one) is it probable Great Britain would become carriers for
the French? and if she did, would our government dare to authorize her citizens
to make prize of any property on board of her vessels? What would we not submit
to, in time of war, if, when not pressed by this calamity, we sacrifice a
principle for which we have been contending ever since we became a nation, and
which we have uniformly adhered to, in our conventions with other nations? As
early as 1781, it was an instruction to the captains of American armed vessels,
that they should permit all "neutral vessels freely to navigate on the high
seas or coast of America, except such, as were employed in carrying contraband
goods, or soldiers to the enemies of the United States." Jour. of Cong. 7. vol.
p. 80. What were then deemed contraband goods will be shown, when we come to
consider the next article of this memorable treaty. Several of the maritime and
commercial states of Europe, had already armed to maintain their neutrality;
and congress, we see, not only respected the principle of this association, but
did all they could to give it complete operation, by a solemn ordinance, which
they passed on the 7th of April, 1781. It need not be contended, that there is
no nation on earth so much interested and benefited by the observance of this
principle, as America. Let us attend only to the present war: what benefit
might we not derive from it, if our vessels could afford protection to the
property of belligerent powers? Having seen that congress, even in time of war
(it will be remembered, that America was then without a senate devoted to Great
Britain, and that those who were then deemed patriots, were really such) when
it might have been her interest to pursue the wicked, piratical system of Great
Britain, respected the rights of neutrality, and would not touch the property
of her enemy, if found on board of a neutral vessel; and all her treaties
hitherto, have secured to her this important, this ^^^^luable right, of
carrying even the property of an enemy, (...) any part of the globe. Let us
contrast the seventeenth article of Mr. Pitt's treaty (for such it ought to be
called) with the 23d article of the one concluded by the venerable Franklin,
with our good ally the French. The disgust occasioned by the former will not be
much diminished, while we peruse the latter. "It shall be lawful," says this
article, "for all and singular, the subjects of the most Christian king, and
the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United States, to sail with
their ships, with all manner of liberty, and security, no distinction being
^^de, who are the proprietors of the merchandises laden thereon, from any port,
to the places of those who now are, or hereafter shall be at enmity with the
most Christian king, or the United States. It shall likewise be lawful for the
subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships and merchandises
aforementioned; and to trade with the same liberty and security, from the
places, ports, and havens of those who are enemies of both, or either party,
without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly from the
places of the enemy aforementioned, to neutral places; but also from one place
belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an enemy; whether they be
under the jurisdiction of the same prince, or several. And it is hereby
stipulated that free ships shall also give a freedom to goods; and that every
thing shall be deemed to be free and exempt which shall be found on board the
ships belonging to the subjects of either of the confederates, although the
whole lading, or any part thereof should appertain to the enemies of either,
contraband goods being always excepted. It is also agreed in like manner, that
the same liberty be extended to persons who are on board a free ship, with
their effects; that although they be enemies to both or either party, they are
not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are soldiers, and in actual
service of the enemies."

If Mr. Pit had graciously permitted Mr. Jay to insert a similar stipulation
in the treaty before us, in what an envied situation would it have placed
America! At present, she must even forego the advantages she might derive from
the French treaty for if we permit the English to seize French property on
bound our vessels, can it be expected that France will abstain from similar
treatment? Between the two, what is to become (...) American vessels? Let Mr.
Jay and his friends answer. In the twenty-fourth article of our treaty with the
United Netherlands, the "liberty of navingation and commerce is extended to all
(...) of merchandises, excepting only those which are distinguished under the
name of contraband or merchandises prohibited." What these are, will be seen by
and by, "so that all effects and merchandises," continues this article, "which
are (...) expressly before named, may, without any exception, and in perfect
liberty, be transported by the subjects and inhabitans of both allies, from and
to places, belonging to the enemy, excepting only the places which at the same
time shall be besieged, blockaded, or invested, and these places shall only be
held for such, which are surrounded, nearly, by some of the belligerent
powers." In our treaty with Sweden, we find the same regard paid to our mutual
interests. The seventh arti^^ deserves to be copied at full length, as a
contrast to the (...) the same subject in the English treaty. The reader in
reque^^^^ to compare them attentively; and he will find his indignation kindled
against any one who shall be hardy enough to adv^^^^^ the latter. It is in
these words: "All and every the subjects and inhabitants of the kingdom of
Sweden, as well as those of the United States, shall be permitted to navigate
with their vessels in all safety and freedom, and without any regard to those
to whom the merchandises and cargoes may belong, from any part whatever^ and
the subjects and inhabitants of the two states shall likewise (...) permitted
to sail and trade with their vessels, and with the save liberty and safety to
frequent the places, ports, and havens of powers, enemies to both or either of
the contracting parties, without being in any wise molasted or troubled, and to
carry on a commerce, not only directly from the ports of an enemy to a newtral
port, but even from one port of an enemy to another port of an enemy, whether
it be under the jurisdiction of the same, or of different princes. And as it is
acknowledged by this treaty with respect to ships and merchandises, that free
ships shall make the merchandises free, and that every thing which shall be on
board of ships belonging to subjects of the one on the other of the contracting
parties, shall be considered as free, even though the cargo or a part of it
should belong to the enemies of one or both; it is nevertheless provided, that
contraband goods shall always be excepted, which, being intercepted, shall be
proceeded against according to the spirit of the following articles. It is
likewise agreed that the same liberty be extended to persons who may be on
board a free ship, with their effects, that although they be enemies to both,
or either of the parties, they shall not be taken out of the free ship, unless
they are soldiers in the actual service of the said enemies." After perusing
these several articles of our treaties with other nations, let the reader
return to the one which has excited this compa^^^^^, and mourn over the lost
dignity and interests of his country. It will be said that by the laws of
nations, free vessels (...) not make free goods. That this was the case
formerly is conceded; but when those nations which have a right to alter this
law are using their utmost efforts to bring about a change, dictated by
humanity and reason, why should we formally give our assent to a measure which
must not only retard this amelioration, but deprive us of the salutary
operation of the treaties we have already made? We shall be told, as in other
cases, th^^ Mr. Pit insisted upon this stipulation, and that the terms were
the best which Mr. Jay could obtain. This reasoning may satisfy a party, when
hard pressed, to support the tottering reputation of a leader; but in private
life, a man would deserve a p^^^e in B^d^am who should assign no other reason
for making a (...) bargain with his neighbor, than that the other would not
^^^^ent to a good one. On such, occasions, nations, as individuals, should
exercise their free agency, and refuse to treat with those ^^o, at every step,
are extorting unreasonable concessions. In the next article, which will
presently furnish matter for animad^^^sion, we shall also find ample field for
censure. By the one which we have just considered, we are interdicted from
carrying ^^y species of enemies' property; in that which follows the
prohibition may be extended by construction, even to our own goods which will
in every case run great hazard of being seized and confiscated.

DECIUS.

Remarks on Mr. Charles Pinckney's Speech.
[CONCLUDED FROM PAGE 111.]

WITH respect to the negotiation about the Mississippi, in 1786, which seems to
be dragged in here without any obvious propriety, it may be remembered, that
Mr. Jay's opinion, on that occasion, had the sanction of a majority of congress
-- that it was then thought, by many of the wisest men in America, a salutary
arrangement for the Atlantic states -- that the eastern states were generally
of that opinion -- that a minority in congress, for the benefit of a small part
of the union, obstructed a measure which was then deemed generally be^^^ial --
and that even now it may be considered as problematical, whether the
arrangement would not have eventuated more beneficially for the western
territory than any other which can be promised.

The insinuation against the president, for having sent a (...) who has shown
himself "so uninformed of the commecial interests of his country, and so
miserably deficient in the talents of a negociator, and for having opposed him
singly, and at their own court, to the talents, experience, and, perhaps,
temptations of their ablest statesmen," will fail of its intended effect. Mr.
Jay's conduct in Spain, in France at the treaty of 1783, his talents and
experience, and known integrity, were sufficient inducements with the president
to select him for this mission. There may indeed be men, whose vanity may lead
them to believe, that they would have negociated a better treaty -- men, no
more to be compared to Mr. Jay, for virtue or abilities, than a farthing candle
to the sun, and whose vanity, in supposing themselves his superiors, in these
respects, can only be surpassed by their folly, in having had pretensions and
expectations so ill-founded and ridiculous.

In complaining of the article relating to British debts, the speech observes,
that the creditors had long since made up their minds on certain points, and
that by far the greater number of cases have been settled by suit or
compromise; so much the better; all those cases, in which the creditors have
been satisfied, will not be touched by the treaty. The article will only affect
the others, where the debtors are insolvent. If Mr. Jay, in his negotiation of
the treaty of 1783, honestly meant, that bona fide debts were to be paid, it
would have been inconsistent in him to deny it, either as judge or secretary of
foreign affairs: Humanity is perhaps as much concerned in paying a fair debt to
a factor or agent in England, who had shipped goods to this country, and was
responsible to the manufacturers, and liable to be imprisoned there for
non-payment, as in shielding from the law a rich debtor in this, who withheld
payment: Honor as much required that our national faith should be kept, and
that bona fide debts should be paid by solvent debtors. The stipulation agreed
to by Mr. Jay is not to distress individuals, but to make the nation answerable
for losses arising from a breach of the treaty.

On the subject of spoliations, the speech chalks out the line of conduct Mr.
Jay should have taken: "He should have required immediate satisfaction; if
refused, he should have quitted their court, and left it to his country to have
determined what other measures were to be pursued: but, instead of this, he has
accepted a remote, expensive, and uncertain remedy." This is the line of
conduct the speaker would leave taken: "his demand should have been spirited
and positive -- no alternative would have been offered." But suppose his
instructions had not been of that spirited and positive nature, and that some
other alternative had been pointed out by them -- and he had disobeyed them,
after having accepted the mission, knowing those instructions? On his return,
he would have been universally condemned, and some other less positive
gentleman would have been sent. The former minister at that court, as
distinguished for his spirit as his virtues, but whose spirit, regulated by
good sense and sound discretion, would have been more wisely directed,
complained for several months to the British court, of the spoliations
committed under the orders of the 8th of June, 1793, without threatening to
quit the country: in this, he conformed to the instructions of the executive;
in Mr. Jefferson's letter to Mr. Pinckney, of September 7, 1793, after
complaining of those spoliations, he adds, "The president, therefore, desires
that you will immediately enter into explanations, on this subject, with the
British government. Lay before them, in friendly and temperate terms, all the
demonstrations of the injury done us by this act, and endeavor to obtain a
revocation of it, and full indemnification to any citizens of these states, who
may have suffered by it in the mean time. Accompany your representations with
every assurance of our earnest desire to live on terms of the best friendship
and harmony with them, and to found our expectations of justice on their part,
on a strict observance of it on ours. Desirous of furnishing no color of
offense, we do not wish you to name to them any term for giving an answer: urge
one as much as you can, without commitment." The remedy accepted by Mr. Jay, is
probably the remedy designated in his instructions; it is certainly the usual
remedy in similar cases. But it is called remote; and what would the speech
have substituted? Why Mr. Jay must have quitted Great Britain, made his report
to the president, who must thereupon have convened the senate, according to the
doctrine laid down in the speech, to reconsider their instructions, and, after
all, at the distance of many months, the senate would have done precisely what
they have done -- advised the president to accept the terms: Mr. Jay would have
returned to England, and this remote remedy would have been made more remote by
at least a twelvemonth: it is called expensive; and what would the speech
substitute? Why, Mr. Jay must have returned home, and the United States, after
the expense of some thousand dollars for the extra session of the senate, must
either have had the expense of another embassy, or the more serious expense of
ten or fifteen millions of dollars by a war, to obtain a compensation of half a
million!! The remedy pointed out by the speech does not then appear preferable
to Mr. Jay's.

Mr. Jay is next charged with having, in the most condescending manner,
stipulated that all prizes brought in, etc. shall be paid for, etc. Mr. Jay
stipulated no such thing. The president and stipulated in 1793, that certain
prizes, ^s specified in Mr. Jefferson's letter, annexed to the treaty, should
be paid for. Mr. Jay, conformably to that letter and his instructions, agrees
that the cases not already paid for, coming within the principles therein
fixed, shall be referred to the commissioners.

After the speech had informed us that the 12th article was held in general
detestation by our own citizens, it may appear superfluous to add the
detestation of foreigners. The detestation of our own citizens was quite
sufficient to condemn it. But the flourish about our friends seems misapplied.
The articles, prohibited by that article, are molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa,
and cotton: It may be queried whether our vessels carry much of them to supply
our friends; the general course of the present trade of re-export in those
articles, seems to be to other parts of Europe. It is not, however, meant to
contend this point, with those who have obtained the best mercantile
information.

The animadversion on the article respecting the East India trade, is either
not understood, or the article itself is not understood by the commentator. It
permits the citizens of the United States "to carry on freely a trade between
the British territories in the East Indies and the United States, in all
articles of which the importation or exportation respectively, to or from the
said territories, shall not be entirely prohibited; that is, it places our
citizens upon the same footing exactly as the East India company, and upon a
better footing than the people of Great Britain, who cannot carry on such
trade. Because advantages favorable to the United States are conceded in this
article, the notable discovery is now made, that the trade is injurious; so the
same persons, who a few years ago would have rejoiced at a stipulation,
permitting our vessels of 60 tons to enter the British islands, now call the
stipulation for 70 tons a paltry allowance. Had the British possessions in the
East Indies been shut to us by the treaty, what clamor should we not have
heard at being deprived of such inestimable advantages?

It has been asserted, in the course of these observations, that the complaint
against Mr. Jay. for recognizing the right to search our vessels on suspicion
of having on board enemy's property, is ill sounded: A recurrence to Vattel,
whose authority, the speech tells us, is not to be doubted, and to Mr.
Jefferson's letters, authorities equally undoubted, will confirm the assertion.
Present experience proves, that the speaker is altogether mistaken, when he
says, "that, if we recognize this right, we must give up the idea of
benefitting by the dissentions of European powers, and becoming their carriers,
and that our commerce will be prostrated at the sect of the maritime powers."
One would suppose, that a person who had obtained the best mercantile
information, would have known, that, notwithstanding Mr. Jefferson, our
secretary of state, in conformity with the doctrine of that undoubted
authority, Vattel, did, two years ago, recognize that right, and the British
vessels of war have constantly exercised it, yet that our carrying trade has
increased, and our commerce has flourished, within the two last years, in a
manner unexampled in the history of nations. And what is very extraordinary,
the speaker, in contradiction to his own assertions in this place, tells us in
another, that the American commerce and navigation flourished beyond all former
example and almost to exceed belief; and that now, American merchants, in
Charleston, carry on all the trade, and own more than sixty vessels of large
size, and a much greater proportion of smaller vessels in the West India trade;
all this, in spite of the recognition of that alarming right made two years
ago, and in spite of the constant exercise of it, which is, to destroy our
carrying trade and prostrate our commerce! To be sure, there must have been a
wonderful exertion of ingenuity to collect together in one (...) of a
newspaper, so many contradictions!

This part of the treaty seems to be the most offensive to the speaker; it is
the article which has brought down upon Mr. Jay his most severe reprobation; he
considers it the most important, the most seriously injurious to our commerce;
and if there had been no other objection, Mr. Jay should have refused to sign
the treaty. And yet, wonderful to relate, it is perfectly conformable to the
law of nations, as laid down by that undoubted authority, Vattel; it is
recognized by our government, and, under the exercise of it, instead of the
most serious injury to our commerce, our commerce and navigation have
flourished, almost to exceed belief. In short, if there is any part of the
treaty less liable to objection than another, this is the article.

To compel Great Britain and other maritime powers (for the northern powers
have now given up this point) to change the acknowledged law of nations, the
speech recommends the establishment of a navy of twelve sail of the line and a
few frigates. However such a thing may be desirable, and may hereafter be
expedient, the idea of an early establishment of that kind is perfectly
chimerical. To protect our commerce from the depredations of the Algerines,
congress resolved, in January, 1794, to build and equip six frigates: At this
day, the keels are scarcely laid; when they will be launched, God knows; when
that happens, there is but little prospect of their being manned; and if they
are, they will float at an expense of a million and a half of dollars outfit,
and half a million of annual expense, without allowing for misfortunes or
contingencies. -- What the expense of the speaker's navy will be, may be easily
computed. Seven or eight millions of dollars for outfit, and two or three
millions of annual expense, will not come up to the mark. Nor is that the
principal difficulty: This fleet will be wanted during the wars of the maritime
powers, to protect our commerce and preserve our neutral rights. -- But, on
these occasions, the extension of our carrying trade absorbs all our seamen;
and if any could be obtained for the public ships, it would be at an
intolerable expense. If we should be at war, then the spirit of privateering
would draw off the greatest part of our seamen. And after all, what would ten
or twelve ships of the line and a few frigates accomplish, when opposed to the
enormous fleets of the maritime powers of Europe? Whatever, therefore, we may
do in the article of a navy some years hence, it is self-evident, that our
strength and resources must at present be applied against our enemies in a very
different shape.

On the 14th and 15th articles, it is remarked in the speech, that the first
clause places the vessels of America on the same footing with those of other
foreign nations, which is as much as we could of right expect, consistent with
their obligations to other nations: But that by this rule, American vessels
going to their European ports pay from 15 l. to 20 l. on a vessel of 150 to 200
tons, more than a British vessel. Certainly we cannot complain, if we are put
on the footing of the most favored nation: as to the extra duty, paid by
American vessels in all the ports of England, but London, for light money,
which is one shilling and nine-pence per ton, it is the same as is paid by all
other foreign nations; in all other respects, our ships are upon the same
footing with those of Great Britain. It is here worthy of remark, that the
extra duty paid in the United States by a British vessel, more than an
American, is greater than the extra duty paid in Great Britain by an American
vessel, more than a British; for example, in the United States an American
vessel pays six cents, a British fifty cents, per ton; the difference on a
vessel of 200 tons is twenty pounds ten shillings and eight-pence, and on a
vessel of 300 tons, twenty-nine pounds sixteen shillings -- besides the
difference of ten per cent on the duties; whereas the difference in England, in
favor of a British vessel of 200 tons, is only seventeen pounds ten shillings,
and of 300, only twenty-six pounds five shillings, and no discrimination in the
duties: And, in one respect, our vessels are on a better footing in England
than those of the most favored nation; for while they pay upon the carriage of
several of their own commodities, additional duties, called alien duties, our
ships are exempt from them.

In 1789, congress laid a tonnage duty of 25 cents per ton on all foreign
vessels, and made the discrimination of ten per cent. on the duties on goods
imported, in favor of American bottoms, as above mentioned. In 1790, the
tonnage duty was increased to 50 cents, not in consequence of the president's
message, as stated in the speech, which was in February 179^ (not 1790). That
message provoked no commercial restriction at that time, but was the foundation
of a reference to the secretary of state, which produced his report, in January
1794. An examination of this part of the speech furnishes another striking
contradiction; it is here said, "that our fellow citizens at the northward have
had exclusively the India trade, by which, besides supplying our own citizens
with Asiatic goods, at one fourth the price they were before the revolution,
they have exported them to the West Indies, and even to Europe, making thereby
the balance of trade more favorable to the United States." The speaker, in thus
excelling the benefits of the East India trade, must assuredly have forgot his
attempt to disparage that trade, in a preceding paragraph, where he was obliged
to mention some advantage acquired by the treaty, and his having therein said,
"that the advantage was delusive; that an extensive trade to the East Indies
was injurious; because, at an immense expense, we import from thence nothing
but articles of mere luxury, most of which, except tea, we could do very well
without, or procure elsewhere, in exchange for our productions; and they take
from us, in payment, scarcely any thing but specie."

These restrictions, on the part of our government, it is said, did not produce
any counter restrictions, on the part of England. But the merchants of several
large commercial cities in Great Britain, as appears by the report to the privy
council, in the spring 1791, did complain of them as being un-reciprocal, as
imposing burdens on their navigation and commerce in our ports, which they did
not impose on our navigation and commerce in theirs. In fact, the sole
discrimination of ten per cent. on the duties in favor of American bottoms,
second nearly the monopoly of the carriage of the manufactures of Great Britain
to this country, and was severely felt by the ship-owners of these cities. They
were wise enough, however, to recommend negotiation instead of retaliation to
the privy council, Mr. Hammond was sent to the United States; and our
government conceiving, that, notwithstanding we had imposed certain
restrictions on the commerce of England, (...) our intercourse was not on such
a footing as we had a right to expect: Mr. Jefferson, in his very first letter
to Mr. Hammond, of 29th November, 1791, says, "with respect to the commerce of
the two countries, we have supposed that we saw, in several instances,
regulations on the part of your government, which, if reciprocally adopted,
would materially injure the interests of both nations: On this subject, too, I
must beg the favor of you to say, whether you are authorized to conclude or to
negociate arrangements with us, which may fix the commerce between the two
countries on principles of reciprocal advantage?" In reply to this letter, Mr.
Hammond assured him, that though he was not authorized to conclude, yet he was
fully authorized to enter on a negotiation on that subject: Mr. Jefferson,
conceiving that such authority was inadequate, dropped the subject, and
confined his ensuing negociations entirely to the infractions of the treaty.
These facts, while they demonstrate that a disposition existed, on the part of
our government, so long ago as November, 1791, to enter into a commercial
treaty with England, exculpate, at the same time, Mr. Jay, altogether, from the
charges insinuated against him of having volunteered these commercial
arrangements.

The speech proceeds to observe, that "at this moment Mr. Jay concedes, in the
second section of the 15th article, the following proviso. "But the British
government reserves to itself the right of imposing on American vessels,
entering into the British ports in Europe, a tonnage duty equal to that which
shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of America, and also such duty
as may be adequate to countervail the difference of duty now payable on the
importation of European and Asiatic goods, when imported into the United
States, in British or American vessels." There is no concession by Mr. Jay: the
British government actually possessed the right to lay such countervailing
duties, and might have exercised it whenever it was thought expedient; it could
not be expected that, after declaring that the intercourse between the two
countries should be carried on, on principles of perfect reciprocity, we should
insist on continuing certain discriminating duties, and bind the other party up
from reciprocating them: this would have been inconsistent with ourselves,
after making the want of reciprocity on their part, the basis of our commercial
complaints. The speech itself in another place, acknowledges that their
receiving our vessels on the same footing as other foreign nations, "was
perhaps as much as we could of right expect, consistent with their obligations
to other nations;" and yet, it has been shown that in some instances, our
vessels are, by existing regulations, received on better terms than those of
other nations. This being the case, could we expect that they should surrender
by treaty, a right which we reserve to ourselves, and which they have reserved
in relation to all other nations? The French have reserved in their treaty with
us, a similar right; and no nation can ever be required to relinquish it.

The stipulation, "that the United States will not impose any new or additional
tonnage duties, on British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting difference
between the duties pay able on the importation of any articles in British or
American vessels," is said, in the speech, to be calculated "to induce the
British shippers to refuse a credit to our merchants, unless they ship their
goods in British bottoms."

Credit being, in the opinion of many modern theorists, a very bad thing, if
the clause should produce the expected operation, it will, in their opinion,
certainly do some good. But it is surprising that this operation should not
have taken place ever since the year 1789, when the difference of duties
commenced. The operation has, during a period of six years been quite the
reverse of the speaker's suggestion; for notwithstanding the difference of
tonnage duty and the discrimination of ten per cent. the British merchants have
shipped their goods in American bottoms, and given the usual credit to our
merchants; and the speaker tells us, that by the operation of those duties, our
commerce and navigation have flourished almost to exceed belief. How then an
agreement not to increase those duties should provoke an hostility of
disposition on the part of the British merchants, which has not for six years
existed, when there was no such agreement not to increase them, is not easily
discovered!! The speech says further, on this article, "That it is not an
extravagant idea to presume, that the wealth of the British East India company
may be employed to crush the American merchants now in this trade (meaning, I
suppose, the East India trade) that they afterward may enjoy the monopoly of
it."

If the restrictions on British East India vessels have been hitherto so
effectual as "to secure the exclusive trade to our northern fellow citizens,"
as the speech informs us, it does not well appear how agreeing not to increase
those restrictions will give the monopoly to the British; the idea, if not
extravagant, is certainly a very extraordinary one. The import of this article
is merely, that we will not increase the discriminations now subsisting; why
should we, when they have been found sufficient to raise our commerce and
navigation to a pitch of prosperity almost to exceed belief -- when we thereby
prevent the other party from imposing on our commerce higher than corresponding
duties, and when, in fact, the whole article will be again in our power in the
course of two or three years?

It is then said, "that by treaties now existing with other nations, they are
to be used as the most favored nation -- and having of right the same privilege
of counteracting the discriminating duties, they will, of course, exercise it."
And have they not such a right at present? unquestionably. Can we now impose on
any nation with whom we have a treaty, any discriminating duties, which she
cannot counteract? And if, possessing that right, the discriminating duties
which have been imposed for six years, have not had injurious consequences, but
on the contrary have raised our commerce and navigation to the highest
prosperity, then none but the meanest capacity can see in this clause the
speedy and total destruction of American navigation.

We are next told, that by other articles of the treaty, the catalogue of
contraband articles is increased, and attempts are made to make even provisions
come under this description. With respect to provisions, the article seems
misunderstood. Vatth, whose authority, the speech tells us, will not be
doubted, has laid it down, that in certain cases which he mentions, pro^^^s^^s
are, by the law of nations, contraband, and liable to be confiscated. Mr. Jay,
differing in this point, from the speaker, has d^^^ted, the authority of
Vattel, and has disputed with the British government the right, under the law
of nations, to seize provisions as contraband in those cases. After discussions
on that point, what is stipulated in the treaty? The British government engage,
that whenever provisions shall become contraband, according to the existing law
of nations, they shall not be confiscated, but the owners shall be indemnified,
with a reasonable mercantile profit, with freight and demurrage. What then was
Mr. Jay given up? It is expressly stipulated, that the seizures shall be only
in cases where they are warranted by the existing law of nations: Mr. Jay
refused to acknowledge that they were contraband by the law of nations in any
particular case; he would not consent to a specification of any one case; he
would not stipulate for any one thing which might preclude us from denying the
existence of such a law of nations: the introductory part of the clause is,
therefore, to this effect; "whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise
cases, in which alone, provisions and other articles, not generally contraband,
may be regarded as such, renders it expedient to provide against the
inconveniences and misunderstandings which might thence arise," etc. If the
British government insisted, that in certain cases mentioned, provisions were
contraband, and Mr. Jay insisted that they were not, and on appealing to
Vattel, it was found that such was the opinion of that writer -- if, further,
the law of nations was supposed to give, in the cases mentioned, the right not
only of seizing, but of confiscating such provisions, and there was no other
mode of deciding ultimately on the right, but by an appeal to the sword; Mr.
Jay may have conceived, that he was making the best terms for our citizens, by
stipulating, that where, by the existing law of nations, and in those cases
only, provisions should be contraband, that they should not be confiscated, but
paid for with a mercantile profit, and freight and demurrage. By this clause,
nothing appears to be given up by our government, which may continue to deny
the existence of such right, under the law of nations, and to resist it either
by remonstrance, by commercial regulations, or by arms. In the mean time, and
until the question shall be decided, our citizens will be paid for their
property, instead of having it confiscated.

But admitting the clause to be an injurious one, the speaker, of all persons,
seems to be the least entitled to complain. He has told us that Vattel is an
author of undoubted authority, and he has also told us, "that if Mr. Jay had
attempted to say a word in favor of the claims of his countrymen, his opponent
had only to show him his own opinions, and his lips must have been instantly
closed." Suppose, then, the speaker, instead of Mr. Jay, had been sent on this
mission, and Lord Grenville had discovered, in the course of the negotiation,
that the speaker thought Vattel a writer of undoubted authority, and, that on
his denying the authority under the law of nations to make provisions
contraband in any case whatever, Lord Grenville had produced an assertion from
Vattel to this effect, that "all provisions are to be considered as contraband,
and as such liable to confiscation, in the case where the depriving an enemy of
these supplies, is one of the means intended to be employed for reducing him to
reasonable terms of peace:" What could our negociator have replied? "Had he
attempted to say a word in favor of the claims of his countrymen, his opponent
had only to show him his own opinions, and his lips must have been instantly
closed." According, then, to his own assertions and doctrines, Mr. Jay has
obtained much better terms, in relation to this point, than he could have done.
He proceeds to remark, that "whenever there is a war between the maritime
powers, the danger of seizure and condemnation to us will be as great as if we
were actually at war ourselves." The experience of the last two years, and his
own statement of the flourishing state of our navigation, during that period,
are sufficient refutations of that assertion.

In his comments on the 23d, 24th, and 25th articles, he unjustly charges Mr.
Jay with endeavoring to render this country as unfriendly as he could to the
French; and nothing can be more unfounded than the whole of this charge; there
is not a tittle of it which can bear the test of truth; there is not a tittle
of those three articles which can produce any such effect; there is not an
argument to prove it; the whole is mere vague declamation. One would suppose,
that a person who had taken so much pains to acquire the best mercantile
information, and who had so high an opinion of Vattei's authority, would have
bestowed some pains on a perusal of the French treaty, on the perusal of the
treaty under consideration, and then would have read Vattel on the subject of
treaties: Had he pursued this course, it must have resulted in a full
conviction, that the French treaty stands completely unimpaired in every point:
he would have learned, that in the construction of treaties, a different rule
prevails from the construction of laws, and that a posterior treaty does not
abrogate a prior one; that Mr. Jay, notwithstanding this rule (that nothing
might be left to construction) has inserted an express stipulation, that no
part of this treaty shall, in any wise, be construed to affect or impair any
former treaty; and that, consequently, whenever there is a war between France
and England, the French treaty will be paramount in every respect to the
British treaty, and the French will enjoy in our ports, to the exclusion of the
British, every right and advantage now secured to them by their treaty.

Such are the strictures on the several clauses of the treaty: The rest of the
speech consists of miscellaneous remarks which shall not be overlooked.

The first which occurs, is a very just observation, and we have to regret that
it is so soon after flatly contradicted. It is this, "that equality must be the
basis of every lasting treaty, for without equality, few treaties can last."
The contradiction which follows it is this; "all the policy of a nation should
consist in a resolution never to think of forming treaties of commerce, until
it finds itself in some happy circumstances which may authorize it to demand
prerogatives of foreign powers, without purchasing them even with equivalents."
Which of these positions does the speaker mean to inculcate? are we, in the
construction of his speech, to follow the rule which applies to the
construction of laws or treaties? if we observe the one, then the latter
position abrogates the former; if we observe the other, then the first position
stands unimpaired: in this dilemma, perhaps the best clue to his intentions is
the desire he has shown of exhibiting the last position in the most striking
light, and that the sentiment in capitals, is the capital sentiment he wishes
to enforce. In this idea we may be confirmed by the general tenor of his
observations, which inculcate inequality in treaties as their only basis. -- If
the speaker thinks no treaty can be lasting without equality, what must we
think of his wise policy, which recommends treaties without equality? If all
nations ought to pursue thi^ wise policy -- if both parties are to demand
prerogatives, and not purchase them with equivalents -- it requires
considerable ingenuity to discover, how treaties can ever be made: this is a
new kind of reciprocity, with the benefits all on one side.

These remarks, which the ingenuity of the speaker alone can reconcile, are
followed by two indecent insinuations, one against Mr. Jay, the other against
the president. The first is, "that there must be some other reasons for these
uncommon surrenders, upon which the public are not yet sufficiently informed."
-- This insinuation, coupled with the allusion to Mr. Jay's having been exposed
to the temptations of the British court, and another allusion at the close of
the speech, though couched in more ambiguous and decorous language, than was
either spoken at St. Michael's, or retailed afterward in the public prints,
leaves no room to doubt a wish to fix, in the public mind, a marked imputation
on the moral character of Mr. Jay. If Mr. Jay has, from corrupt motives,
sacrificed his country's interests, I most sincerely pray to God he may be
detected and punished; but his signing the treaty is not in itself a sufficient
cause of suspicion or insinuation: As well may we suspect the twenty senators,
among whom are men as pure and virtuous as ever breathed. He must either have
been very unfortunate in his intercourse with the world, or possess a mind very
susceptible of such impressions, as well as a heart very liable to be shaken,
who can think it probable, that two thirds of the senate, as well as Mr. Jay,
have been guilty of such infamy. The idea is too gross and too invidious to be
entertained. Should it, however, be found to be the case, the treaty, like
other fraudulent contracts, would be null and void by the law of nations. In
this charge, it has not, however, been even shown, what these uncommon
surrenders are, and wherein they differ from the stipulations in our former
treaties.

The insinuation against the president is, " his postponing the consideration
of the treaty from January to June." The treaty, it is well known, did not
reach Philadelphia until the 7th of March: the president never saw it before
that day; and the senate had adjourned on the third. Those members, who had to
return home to the extremities of the union, could not, with convenience,
re-assemble before the month of June, the second Monday in which had been fixed
for their meeting, before they adjourned.

No one will deny, that "any treaty which may operate to lessen our shipping,
and destroy that competition which is so necessary for our obtaining a proper
price for our staples, becomes a matter of serious concern." But has it been
proved, that the commercial articles of this treaty, as ratified by the senate,
will produce this effect? Is there any thing in them, which diminishes, in the
smallest degree, the efficacy of those regulations, which have given such a
spring to our commerce? Not a syllable. Is it desired to lay further
restrictions on foreign commerce? That would indeed be a matter of serious
concern: would any thing tend more to destroy that competition, which is so
necessary to our obtaining ready freights and a quick demand for our staples,
than to exclude, by heavy restrictions, the shipping of other nations, or to
give a monopoly to particular nations? There is one thing, and one only, which
would be still worse, and that is, WAR, which seems to be now a favorite
measure with many, who would perhaps be among the first to be tired of it.

The remainder of the speech consists of sundry objections similar to those
slated in the committee's report, and of general principles, applicable to
commercial nations, on which no comments are necessary. From a review of the
whole of it, it will be found to contain the most extraordinary collection of
errors, self-contradictions, and unfounded accusations, that ever was heard of
in the annals of political declamation. The author may, indeed, be said to have
surpassed all his predecessors; for it may be safely asserted, that history can
produce no instance, where such a mass of astonishing and glaring
contradictions and inconsistencies has been condensed into the compass of half
a newspaper: To the merit of a most surprising ingenuity, in this respect, he
is fairly entitled, if to no other.

Perhaps, it will be thought that the writer of these strictures is a friend of
Mr. Jay's. He positively denies it; he has a very slight personal acquaintance
with Mr. Jay, and has had some personal reasons to dislike him. That
gentleman's manners are not such as to gain him friends; experience, on the
contrary, has evinced, that he has many bitter personal enemies. But those, who
remember his long and faithful services, who know his tried attachment to his
country, and the integrity of his heart, ought not, without proof, to abandon
him to public infamy. He has been attacked with a virulence, which public
motives alone seem not to have required; he has been attacked in his absence;
were he here to defend himself, or had the attack not affected his moral
character, the writer of this would have been silent. But when base and corrupt
motives are explicitly and publicly charged on a old public servant -- on a man
who has near twenty years held high and important stations under our government
-- on the present chief magistrate of a sister state -- when, through his side,
the purity and honor of our government and country are deeply wounded -- when
the president himself is charged with a double violation of the constitution,
and with ignorance, or something worse, in the appointment of Mr. Jay -- when
attempts are made to sow the seeds of opposition to the government and laws, by
misinforming the people, and exciting, by such misinformation, an abhorrence of
their constituted authorities -- when, through the whole of this, a tissue of
errors and contradictions is discernible, to be silent would be to acquiesce in
the mischievous consequences of such proceedings, would be to cooperate in
promoting the confusion and anarchy which are their inevitable result.

Charleston, August 12, 1795.
FROM THE VIRGINIA GAZETTE. GRACCHUS. -- No. I.
GREAT events have roused the people of America from that lethargy in which
they ingloriously reposed, and have excited an attention, mingled with anxiety,
peculiarly favorable to political discussions. Whilst that lethargy existed,
the American revolution appeared incomplete to the philosopher, who only
contemplates the effects of political innovations upon the human character. The
Americans retained many of the prominent features of the English temper. They
were not, like the English, ambitious, perfidious, rapacious, and vindictive;
but, like the English, they arrogantly deemed their constitution perfect, and
their government immaculate -- Like the English, they acquired a faith in
administration, approaching to bigotry, an attachment to persons, approaching
to idolatry. Whilst a vestige of this character remained, enlightened
patriotism could only speak in "afflicted tones." But the French revolution has
diffused a blaze of light over the American world. It has communicated a
fervor, an energy, a sublimity of character. It has destroyed that timidity
which could not gaze upon the divine aspect of liberty, which appointed a high
priest to that "immortal daughter of reason," and which offered homage to her,
only through the medium of flattery to him.

It is to my country, thus completely regenerated, candid, moderate, impartial,
and democratical, that I address, with confidence and sincerity, some
investigations into the principles, and some observations on the conduct, of
our federal government -- I am not one of those cold beings, who can conceal
their opinions and stifle their feelings. -- When I examine some measures, and
when I denounce some men, I may be transported with an ardour, which moderation
may deem violence, which calumny may call factiousness.

A party, animated by the most dangerous principles, have long deluded this
country, by extolling the excellencies of the federal government, by
proclaiming dangerous conspiracies against its existence, and by stigmatizing
their own enemies, as the foes of tranquillity, of union, and virtue -- This
party, active in the convention of 1787, and clamorous in all the state
conventions, have allured to their standard many of the ci-devant heroes and
patriots of America; have usurped the name of Federalists; have denounced their
enemies; have seized the most important offices of state; and established an
influence independent of the people -- They boldly denominated the generous
patriots, who opposed the adoption of this government, because their "under
standings were enlightened by prophecy," anarchists, impelled by atrocious
passions to involve their country in misery -- An enemy to the federal
constitution, according to their logic, is an enemy to liberty -- and an enemy
to the system of administration, or to the most contemptible secretary of one
of the departments, is an enemy to the federal constitution.

But the period has arrived, when the artifices of this party can no longer
impose, when the machinations of this party can no longer enthral the minds of
the people -- They will disdain to be marshalled against each other in hostile
array, to march under the banner of absurd and artificial distinctions, and to
be inflamed to hostilities by the cant terms of men, who despise their
principles and attack their rights -- The penetrating politician perceives the
downfall of American aristocracy, in the ratification of a treaty which has been
deprecated by rour millions of men, and imposed upon them by twenty and ONE --
The people feel oppre^^ion, they will humble their oppressors -- The magic
power of gratitude, which so long enchained them to one man, has ceased to
operate -- The superstition, which impelled them to adore a frail mortal, as a
being elevated above the passions of humanity, born to humble Britain, to break
the chains of a whole continent, to guard liberty and to establish government,
has flown to the Sea Milton's Limbo of Va^ity.
gloomy mansion of exiled follies. In subsequent numbers, I will detail the
violations which our good constitution has suffered: I will expose the
pernicious tendency of the policy which has hitherto been pursued -- I will
delineate some characters, and demonstrate the necessity of adopting
constitutional modes of reform and punishment.

GRACCHUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 34.]

No. XVIII.
IT is provided by the tenth article of the treaty, that "neither (...) due
from individuals of one nation to individuals of the other, nor shares, nor
moneys, which they may have in the public funds, or in the public or private
banks, shall ever, in any event of war, or national difference, be sequestered
or confiscated; it being unjust and impolitic, that debts and engagements,
contracted and made by individuals, having confidence in each other, and in
their respective goveraments, should ever be destroyed or impaired by national
authority on account of national differences and discontents."

The virulence with which this article has been attacked, cannot fail to excite
very painful sensations in every mind duly impressed with the sanctity of
public faith, and with the importance of national credit and character; at the
same time that it furnishes the most cogent reasons to desire, that the
preservation of peace may obviate the pretext and the tempration to fully the
honor, and wound the interests of the country, by a measurs which the truly
enlightened of every nation would condemn.

I acknowledge, without reserve, that in proportion to the vehemence of the
opposition against this part of the treaty, is the satisfaction I derive from
its existence, as an obstacle the more to the perpetration of a thing, which,
in my opimon, besides deeply injuring our real and permanent interest, would
cover us with ignominy. No powers of language, at my command, can express the
abhorrence I feel at the idea of violating the property of individuals, which,
in an authorized intercourse in time of peace, has been confided to the faith
of our government and laws, on account of controversies between nation and
nation. In my view, every moral and every political sentiment unite to consign
it to execration.

Neither will I diffemble, that the dread of the effects of the spirit which
patronizes that idea, has ever been with me one of the most persuasive
arguments for a pacific policy on the part of the United States. Serious as the
evil of war has appeared, at the present stage of our affairs, the manner in
which it was to be apprehended it might be carried on, was still more
formidable, in my eyes, than the thing itself. It was to be feared, that in the
fermentation of certain wild opinions, those wise, just, and temperate maxims,
which will for ever constitute the true security and felicity of a state, would
be overruled; and that a war upon credit, eventually upon property, and upon
the general principles of public order, might aggravate and embitter the
ordinary calamities of foreign war. The confiscation of debts due to the enemy,
might have been the first step of this destructive process. From one violation
of justice to another, the passage is easy. Invasions of right, still more
fatal to credit, might have followed; and this, by extinguishing the resources
which that could have afforded, might have paved the way to more comprehensive
and more enormous depredations for a substitute. Terrible examples were before
us; and there were too many not sufficiently remote from a disposition to
admire and imitate them.

The earnest and extensive clamours against the part of the treaty under
consideration, confirm that anticipation; and while they enhance the merit of
the provision, they also inspire a wish, that some more effectual barrier had
been erected against the possibility of a contrary practice being ever, at any
ill-fated moment, obtruded upon our public councils. It would have been an
inestimable gem in our national constitution, had it contained a positive
prohibition against such a practice, except, perhaps, by way of reprisal for
the identical injury on the part of another nation.

Analogous to this is that liberal and excellent provision, in the British
Magna Charta, which declares, that "if the merchants of a country at war with
England, are found there in the beginning of the war, they shall be attached
without harm of body or effects, until it is known in what manner English
merchants are treated in the enemy's country; and if they are safe, that the
foreign merchants shall also be safe." Si Mercatores sint de terra contra nos
guerrira, et tales inveniantur in terra nostra in principio guerr^,
attachientur sine damno corporum suorum vel reru^^, donec s^iatur a nobis vel a
capitali justiciario nostro quo modo mercatores terrae nostrae tractantur qui
tune inveniantur in terra illa contra nos guerirra; et si nostri salvi sint
ibi, alii salvi sint in terra nostra. Magna charta, cap. XXX.
The learned Lord Coke pronounces this to be jus belli or law of war: -- And
the elegant and the enlightened Montesquieu, speaking of the same provision,
breaks out into this exclamation -- "It is noble that the English nation have
made this one of the articles of its liberty." Spirit of Laws, book XX. chap.
XIV.
How much it is to be regretted, that our magna charta is not unequivocally
decorated with a like feature; and that, in this instance, we, who have given
so many splendid examples to mankind, are excelled in constitutional precaution
for the maintenance of justice!

There is, indeed, ground to assert, that the contrary principle would be
repugnant to that article of our constitution, which provides, that "no state
shall pass any law impairing the obligation of contracts." The spirit of this
clause, though the letter of it be restricted to the states individually, must,
on fair construction, be considered as a rule for the United States; and if so,
could not easily be reconciled with the confiscation or sequestration of
private debts in time of war. But it is a pity, that so important a principle
should have been left to inference and implication, and should not have
received an express and direct sanction.

This position must appear a frightful heresy in the eyes of those who
represent the confiscation or sequestration of debts, as our best means of
retaliation, and coercion, as our most powerful, sometimes as our only means of
defense.

But so degrading an idea will be rejected with disdain, by every man who feels
a true and well informed national pride; by every man who recollects and
glories, that in a state of still greater immaturity, we achieved independence
without the aid of this dishonorable expedient The federal government never
resorted to it; and a few only of the state governments stained themselves with
it. It may, perhaps, be said, that the federal government had no power (...)
subject; but the reverse of this is truly the ^ase. The federal government
(...) power. The state governments had none, (...) to exercise it. This
position is fou^^^d on (...) ground that the confiscation or sequestration of
the debts of an enemy is a high act of (...) war, necessarily and exclusively
incident to the power of making war, which was always in the sederal government.
; that even in a revolutionary war, a war of liberty against usurpation, our
national councils were too magnanimous to be provoked or tempted to depart so
widely from the path of rectitude; by every man, in fine, who, though careful
not to exaggerate, for rash and extravagant projects, can nevertheless fairly
estimate, the real resources of the country, for meeting dangers which prudence
cannot avert.

Such a man will never endure the base doctrine, that our security is to depend
on the tricks of a swindler. He will look for it in the courage and constancy
of a free, brave and virtuous people -- in the riches of a fertile soil -- an
extended and progressive industry -- in the wisdom and energy of a
wellconstituted and well-administered government -- in the resources of a
solid, if well supported, national credit -- in the armies, which, if
requisite, could be raised -- in the means of maritime annoyance, which, if
necessary, could be organized, and with which we could inflict deep wounds on
the commerce of a hostile nation. He will indulge an animating consciousness,
that, while our situation is not such as to justify our courting impradent
enterprises, neither is it such as to oblige us, in any event, to stoop to
dishonorable means of security, or to substitute a crooked and piratical
policy, for the manly energies of fair and open war.

That is the consequence of the favorite doctrine, that the confiseation or
sequestration of private debts is our most powerful, if not our only, weapon of
defense! Great Britain is the sole power against whom we could wield it, since
it is to her citizens alone, that we are largely indebted. What are we to do,
then, against any other nation which might think sit to menace us? Are we, for
want of adequate means of desence, to crouch beneath the uplifted rod, and,
with abject despondency, sue for mercy? Or has providence guaranteed us
specially against the malice or ambition of every power on earth, except Great
Britain?

It is at once curious and instructive to mark the inconsistencies of the
disorganizing sect. Is the question, to discard a spirit of accommodation, and
rush into war with Great Britain? Columus are filled with the most absurd
exaggerations, to prove that we are able to meet her, not only on equal, but
superior terms. -- Is the question, whether a stipulation against the
confiscation or sequestration of private debts ought to have been admitted into
the treaty? Then are we a people destitute of the means of war, with neither
arms, nor fleets, nor magazines -- then is our best, if not our only weapons of
defense, the power of confiscating or sequestrating the debts which are due to
the subjects of Great Britain; in other words, the power of committing fraud,
of violating the public faith, of sacrificing the principles of commerce, of
prostrating credit. Is the question, whether free ships shall make free goods,
whether naval stores shall or shall not be deemed contraband? Then is the
appeal to what is called the modern law of nations; then is the cry, that
recent usage has changed and mitigated the rigor of ancient maxims. But is the
question, whether private debts can be rightfully confiscated or sequestered?
Then ought the utmost rigor of the ancient doctrine to govern, and modern
usage and opinion to be discarded. The old rule or the new is to be adopted or
rejected, just as may suit their convenience.

An inconsistency of another kind, but not less curious, is observable in
positions, repeatedly heard from the same quarter, namely, that the
sequestration of debts is the only peaceable mean of doing ourselves justice
and avoiding war. If we trace the origin of the pretended right to confiscate
or sequester debts, we find it, in the very authority, principally relied on to
prove it, to be this (Bynkershoeck, quaestiones juris publici. 1. s. 2.) "since
it is the condition of WAR, that ENEMIES may be deprived of all their rights,
it is reasonable, that every thing of an enemy's, found among his enemies,
should change its owner, and go to the treasury." Hence it is manifest, that
the right itself, if it exist, pre-supposes, as the condition of its exercise,
an actual state of war, the relation of enemy to enemy. Yet we are fastidiously
and hypocritically told, that this high and explicit act of war, is a peaceable
mean of doing ourselves justice and avoiding war. Why ae we thus told? Why is
this strange paradox attempted to be imposed upon us! Why, but that it is the
policy of the conspirators against our peace, to endeavor to disguise the
hostilities, into which they wish to plunge us, with a specious outside, and to
precipitate us down the precipice of war, while we imagine we are quietly and
securely walking along its summit.

Away with these absurd and incongruous sophisms! Blush, ye apostles of
temerity, of meanness, and of deception! Cease to beckon us to war, and at the
same time to freeze our courage by the cowardly declaration, that we have no
resource but in fraud! Cease to attempt to persuade us, that peace may be
obtained by means which are unequivocal acts of war. Cease to tell us, that war
is preferable to dishonor, and yet, as our first step, to urge us into
irretrievable dishonor. A magnanimous, a sensibre people, cannot listen to your
crude conceptions -- Why will ye persevere in accumulating ridicule and
contempt upon your own heads?

In the further observations, which I shall offer on this article, I hope to
satisfy, not the determined leaders or instruments of faction, but all
discerning men, all good citizens, that, instead of being a blemish, it is an
ornament to the instrument in which it is contained; that it is as consistent
with true policy as with substantial justice; that it is, in substance, not
without precedent in our other treaties; and that the objections to it are
futile.

CAMILLUS.

No. XIX.
THE objects protected by the 10th article, are classed under four heads: -- 1.
Debts of individuals to individuals: 2. Property of individuals in the public
funds: 3. Property of individuals in public banks: 4. Property of individuals
in private banks.
These, if analised, resolve themselves, in principle, into two
discriminations, viz. private debts, and private property in public funds. The
character of private property prevails throughout. No property of either
government is protected from confiscation or sequestration by the other. This
last circumstance merits attention, because it marks the true boundary.

The propriety of the stipulation will be examined under these several aspects:
the right to confiscate or sequestrate private debts or private property in
public funds, on the ground of reason and principle -- the right as depending
on the opinions of jurists and on usage -- the policy and expediency of the
practice -- the analogy of the stipulation with stipulations in our other
treaties, and in treaties between other nations.

First, as to the right on the ground of reason and principle.

The general proposition on which it is supported, is this, "That every
individual of a nation, with whom we are at war, wheresoever he may be, is our
enemy, and his property of every kind, in every place, liable to capture by
right of war."

The only exception admitted to this rule, respects property within the
jurisdiction of a neutral state; but the exemption is referred to the right of
the neutral nation, not to any privilege which the situation gives to the enemy
proprietor.

Reason, if consulted, will suggest another exception -- This regards all such
property as the laws of a country permit foreigners to acquire within it or to
bring into it. The right of holding or having property in a country, always
implies a duty on the part of its government to protect that property, and
secure to the owner the full enjoyment of it. Whenever, therefore, a government
grants permission to foreigners to acquire property within its territories, or
to bring and deposit it there, it tacitly promises protection and security. It
must be understood to engage, that the foreign proprietor, as to what he shall
have acquired or deposited, shall enjoy the rights, privileges and immunities
of a native proprietor, without any other exceptions than those which the
established laws may have previously declared. How can any thing else be
understood? Every state, when it has entered into no contrary engagement, is
free to permit or not to permit foreigners to acquire or bring property within
its jurisdiction; but if it grant the right, what is there to make the tenu^e
of the foreigner different from that of the native, if antecedent laws have not
pronounced a difference? Property, as it exits in civilized society, if not a
creature of, is, at least, (...) and defined by, the laws. They prescribe the
manner in which (...) be used, alienated, or transmitted; the conditions on
which it may be help, preserved, or forfeited. It is to them we are to look for
its rights, limitations, and conditions. No condition of enjoyment, no cause of
forfeiture, which they have not specified, can be presumed to exist. An
extraordinary discretion to resume or take away the thing, without any personal
fault of the proprietor, is inconsistent with the notion of property. This
seems always to imply a contract between the society and the individual; that
he shall retain and be protected in the possession and use of his property, so
long as he shall observe and perform the conditions which the laws have annexed
to the tenure. It is neither natural nor equitable to consider him as subject
to be deprived of it, for a cause soreign to himself: still less for one which
may depend on the volition or pleasure, even of the very government to whose
protection it has been confided: for the proposition, which affirms the right
to confiscate or sequester, does not distinguish between offensive or defensive
war; between a war of ambition on the part of the power which exercises the
right, or a war of self-preservation against the assaults of another.

The property of a foreigner placed in another country, by permission of its
laws, may justly be regarded as a deposit, of which the society is the trustee.
How can it be reconciled with the idea of a trust, to take the property from
its owner, when he has personally given no cause for the deprivation?

Suppose two families in a state of nature, and that a member of one of them
had by permission of the head of the other, placed in his custody some article
belonging to himself -- and suppose a quarrel to ensue between the two heads of
families, in which the member had not participated by his immediate counsel or
consent -- would not natural equity declare the seizure and confiscation of the
deposited property to be an act of perfidious rapacity?

Again -- suppose two neighboring nations, which had not had intercourse with
each other, and one of them opens its ports and territories for the purpose of
commerce, to the citizens of the other, proclaiming free and safe ingress and
egress -- suppose afterward a war to break out between the two nations, and
the one which had granted that permission, to seize and convert to its own use,
the goods and credits of the merchants of the other, within its dominion. What
sentence would natural reason, unwarped by particular dogmas, pronounce on such
conduct? If we abstract ourselves from extraneous impressions, and consult a
moral feeling, we shall not doubt that the sentence would inflict all the
opprobium and infamy of violated faith.

Nor can we distingush either case, in principle, from that which constantly
takes place between nations, that permit a commercial intercourse with each
other, whether with or without national compact. They equally grant a right to
bring into and carry out of their territories the property which is the subject
of the intercourse, a right of free and secure ingress and egress; and in doing
this, they make their territories a sanctuary or asylum, which ought to be
inviolable, and which the spirit of plunder only could have ever violated.

There is no parity between the case of the persons and goods of enemies found
in our own country, and that of the persons and goods of enemies found
elsewhere. In the former there is a reliance upon our hospitality and justice;
there is an express or implied safe conduct; the individuals and their property
are in the custody of our faith: they have no power to resist our will; they
can lawfully make no defense against our violence; they are deemed to owe a
temporary allegiance; and for endeavoring resistance, would be punished as
criminals; a character inconsistent with that of an enemy. To make them a prey,
is, therefore, to infringe every rule of generosity and equity; it is to add
cowardice to treachery. In the latter case, there is no confidence whatever
reposed in us; no claim upon our hospitality, justice or good faith; there is
the simple character of enemy, with entire liberty to oppose force to force.
The right of war consequently to attack and seize, whether to obtain
indemnification for any injury received -- to disable our enemy from doing us
further harm -- to force him to reasonable terms of accommodation -- or to
repress an overbearing ambition, exists in full vigor, unrestrained and
unqualified by any trust or duty on our part. In pursuing it, though we may
inflict hardship, we do not commit injustice.

Moreover the property of the foreigner within our country, may be regarded as
having paid a valuable consideration for its protection and exemption from
forfeiture; that which is brought in, commonly enriches the revenue by a duty
of entry. All that is within our territory, whether acquired there or brought
there, is liable to contributions to the treasury, in common with other similar
property. Does there not result an obligation to protect that which comtributes
to the expense of its protection? will justice sanction, upon the breaking out
of a war, the confiscation of a property, which, during peace, serves to
augment the resources and nourish the prosperity of a state?

The principle of the proposition gives an equal right to subject the person as
the property of the foreigner to the rigors of war. But what would be thought
of a government which should seize all the subjects of its enemy found within
its territory, and commit them to durance, as prisoners of war? Would not all
agree that it had violated an asylum which ought to have been sacred? That it
had trampled upon the laws of hospitality and civilization? That it had
disgraced itself by an act of cruelty and barbarism? All that can rightfully be
done, is to oblige the foreigners, who are subjects of our enemy, to quit our
country.
Why would it not be equally reprehensible to violate the asylum which had been
given to the property of those foreigners?

Reason, left to its own lights, would answer all these questions in one way,
and severely condemn the molestation, (...) account of a national contest, as
well of the property as person of a foreigner found in our country, under the
license and guarantee of the laws of previous amity.

The case of property in the public (...) is still stronger th^^ that of
private debts. To all the sanctions which apply to the la^^er, it adds that of
an express pledge of the public says to the foreign holder of stock.

The constituting of a public debt or fund, transserable without limitation or
distinction, amounts to a promise to all the world, that whoever, foreigner or
citizen, may acquire a title to it, shall enjoy the benefit of what is
stipulated. Every transferee becomes, by the act of transfer, the immediate
proprie^^^ of the promise. It mures directly to his use, and the foreign
promisee no more than the native, can be deprived of that benefit, except in
consequence of some act of his own, without the infraction of a positive
engagement.

Public debt has been truly defined, "A property subsisting (...) the faith of
government." Its essence is promise. To confiscate or sequester it is
emphatically to rescind the promise given, (...) revoke the faith plighted --
It is impossible to separate the two ideas of a breach of ^aith, and the
confiscation or sequestration^ of a property subsisting only in the faith of
the government by which it is made.

When it is considered, that the promise made to the foreigner is not made to
him in the capacity of member of another fociety, but in that of citizen of the
world, or of an individual in the state of nature -- the infraction of it
toward him, on account of the fault, real or preteded, of the society to which
he belongs, is the more obviously destitute of color. There is no real
affinity between the motive and the consequence. There is a confounding of
relations. The obligation of a contract can only be avoided by the breach of a
condition express or implied, which appears or can be presumed to have been
within the contemplation of both parties, or by the personal fault or crime of
him to whom it is to be performed. Can it be supposed that a citizen of one
country would ^end his money to the government of another, in the expectation
that a war between the two countries, which, without or against their will,
might break out the next day, could be deemed a sufficient cause of forfeiture?

The principle may be tested in another way -- Supppose one government indebted
to another in a certain sum of money, and suppose the creditor government to
borrow of the citizen of the other an equal sum of money. When he came to d^^^
and payment, would justice, would good faith, permit the ^^^po^ing to his
claim, by way of set off, the debt due from (...) government? Who would not
revolt at such an attem^^^ ^^^ould not the individual creditor answer with
conclusive (...) that in a matter of contract he was not responsible for the
soc^^^, of which he was a member, and that the debts of the society were not a
proper set off against his private claim?

With what greater reason could his claim be refused on account of an injury
which was a cause of war, received from his sovereign, and which had created on
the part of the sovereign a debt of reparation? It were certainly more natural
and just to set off a debt due by contract to the citizen of a foreign country
against a debt due by contract from the sovereign of that country, than to set
it off against a vague claim of indemnification for an injury or aggression of
which we complain, and of which the reality or justice is seldom undisputed on
the other side.

The true rule which results from what has been said, and which reason
sanctions with regard to the right of capture, is this -- "It may be exercised
every where except within a neutral jurisdiction There are exceptions to this
exception; but they depend on special circumstances, which admit the principal
exception, and need not be particularized.
or where the property is under the protection of our own laws;" and it may
perhaps be added that it always supposes the possibility of rightful combat, of
attack, and defense.

These exceptions involve no refinement -- they depend on obvious
considerations, and are agreeable to common sense and to nature -- the
spontaneous feelings of equity accord with them. It is, indeed, astonishing
that a contrary rule should ever have been countenanced by the opinion of any
jurist, or by the practice of any civilized nation.

We shall see in the next number how far either has been the case, and what
influence it ought to have upon the question.

CAMILLUS.

No. XX.
THE point next to be examined is the right of confiscation or sequestration,
as depending on the opinions of jurists and on usage.

To understand how far these ought to weigh, it is requisite to consider what
are the elements or ingredients, which compose what is called the law of
nations.

The constituent parts of this system are, 1. The necessary or internal law,
which is the law of nature applied to nations; or that system of rules for
regulating the conduct of nation to nation, which reason deduces from the
principles of natural right, as relative to political societies or states. 2.
The voluntary law, which is a system of rules resulting from the equality and
independence of nations, and which, in the administration of their affairs, and
the pursuit of their pretensions, proceeding on the principle of their having
no common judge upon earth, attributes equal validity, as to external effects,
to the measures or conduct of one as of another, without regard to the
intrinsic justice of those measures or that conduct. Thus captures, in war, are
as valid, when made by the party in the wrong, as by the party in the right. 3.
The pactitious or conventional law, or that law which results from a treaty
between two or more nations. This is evidently a particular, not a general law,
since a treaty or pact can only bind the contracting parties: Yet, when we find
a provision universally pervading the treaties between nations, for a length of
time, as a kind of formula, it is high evidence of the general law of nations.
4. The customary law, which consists of those rules of conduct, that, in
practice, are respected and observed among nations: Its authority depends on
usage, implying a tacit consent and agreement. This also is a particular, not a
general law, obligatory only on those nations whose acquiescence has appeared,
or, from circumstances, may fairly be presumed. Thus, the customary law of
Europe may not be that of a different quarter of the globe. The three last
branches are sometimes aggregately denominated the positive law of nations.


The two first are discoverable by reason; the two last depend on proof, as
matters of fact. Hence the opinion of jurists, though weighing, as the
sentiments of judicious or learned men, who have made the subject a particular
study, are not conclusive, as authorities. -- In regard to the necessary and
voluntary law, especially, they may be freely disregarded, unless they are
found to be adopted and sanctioned by the practice of nations: For where REASON
is the guide, it cannot properly be renounced for mere OPINION, however
respectable. As witnesses of the customary laws, their testimony, the result of
careful researches, is more particularly entitled to attention.

If, then, it has been satisfactorily proved, as the dictate of sound reason,
that private debts, and private property in public funds, are not justly liable
to confiscation or sequestration, an opposite opinion of one or more jurists
could not control the conclusion in point of principle. So far as it may
attest a practice of nations, which may have introduced a positive law on the
subject, the consideration may be different. It will then remain to examine,
upon their own and other testimony, whether that practice be so general as to
be capable of varying a rule of reason, by the force of usage; and whether it
still continues to bear the same character, or has been weakened or done away
by some recent or more modern usage.

I will not avail myself of a position, advanced by some writers, that usage,
if derogating from the principles of natural justice, is null, further than to
draw this inference, that a rule of right, deducible from them, cannot be
deemed to be altered by usage, partially contradicted, fluctuating.

With these guides, our further enquiries will serve to confirm us in the
negative of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester in the cases
supposed.

The notion of this right is evidently derived from the ROMAN law. It is seen
there, in this peculiar form, "Those things of an enemy which are among us,
belong not to the state, but to the first occupant," Digest. XLI. tit. 1. "Et
quae (...) hostile ^ a pud no^," etc.
which seems to mean, that the things of an enemy, at the commencement of the
war, found in our country, may be seized by any citizen, and will belong to him
who first gets possession. It is known, that the maxims of the Roman law are
extensively incorporated into the different codes of Europe; and particularly,
that the writers on the law of nations have borrowed liberally from them. This
source of the notion does not stamp it with much authority. The history of Rome
proves, that war and conquest were the great business of that people, and that,
for the most part, commerce was little cultivated. Hence it was natural, that
the rights of war should be carried to an extreme, unmitigated by the softening
and humanizing influence of commerce. Indeed the world was yet too young --
moral science too much in its cradle -- to render the Roman jurisprudence a
proper model for implicit imitation: accordingly, in this very particular of
the rights of war, it seems to have been equally a rule of the Roman law, "That
those who go into a foreign country, in time of peace, if war is suddenly
kindled, are made the slaves of those among whom, now become enemies by ill
fortune, they are apprehended." (...) subito exarcissa^, (...) um servi effi^^^
(...) qu^^ jam ho^^es^uo facto depre^^nduntur." Digest. l^b. XI. IX. tit. XV.
i. xii.
This right of capturing the property and of making slaves of the persons of
enemies is reserved, as we learn from Cicero, to the right of killing them;
which was regarded as absolute and unqualified, extending even to women and
children. Thus it would seem, that, on the principle of the Roman law, we might
rightfully kill a foreigner, who had come into our country during peace, and
was there at the breaking out of a war with his country -- Can there be a
position more horrible, more detestable?

The improvement of moral science in modern times, restrains the right of
killing an enemy to the time of battle or resistance, except by way of
punishment for some enormous breach of the law of nations, or for self
preservation, in case of immediate and urgent danger; and rejects altogether
the right of imposing slavery on captives.

Why should there have been a hesitation to reject other odious consequences of
so exceptionable a principle? What respect is due to maxims which have so
inhuman a foundation?

And yet a deference for those maxims has misled writers who have professedly
undertaken to teach the principles of national ethics; and the spirit of rapine
has continued, to a late period, to consecrate the relics of ancient barbarism
with too many precedents of imitation -- Else it would not now be a question
with any, "Whether the person or property of a foreigner, being in our country
with permission of the laws of peace, ^ould be liable to molestation or injury
by the laws of war -- merely on account of the war?"

Turning from the ancients to the moderns, we find, that the learned Grotius
quotes and adopts, as the basis of his opinions, the rules of the Roman law;
though he, in several particulars, qualifies them, by the humane innovations of
later times.

On the very question of the right to confiscate or sequester private debts,
his opinion, as far as it appears, seems to be at variance with his premises,
steering a kind of middle course. His expressions (L. III. C. XX. Sec. XVI.)
are these, "Those debts which are due to private persons, at the beginning of
the war, are not to be accounted forgiven (that is, when peace is made) for
these are not acquired by the right of war, but only forbidden to be demanded
in time of war; therefore, the impediment being removed, that is, the war
ended, they retain their full force." His idea appears from this passage to be,
that that the right of war is limited to the arresting of the payment of
private debts during its continuance, and not to the confiscation or
annihilation of the debt. Nor is it clear, whether he means, that this
arrestation is to be produced by a special act of prohibition, or by the
operation of some rule of law, which denies to an alien enemy a right of
action. This feeble and heterogeneous opinion may be conceived to have
proceeded from a conflict between a respect for ancient maxims, and the
impression of more enlightened views, inculcated by the principles of commerce
and civilization.

Bynkershoeck is more consistent: Adopting, with Grotius, the rule of the Roman
law in its full vigor, he is not frightened at the consequences, but follows
them throughout. Hence he bestows a chapter upon the defense of the
proposition, quoted in a former number (to wit) that, Quaestionum Juris Public.
libe^ I. caput VII. "Cum ea sit belli conditio is it hosts sint omni j^re
spoli^ti pros^riptique, ^a^ ^^is est quascunque res hosti^m apud hosts
inventas, dom^um mutare et fisco cedere."
"Since it is the condition of war, that enemies may, with full right, be
despoiled and proscribed, it is reasonable that whatsoever things of an enemy
are found among his enemies, should change their owner and go to the treasury;"
and in several places he expressly applies the rule to things in action, or
debts and credits, as well as to things in possession.

In confirmation of his doctrine, he adduces a variety of examples, which
embrace a period of something more than a century, beginning in the year 1556,
and ending in the year 1657, and which comprehends, as actors on the principle
which he espouses, France, Spain, the States General, Denmark, the bishops of
Cologne, and Munster. But he acknowledges that the right has been questioned;
and notes particularly, that when the king of France and the bishops of Munster
and Cologne, in the year 1563, confiscated the debts which their subjects owed
to the confederate Belgians, the states general, by an edict of the 6th of
July, of that year, censured the proceeding, and decreed that those debts could
not be paid but to the true creditors, and that the exaction of them, whether
by force or with consent, was not to be esteemed valid.

If from the great pains which appear to have been taken by this learned
writer, to collect examples in proof of his doctrine, we are to conclude that
the collection is tolerably complete, we are warranted in drawing this
inference, that he has not cured any defect, which reason may discern in his
principle, by any thing like the evidence of such a general, uniform, and
continued usage, as is requisite to introduce a rule of the positive law of
nations, in derogation from the natural.

A minority only of the powers of Europe are shown to have been implicated in
the practice; and among the majority, not included, are several of the most
considerable and respectable. One of these, Great Britain, is represented as
having acquiesced in it, in the treaties of peace, between her and some of the
powers who went into the practice, to her detriment, by relinquishing the claim
of restitution -- But war must, at length, end in peace; and the sacrifice a
nation makes to the latter, is a slight argument of her consent to the
principle of the injuries which she may have sustained. I have not been able to
trace a single instance in which Great Britain has, herself, set the example of
such a practice; nor could she do it, as has elsewhere appeared, without
contravening an article of magna charta, unless by way of reprisal for the same
thing done toward her. The suggestion of an instance in the present war with
France, will, hereafter, be examined. In such a question, the practice of a
nation, which has, for ages, figured pre-eminently in the commercial world, is
entitled to particular notice.

It is not unworthy of remark, that the common law of England, from its
earliest dawnings, contradicted the rule of the Roman law. It exempted from
seizure, by a subject of England, the property of a foreigner brought there
before a war; but gave to the first seizer, or occupant, the property which
came there after the breaking out of a war. The noble principles of the common
law cannot cease to engage our respect, while we have before our eyes so many
monuments of their excellence in our own jurisdiction.

It also merits to be dwelt upon, that the United Netherlands, for some time
the first, and long only the second in commercial consequence, formally
disputed the right, and condemned the practice of confiscating private debts,
though themselves, in some instances, guilty of it.

And it is likewise a material circumstance, that Bynkershoeck, who seems to
have written in the year 1737, does not adduce any precedent later than the
year 1667, seventy years before his publication.

The subsequent period will, it is believed, be found upon strict enquiry,
equally barren of similar precedents. The exceptions are so few, The case of
Pr^^^ and the Silesia loan, is the only one I have found.
that we may fairly assert, that there is the negative usage of near a century
and an half, against the pretended right. This negative usage, of a period, the
most enlightened as well as the most commercial in the annals of the world, is
of the highest authority. The former usage, as being partial and with numerous
exceptions, was insufficient to establish a rule. -- The contrary usage, or the
renunciation of the former usage, as being general, as attended with few or no
exceptions, is sufficient even to work a change in the rigor of an ancient
rule, if it could be supposed to have been established. Much more is it
sufficient to confirm and enforce the lesson of reason, and to dissipate the
clouds which error, and some scattered instances of violence and rapine, may
have produced.

Of the theoretical writers, whom I had an opportunity of consulting, Vattel is
the only remaining one, who directly treats the point. His opinion has been
said to favor the right to confiscate and sequester. But when carefully
analized, it will add to the proofs of the levity with which the opposers of
the treaty make assertions.

After stating, among other things, that "war gives the same right over any sum
of money due by a neutral nation to our enemy, as it can give over his other
goods," he proceeds thus -- "When Alexander, by conquest, became absolute
master of Thebes, he remitted to the Thessalians, a hundred talents, which they
owed to the Thebans. The sovereign has naturally the same right over what his
subjects may be indebted to his enemies; therefore he may confiscate debts of
this nature, if the term of payment happen in the time of war; or, at least, he
may prohibit his subjects from paying, while the war lasts. But at present, in
regard to the advantage and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe
have departed from this rigor. And as this custom has been generally received,
he who should act contrary to it, would injure the public faith; for strangers
trusted his subjects only from a firm persuasion, that the general custom would
be observed. The state does not so much as touch the sums which it owes to the
enemy. Every where, in case of a war, funds credited to the public, are exempt
from confiscation and seizure." Book III. Chap. 5. sect. 77.


The first proposition of the above passage, amounts to this, that "a sovereign
naturally, that is, according to the law of nature, may confiscate debts, which
his subjects owe to his enemies, if the term of payment happen in the time of
war; or, at least, he may prohibit his subjects from paying while the war
lasts."

So far as this goes, it agrees with the principle which I combat, that there
is a natural right to confiscate or sequester private debts in time of war; so
far Vattel accords with the Roman law and with Bynkershoek.

But he annexes a whimsical limitation, "If the term of payment happen in the
time of war" -- and there is a marked uncertainty and hesitation -- the
sovereign "may confiscate, or, at least, he may prohibit his subjects from
paying while the war lasts." It is evident, that the circumstance of the time
of payment can have no influence upon the right. If it reaches to confiscation,
which takes away the substance of the thing, the mere incident of the happening
of payment must be immaterial. If it is confined to the arresting of payment
during the war, the reason of the rule, the object being to prevent supplies
going to the enemy, will apply it as well to debts which had become payable
before the war, as to those which became payable in the war. Whence this
inaccuracy in so accurate a thinker? Whence the hesitation about so important a
point, as whether the pretended right extends to confiscation or simply to
sequestration? They must be accounted for, as in another case, by the conflict
between respect for ancient maxims and the impressions of juster views,
seconded by the more enlightened policy of modern times.

But while Vattel thus countenances, in the first part of the passage, the
opinion, that the natural law of nations authorizes the confiscation or
sequestration of private debts, in what immediately follows, he most explicitly
and unequivocally informs us, that the rule of that law in this respect has
been abrogated by modern usage or custom; in other words, that the modern
customary law has changed in this particular the ancient natural law. Let his
own words be consulted -- "At present," says the, "in regard to the advantage
and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe have departed from this
rigor: and as this custom has been generally received, he who would act
contrary to it, would injure the public faith; for strangers trusted his
subjects only from the firm persuasion that the general custom would be
observed."

This testimony is full, that there is a general custom received and adopted by
all the sovereigns of Europe, which obviates the rigor of the ancient rule;
the non-observance of which custom would violate the public faith of a nation;
as being a breach of an implied contract, by virtue of the custom, upon the
strength of which foreigners trust his subjects.

Language cannot describe more clearly a rule of the customary law of nations,
the essence of which, we have seen, is general usage implying a tacit agreement
to conform to the rule -- The one alleged is denominated a custom generally
received, a general custom; all the sovereigns of Europe are stated to be
parties to it, and it is represented as obligatory on the public faith, since
this would be injured by a departure from it.

The consequence is, that if the right pretended did exist by the natural law,
it has given way to the customary law; for it is a contradiction, to call that
a right, which cannot be exercised without breach of faith. The result is, that
by the present customary law of nations, within the sphere of its action, there
is no right to confiscate or sequester private debts in time of war. The reason
or motive of which law is the advantage and safety of commerce.

As to private property in public funds, the right to meddle with them is still
more emphatically negatived. -- "The state does not so much as touch the sums
it owes to the enemy -- Every where, in case of a war, funds credited to the
public are exempt from confiscation and seizure." These terms manifestly
exclude sequestration as well as confiscation.

In another place, the author gives the reason of this position, Book II. Chap.
XVIII. ^^n reprisals, the goods of a subject are seized in the same manner as
those of the state or the sovereign. -- Every thing that belongs to the nation
is liable to reprisals as soon as it can be seized, provided it be not a
deposite trusted to the public faith. This DEPOSITE is found in our hands, only
in consequence of that confidence, which the proprietor has put in our good
faith, and it ought to be respected, even in case of open war. -- Thus it is
usual to behave in France, England, and elsewhere, with respect to the money
which foreigners have placed in the public funds." The same principle, if he
had reflected without bias, would have taught him, that reprisals could
rightfully extend to nothing that had been committed with their permission, to
the custody and guardianship of our laws, during a state of peace; and
consequently, that no property of our enemy, which was in our country before
the breaking out of the war, is justly liable to them. For is not all such
property equally a deposite, trusted to the public faith? What foreigner would
acquire property in our country, or bring and lodge it there, but in the
confidence, that, in case of war, it would not become an object of reprisals?
Why then resort to custom for a denial of the right to confiscate or sequester
private debts? Why not trace it to the natural injustice and perfidy of taking
away in war, what a foreigner is permitted to own and have among us in peace?
Why ever have considered that as a natural right which was contrary to good
faith tacitly pledged? This is evidently the effect of too much deference to
ferocious maxims of antiquity, of undue complaisance to some precedents of
modern rapacity.

He had avoided the error, by weighing maturely the consequences of his own
principle in another case: "He who declares war, (says he) does not confiscate
the immovable goods possessed in his country by his enemy's subjects: in per
mitting them to purchase and possess those goods, he has, in this respect,
admitted them into the number of his subjects," (that is) he has admitted them
to a like privilege with his subjects, as to the real property they were
permitted to acquire and hold. But, why should a less privilege attend the
license to purchase, possess, or have other kinds of property in his country?
The reason, which is, the permission of the sovereign, must extend to the
protection of one kind of property as well as another, if the permission
extends to both.

Vattel advances in this and in the passage quoted immediately before it, the
true principles which ought to govern the question -- though he does not pursue
them into their consequences; else he would not have deduced the exemption of
private debts, from confiscation or sequestration, from the customary law of
nations, but would have traced it to the natural or necessary law, as founded
upon the obligations of good faith; upon the tacit promise of security
connected with the permission to acquire property within, or bring property
into, our country; upon the protection which every government owes to a
property of which it legalizes the acquisition, or the deposit within its
jurisdiction; and in case of immovable goods or real estate, of which he
admits a right to sequester the income, to prevent its being remitted to the
enemy, he would have perceived the necessaty of leaving this effect to be
produced by the obstructions intrinsically incident to a state of war; since
there is no reason why the income should be less privileged than the substance
of the thing.

It appears, then, that the doctrine of Vattel, collectively taken, amounts to
this, that there is a natural right of war in certain cases to confiscate or
sequester enemy's property found within our country; but that, on motives
relative to commerce and public credit, the customary law of Europe has
restrained that right, as to private debts, and private property, in public
funds. His opinion, therefore, favors the principle of the article of the
treaty under examination, as consonant with the present European law of nations
-- and it is an opinion of greater weight than any that can be cited; as well
on account of the capacity, diligence, information, and the precision of ideas,
which characterise the work in which it is contained, as on account of the
recency of that work. It appears to have been written about the year ^^60.


A question may be raised -- Does this customary law of nations, as established
in Europe, bind the United States? An affirmative answer to this is warranted
by conclusive reasons.

1. The United States, when a member of the British empire, were, in this
capacity, a party to that law, and not having dissented from it, when they
became independent, they are to be considered as having continued a party to
it. 2. The common law of England, which was and is in force in each of these
states, adopts the law of nations, the positive equally with the natural, as a
part of itself. 3. Ever since we have been an independent nation, we have
appealed to, and acted upon, the modern law of nations as understood in Europe
-- various resolutions of congress during our revolution -- the
correspondencies of executive officers -- the decisions of our courts of
admiralty, all recognized this standard. 4. Executive and legislative acts, and
the proceedings of our courts, under the present government, speak a similar
language. The president's proclamation of neutrality, refers expressly to the
modern law of nations, which must necessarily be understood of that prevailing
in Europe, and acceded to by this country; and the general voice of our nation,
together with the very arguments used against the treaty, accord in the same
point. It is indubitable, that the customary law of European nations is, as a
part of the common law, and by adoption, that of the United States.

But let it not be forgotten, that I derive the vindication of the article from
a higher source, from the natural or necessary law of nature -- from the
eternal principles of morality and good faith.

There is one more authority which I shall cite in reference to a part of the
question; property in the public funds. It is a report to the British king in
the year 1753, from Sir George Lee, judge of the prerogative court, Dr. Paul,
advocate general in the courts of civil law, Sir Dudley Rider and Mr. Murray,
attorney and solicitor general, Sir George Lee, was afterward the very
celebrated Chief Justice Lee, and Mr. Murray was the late Lord Mansfield.
on the subject of the Silesia loan, sequestered by the king of Prussia, by way
of reprisal, for the capture and condemnation of some Prussian vessels. This
report merits all the respect which can be derived from consummate knowledge
and ability in the reporters; but it would lose much of its weight from the
want of impartiality, which might fairly be imputed to the officers of one of
the governments interested in the contest, had it not since received the
confirming eulogies of impartial and celebrated foreign writers. -- A mong
these, Vattel calls it an excellent piece on the law of nations.

The following is an extract: -- "The king of Prussia has pledged his royal
word to pay the Silesia debt to private men. It is negociable, and many parts
of it have been assigned to the subjects of other powers. It will not be easy
to find an instance, where a prince has though fit to make reprisals upon a
debt due from himself to private men. There is a confidence that this will not
be done. A private man lends money to a prince upon an engagement of honor;
because a prince cannot be compelled, like other men, in an adversary way, by a
court of justice. So scrupulously did England and France adhere to this public
faith, that even during the war, they suffered no enquiry to be made whether
any part of the public debt was due to the subjects of the enemy, though it is
certain many English had money in the French funds, and many French had money
in ours."

The universal obligation of good faith is here reinforced on a special ground,
by the point of honor; to confirm the position that money which a sovereign or
state owes to private men, is not a proper object of reprisals.

This case of the Silesia debt is the only example, within the present century,
prior to the existing war, which I have been able to trace, violating the
immunity of private debts, or private property, in public funds. It is a
precedent that can have little weight, not only from singularity, but from the
character of its author. Frederick was a consummate general, a profound
statesman; but he was very far from being a severe moralist. This is not the
only instance in which he tarnished his says; and the friends of his same must
regret, that he could not plead on the occasion those mighty and dazzling
reasons of state, which are the specious apologies for his other aberrations.

It is asserted, that the present war of Europe affords examples of the
practice, which I reprobate, and that Great Britain herself has given one. The
present war of Europe is of so extraordinary a complexion, and has been
conducted, in all respects, upon such extraordinary principles, that it may
truly be regarded as an exception to all general rules, as a precedent for
nothing. It is rather a beacon, warning mankind to shun the pernicious
examples, which it sets, than a model inviting to imitation. The human
passions, on all sides, appear to have been wrought up to a pitch of frenzy,
which has set reason, justice, and humanity, at defiance.

Those who have nevertheless thought fit to appeal to the examples of this very
anomalous war, have not detailed to us the precise nature or course of the
transactions to which they refer; nor do I know that sufficient documents have
appeared in this country to guide us in the enquiry.

The imperfect evidence which has fallen under my observation, respects France
and Great Britain, and seems to exhibit these facts.: --

France passed a decree sequestering the property of the subjects of the powers
at war with her; and in the same or another decree, obliged all those of her
citizens, who had moneys owing to them in foreign countries, to draw bills upon
their debtors, and to furnish those bills to the government, by way of loan, or
upon certain terms of payment.

The government of Great Britain, in consequence of this proceeding, passed ten
different acts, the objects of which were to prevent the payment of those
bills, and to secure the sums due for the benefit of the original creditors.
These acts appoint certain commissioners, to whom reports are to be made of all
French property in the hands of British subjects, and who are empowered to
receive and fell goods and other effects -- to collect debts, and to deposite
the proceeds in the bank of London, or in other safe keeping, if preferred or
required by parties interested. The moneys deposited are to be invested in the
purchase of public stock, together with the interest or dividends arising from
time to time, to be eventually accounted for to the proprietors. The
commissioners have, likewise, a discretion, upon demand, to deliver over their
effects and moneys to such of the proprietors as do not reside within the
French dominions.

I shall not enter into a discussion of the propriety of these acts of Great
Britain. -- It is sufficient to observe, that they are attended with
circumstances which very essentially discriminate them from the thing for which
they were quoted. The act of the French government was in substance a
compulsory assumption of all the property of its citizens in foreign countries.
This extraordinary measure presented two options to the governments of those
countries -- One, to consider the tranfer as virtually effected, and to
confiscate the property as being no longer that of the individuals, but that of
the government of France -- the other, to defeat the effect of her plan by
buying up the property for the benefit of the original creditors, in exclusion
of the drafts which they were compelled to draw. Great Britain appears to have
elected the latter course. If we suppose her sincere in the motive, and there
is fairness and fidelity in the execution, the issue will be favorable, rather
than detrimental, to the rights of private property.

I have said, that there was an option to confiscate. A government may
rightfully confiscate the property of an adversary government. No principle of
justice or policy occurs to forbid reprisals upon the public or national
property of an enemy. That case is foreign, in every view, to the principles
which protect private property. The exemption stipulated by the 10th article of
the treaty is accordingly restricted to the latter.

It appears, that the government of France, convinced by the effect of the
experiment, that the sequestration of the property of the subjects of her
enemies was impolitic, thought fit to rescind it. -- Thence, on the 29th of
December, 1794, the convention decreed as follows:

"The decrees concerning the sequestration of the property of the subjects of
the powers at war with the republic, are annulled. Such sums as have been paid
by French citizens into the treasury, in consequence of those decrees, will be
reimbursed."

In the course of the debates upon this decree, it was declared, that the
decrees which it was to repeal, had prepared the ruin of commerce, and had
severed, against the rights of nations, the obligations of merchants in
different states. This is a direct admission, that the sequestration was
contrary to the law of nations.

As far as respects France, then, the precedent, upon the whole, is a strong
condemnation of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester. This formal
renunciation of the ground which was at first taken, is a very emphatical
protest against the principle of the measure -- It ought to serve us too as an
instructive warning against the employment of so mischievous and disgraceful an
expedient. And as to England, as has been shown, the precedent is foreign to
the question.

Thus we perceive, that opinion and usage, far from supporting the right to
confiscate or sequester private property, on account of national wars, when
referred to the modern standard, turn against that right, and coincide with the
principle of the article of the treaty under examination.

What remains to be offered will farther illustrate its propriety, and
reconcile it to all reflecting men.

CAMILLUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
FROM THE AURORA. Sophistry Detected. No. I.
THE sophistry and deception used by the writers in favor of the treaty, are,
undoubtedly, as extraordinary as ever were attempted to be imposed upon a
thinking people like the Americans. -- Camillus, the most zealous and the most
casuistical of its defenders, seems, throughout his whole performance, to
proceed on the idea, that his mere assertions will be received, without doubt
or enquiry, as oracular truths. But he will find himself miserably
disappointed. His never-ending columns will be narrowly scanned; and, laborious
as the attempt must be, the grain of wheat will be selected from the immense
heaps of surrounding chaff. I shall take the liberty, occasionally, to lay a
few extracts from his numbers, before the public, through the medium of your
paper, Mr. Bache, with very concise comments; as their absurdity and fallacy
are so self-evident, "As to be hated, need but to be seen."

This British patriot, who advocates so elaborately the most minute and
doubtful rights of England, when he treats on the case of our unfortunate,
oppressed, and abandoned sailors, impressed out of American vessels, to serve
against France, and even to aid in the piracy which is every day practiced on
our commerce, adduces the following defense of the shameful direliction of
those useful and worthy men, observable in the treaty; "the good faith of the
parties" (let not the ridicule of this argument stisle your resentment, reader,
yes -- the good faith of England) "and the motives which they have to respect
the rights of each other, and to avoid giving causes of offense, and vigilance
in noting and remonstrating against the irregularities which are committed,
are, probably, the only peaceable sureties of which the case is susceptible."

The barefaced disingenuity prevalent in this paragraph, of holding out an idea
of reciprocity, as if there was any probability of our impressing British
seamen, can hardly be censured; as it is neither more nor less, than the spirit
which runs through the treaty itself; therefore let that pass.

But what shall be said of a man, who pretends to be an American, and yet tells
us, that we can have no other peaceable sureties, for the protection of a most
valuable class of our citizens, than the "good faith of England!" His
conscience must have smote him when writing the words. Was he unacquainted with
the experience America has had of English "good faith," during the present war?
Did he not know the immense extent of the depredations our merchants had
sustained, by a reliance on English "good faith?" Where was the operation of
that "good faith," when the captain of the Hermione impressed every man, except
the captains and mates, on board above twenty American vessels at Jeremie? What
dependence can be placed in this "good faith," when our sailors are impressed
in the very port of London, notwithstanding the reclamations of our consul?

But besides the "good faith" of our new allies, we have a further security in
"the motives which the parties have to respect the rights of each other, and to
avoid giving causes of offense." Of what avail are these motives? Have not the
British, almost throughout this war, seemingly studied "to give offense" to
America, if that were possible? Has not insult been accumulated on injury? Has
their "respect for our rights" been displayed by Rodham Home, in his piratical
attempt to seize Mr. Fauchet within our jurisdiction? Where were the "regard
for our rights" or "the motives to avoid giving causes of offense," when the
Algetine orders, of the 6th of November, were issued? Where is the wish to
"avoid giving causes of offense," when our vessels are, even now, seized and
carried into England? Where is "the regard for our rights," when the captain of
the Thetis informs us he has orders to seize all our vessels bound to, or from
France? in fine, have the British nation betrayed a single symptom of "good
faith" toward the United States -- of "regard for our rights," or of a
disposition to "avoid giving offense?" Surely not. And can, therefore, any
terms of reprobation and obloquy be too severe for the man who attempts to lull
us to sleep by his artifices, until we are caught in the vortex of destruction,
through the perfidy of those on whom America has devolved her dearest interests?

TULLY.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
FROM THE LANCASTER JOURNAL. State of Opinions on the Treaty.
THERE remains no longer a doubt that the president has affixed his signature
to the treaty -- but, whether in the execution of this act, he has acted
conformably to the voice of a majority of the citizens of the United States,
requires at least an investigation.

We find, that in New York, the chamber of commerce, at a small meeting (of
about 33 members) procured a vote of approbation, and communicated that to the
president as the sense of the whole body of merchants, in that great commercial
city.

In Boston, not more than thirty-two of the actual merchants were supposed to
appear in support of it.

In Philadelphia where the mania seemed to have the most effect, and where the
influence of bank directors, stock jobbers, etc. had its full weight, 410 are
said to have signed the address in favor of it. -- But are these all merchants?
No! Among them are shopkeepers, booksellers, brokers, gentlemen, etc. -- an
intermixed phalanx.

So far the mercantile interest, which the president has vouchsafed to say, is
"directly affected." Of those whose interests could not be "affected," as they
were not merchants, the number is few indeed. -- A meeting near Trenton, and
one in the populous borough of York, were among the principal; and I think I
may venture to assert, that not more than 400 of this class of partisans have
collected in the whole.

Thus may we form some idea of the respectable and formidable support the
treaty has received -- 1000 merchants, stock-jobbers, bank-directors, and a few
influenced artizans, etc.

Now let us search for something like a contra or supra credit, to overbalance
this tremendous debit. In Charleston, Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and
Portsmouth, where the meetings against the treaty were nearly unanimous in
their voice, at least 25, 000 citizens are supposed to have attended -- add to
this, the numerous meetings throughout the union -- a recapitulation of which
would be here endless.

"But," say the sticklers of government "respectability of character is on our
side; and the opponents of the treaty are perfectly unacquainted with its
merits."

Strange infatuation, or criminal deception, must be the ground plan of this
building; and such a foundation can never support the fabric. Out of at least
40, 000 independent citizens of the United States, who preserve the spirit and
dignity of exercising their right on this interesting occasion, cannot a
sufficiency of respectability be procured, to outweigh that of 1, 000
flatterers of administration!

But to expatiate on, or to extend this part of the subject, is needless, I
believe every unprejudiced mind must be fully persuaded, that the general voice
was opposed to the treaty.

Though the president must have been acquainted with the facts, yet he has
thought proper to sanction it; and, as he informs the select men of Boston,
that he only pursued the dictates of his conscience, it becomes our duty to
acquiesce in his decision.

With due deference to these considerations, it may not be improper to enquire
into some of the probable consequences to result from the ratification.

Already do we find the French (in consequence, no doubt, of the success the
treaty has met with from government) are making encroachments on our trading
vessels; and we have reason to fear, that before long, it may be necessary to
send an envoy extraordinary to France, to claim indemnification for Gallic
spoliations on our commerce. But no treaty may be dreaded as the result.

Attempts at bawling the government into a compliance with the will of the
people, would be impolitic, as it might have a disorganizing tendency. But let
us enquire if we have no peaceable resource of amendment.

The citizens of the United States, confident of the disadvantages of the
treaty, applied in a respectful manner to the head of their government, and
amply stated its defects. Independent of a noncompliance, they, perhaps, have
not even received that attention which they had a right to expect.

As to the character and affections of the president, no American, I trust,
entertains an opinion tending to criminate him. That he is not infallible, is
certain, and that he has erred, is probable; but if so, we still possess too
great a confidence in him to imagine it any thing but an "error of the
judgment, and not of the heart."

If then the treaty is proved to be a public evil, let us trace it to the
origin of its ratification: and the star chamber movements of a mysterious
senate, whose works are in darkness, and whose doors and ears are closed to the
admission of public opinions, may lead us, at least, to a probable discovery.

Perhaps, then, it is here the calamity exists -- here that the government is
defective -- and here only that the organs of administration are disconsonant
with the voice of the people.

The means of redress are obvious. The constitution of our country has
anticipated our necessities. Let us individually and collectively inspect the
past conduct of our RULERS -- and let the purity of elections be the rallying
point of reform.

MENTOR.

FROM THE JERSEY CHRONICLE. Observations on the Disposition of Administration
to France and England.
FOR the better information of my fellow citizens of this state, it may be of
great importance to republish some facts, that cannot be denied, as to the
conduct of the president of the United States, respecting our connexions with
France and Great Britain. They will demonstrate an uniform disposition to evade
a nearer alliance with France, and a closer intercourse with England. As early
as the 14th of February, 1791, the president of the United States, in a message
to congress, says: "Soon after I was called to the administration of the
government, I found it important to come to an understanding with the court of
London, on several points, interesting to the United States, and particularly,
to know, whether they were disposed to enter into arrangements, by mutual
consent, which might fix the commerce of the two nations on principles of
reciprocal advantage, etc. but I do not infer any disposition, on their part,
to enter into any arrangements, merely commercial," etc.

On the 13th of December, 1791, Mr. Hammond, the English minister, being
arrived, a letter was addressed to him by Mr. Jefferson, then secretary of
state, which must have come from the orders of the president, saying: "as you
are fully authorized to enter into a negotiation, for the purpose of arrangeing
the commercial intercourse between the two countries, I have the honor to
inform you, that I am ready to receive a communication of your full powers, for
that purpose, at any time you may think proper, and to proceed immediately to
their object." Now, it does not appear, that any communications were made to
the senate, or that they were consulted, as to any of these objects.

But, upon further investigation, Mr. Hammond had no powers to treat with us.

On the arrival of Mr. Genet, he communicated a decree of the national
convention of France, to Mr. Jefferson, authorizing him to propose a treaty
with us, on liberal principles, such as might strengthen the bonds of good
will, which unite the two nations, etc. etc.

Mr. Jefferson, by order of the president, replies in the following words; his
letter is dated, 23d August, 1793: " the senate being then in recess, and not
to meet again till fall, I apprised Mr. Genet, that the participation, in
matters of treaty, given by the constitution to that branch of our government
[meaning the senate] would, of course, delay any definitive answer to his
friendly proposition." His letter concludes, "by assuring the national
convention, that the president will meet them with the most friendly
dispositions, on the grounds of treaty, as soon as he could do it by the forms
of the constitution."

Observe, citizens, I state facts. Nothing was done by the president, as to the
observance of these promises, when the senate did meet, nor has any thing been
done with the advice of the senate, toward that nation, to this day; and I am
informed, from good authority, that the French nation proposed by this treaty
to give to our citizens and our ships, all the advantages and privileges of
their own, in every part of their dominions.

On the 16th of April, 1794, a message was sent to the senate of the United
States, by the president, at the very moment when the house of congress had
made most salutary regulations, to preserve and increase our growing commerce,
announcing, that he had nominated John Jay as envoy extraordinary to Great
Britain. The message is in the following words:

"Gentlemen of the senate: The communications I have made to you, during your
present session, from the dispatches of our minister in London, contain a
serious aspect of our affairs with Great Britain; but as peace ought to be
pursued with unremitted zeal, before the last resource, which so often has been
the scourge of nations, and cannot fail to check the advanced prosperity of the
United States, is contemplated, I have thought proper to nominate John Jay, as
envoy extraordinary from the United States to his Britannic majesty. My
confidence in our minister plenipotentiary in London, continues undiminished;
but a mission like this, while it corresponds with the solemnity of the
occasion, will announce to the world a solicitude for a friendly adjustment of
our complaints: going immediately from the United States, such an envoy will
carry with him a full knowledge of the existing temper and sensibility of our
country, and will thus be taught to vindicate our rights with firmness, and to
cultivate peace with sincerity."

I will now draw some conclusions from the above facts, leaving it to the good
sense of the people of this state to determine, whether they are not such, as
naturally arise from this statement, taken from the records and proceedings of
our government.

It is evident, that the president has uniformly sought a more intimate
connection with Great Britain; that he has waved the advice and participation of
the senate, offering to treat on his own authority; that Great Britain has
uniformly evaded a treaty, until an embargo threatened the ruin of her islands,
and until the French nation had accomplished the ruin of her designs, and
nearly the ruin of the nation.

That the forms of the constitution have slept, as innocent and insignificant,
when compared to the friendly overtures of England; but have been held up as
insurmountable barriers against the friendly offers of France.

That the senate (except such as were known to favor British connexions) were
ignorant, like the rest of our citizens, that Mr. Jay's mission was to make a
treaty of commerce and amity with Great Britain. That they had no grounds to
suppose or suspect, from the president's message on his appointment, that he
could possibly have held up an object, containing the wishes of the whole
nation, when he was to be instructed to abandon that object. The senate were
made to believe it necessary to send a special envoy, on a special occasion, to
carry with him the sensibility of the nation, to vindicate our rights with
firmness; they were told that Mr. Pinckney deserved confidence, as to all
matters not important and momentous: had they been informed, that a treaty of
commerce and amity was to wind up the just expectations of the sufferers; that
all our injuries must be forgotten; that we must bow to insults, and kiss the
tyrant's rod; I trust that even the senate would have had spirit enough,
miserable advisers as they are represented, to have replied, "That, since we
must be degraded, there is no necessity of sending a special envoy, to make it
still more mortifying."

"If Mr. Pinckney, who is now in London, is a fit person to represent us, he is
able to make a treaty of commerce."

But, to ask advice of the senate to sanctify an intended trick upon the
feelings and sensibility of the country, might have led to a disappointment; a
majority might have put a negative on Mr. Jay's instructions; but, what is
still more important, the whole plan would have been made known to, and have
been blasted for ever by the united voice of, the people.

In my next letter, I shall demonstrate clearly, that the treaty, in question,
absolutely annihilates all those soothing expectations, and all that
sensibility, which we find stated and acknowledged, in the president's message
to the senate, on the appointment of Mr. Jay; that the nation has been
secretly, I will not say treacherously, divorced from France, and most
clandestinely married to Great Britain: we are taken from the embraces of a
loving wife, and find ourselves in the arms of a detestable and abandoned w --
e covered with crimes, rottenness, and corruption.

A POLITICAL WATCHMAN.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
FROM THE BOSTON CHRONICLE. Remarks on some of the probable Consequences of Mr.
Jay's Treaty.
THE reply of the president of the convention of France to noble M. Querini,
the Venetian ambassador, deserves the particular attention of the citizens of
the United States.

"Governed (he observes) by a wise constitution, directed solely by the
principles of justice and reason, and the purest maxims of morality -- France
is on the point of enjoying the objects of her wishes, liberty, equality and
union, the fruits of so many sacrifices and labors.

"France, always great, will reply to generous proceedings, by proceedings
equally generous. When, on all sides, our rising republic was assailed in its
cradle, and the event appeared to be uncertain, the Venetian senate, not
content with keeping within the bounds of neutrality, received with distinction
the envoy of the French republic.

"We love to talk of, and publish our gratitude. The measure was so much the
more noble, as it exposed our faithful ally to much embarrassment.

"France, under a despotic you^, might be ungrateful and treacherous; but
France, restored to freedom, becomes a republic, which cannot be otherwise than
grateful.

"Tell your nation that she may number amongst the most pure and zealous of her
allies, the French republic. Holland, comprised in our treaty with Spain,
proves that we do not forget our friends."

This affectionate address cannot but endear France to every benevolent heart.
The language is pathetic, and the sentiments sincere. Far from the parade of
courtly etiquette, and the cold civilities of a levee, the president of the
convention welcomes the ambassador with all that fraternal affection, which the
common cause of Liberty inspires.

But these words are more particularly worthy the attention of the Americans,
"France, always great, will reply to generous proceedings, by proceedings
equally generous." As it respects the United States, can this republic think
our conduct "generous?" Is it "generous" to issue a proclamation on the "modern
law of nations," and publicly to declare to the French, that on that ground,
the United States meant to establish their neutrality, and yet admit the
British to violate it, by taking our vessels going to France, loaded with
provisions, and other articles, expressly declared in the aforesaid law to be
free? Is it generous to refuse the overtures of France, for a commercial
treaty, founded on the most liberal principles, and at the same moment send
over a minister to the court of Britain, apparently for the purpose of
obtaining indemnification for their captures; though, at the same time, he was
authorized to make a treaty of commerce, in a secret manner, without any
information to the French republic, on the subject? More especially when it was
so secret, that our minister in France, was kept ignorant of the whole business?

Is it generous to enter into a treaty with Britain, to surrender the ground of
"impartial neutrality" as to the modern law of nations, to admit articles as
contraband, which were declared, by the president's proclamation, to be free,
and directly clas^ with our previous promise to France, that "free ships, shall
make free goods?"

Is it generous that our treaty with England, should be so greatly detrimental
to France, as to expressly declare, "that timber for ship-building, tar, or
rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and generally whatever may
serve directly to the equipment of vessels, and unwrought iron and fir plank
only excepted, shall be objects of confiscation, whenever they are attempted to
be carried to an enemy?

Is such a prohibition "generous," as it respects France, when our treaty with
that republic, expressly declares, that "in general, all provisions, which
serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life; furthermore,
all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sail cloth, anchors
and any part of anchors; also ship's masts, planks, boards, and beams; and all
other things proper either for building or repairing ships, and all other goods
whatever, which have not been worked into the form of any instrument for war,
by land or sea, shall not be reputed contraband?"

Is it "generous" to admit by treaty the provisions destined to France to be
carried into England, to be disposed of at such a price as the ministry shall
say is a reasonable compensation, when they are admitted to be sold in France
at public market, and at the highest price?

In short, it is needless to query any longer upon the subject. The features of
the treaty too strongly evidence our partiality for the English, and enmity to
the French. The nation now begin to see our conduct, and begin to express their
resentment. Their late orders to their agents to stop the shipment of
provisions, no doubt, is in consequence of the treaty; as they find by this
instrument, we have surrendered every right of our neutrality, destroyed every
vital principle of the president's proclamation, and completely thrown
ourselves under the sole control and influence of the British nation. They
find we have forsaken them, and instead of acting agreeably to the declaration
made by Mr. Munroe, "to draw the bonds of our alliance closer," we have, by Mr.
Jay's negotiation, severed the connection, and rushed into the arms of the
British.

This treaty will lower the produce of the United States, 100 per cent. Our
ships will perish at our wharves -- our tradesmen will be thrown out of employ
-- and, in return, we shall be blessed with a land tax, to discharge British
debts, and our seaports and trading towns soon be thronged with British and
Scotch agents and factors. Blessed effects of Mr. Jay's treaty!!!

Can France express that cordiality to the United States, as she does to
Venice? Or are our proceedings toward her, such, that we can expect any thing,
in return, but her resentment?

The fate of America is suspended on the treaty, which involves in it a
question, whether we will return, by a clandestine treaty, to Britain, to be
again subject to her insolence and arbitrary measures, or whether we will
support that " modern neutrality" pledged, to the United States, by the
president.

The treaty, made by Mr. Jay, is in direct opposition to the president's
proclamation; upon what principle he has ratified it, requires, therefore, an
explanation more copious than he has deigned to express in his letter to the
town of Boston, and the other citizens who have addressed him on this momentous
subject.

It is in the power of America, by commercial restrictions, to vindicate her
national honor, without any danger of a war; as we have as much right to say,
that we will not import British manufactures, as France has to say, she will
not purchase American provisions. The Americans may as well say, that they
would declare war against France, for her late orders to her agents, as the
British pretend to go to war with America, for preventing the importation of
their manufactures. The war is a mere bugbear of the British faction, and those
who are concerned in the English trade; as these very persons know that if Mr.
Madison's resolutions or a non-importation had taken place, Britain would have
been obliged to make peace with France.

But to our disgrace, and possibly ruin, we have tampered too long with the
magnanimity of this generous republic. Our narrow policy, for the support of a
set of bank speculators, it is to be feared, has for ever separated France from
America.

A REPUBLICAN.

FROM THE INDEPENDENT GAZETTEER.
ATTICUS -- No. I.
To the Freemen of the United States.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
AT length the illegitimate imp, the abortion of liberty, has crawled from its
sculking place, and, contrary to the wishes of its parent and of its
godfathers, has peeped into day. Divested of the darkness which encompassed
it, we may now behold and examine the foul blotches that overspread it, and
trace a pestiferous malady oozing from every pore. That imagination must have
possessed an uncommon portion of poetic phrenzy; it must have boldly soared
into the regions of extravagance, and have viewed human nature in its utmost
deformity, that could have figured to itself a treaty of amity, commerce and
navigation, so replete with hostility to a generous and magnanimous ally, and
so prolific of enmity to the essential rights of a free, sovereign, and
independent people.

Yes, citizens of America, we have virtually, though not formally, become a
party in the confederacy of despots against liberty, and have surrendered the
rights of an independent nation into the hands of Great Britain. We have become
her colonies in jact, though not in form; and our honor and our interests, our
gratitude and our liberty, are placed under her guardianship. The treaty formed
with France, in the hour of danger and adversity, when the heavy clouds of
tyranny had darkened our horizon, and were ready to burst upon our heads, has
been paralized by our government; and the nation, against which every arm
should have been nerved, and every mind electrified with abhorrence, is to
usurp the place due to gratitude and liberty. Now the wisdom and policy of our
administration, nay, its patriotism too, will receive a full exposition, from
the treaty itself -- Now the vindication of our rights with firmness will be
seen in its meridian splendour -- now the adjustment of our complaints will
exhibit itself in all its brilliancy -- and now that temper and sensibility of
our country, which was to aid, if not direct, the negotiation, will stand
unmasked, and prompt sensations, at which conscience should start back with
horror. Let us, my fellow citizens, take a view of this mimitables bantling --
its royal charms will smooth its constitutional deformity, and enamour us into
an oblivion of violated rights and usurped authority. We were tickled with the
high prospects of commercial advantage, which we were to derive from our
intercourse with the British West Indies; let us view the article upon which
those prospects are bottomed, and then say, whether the man who could assent to
such terms, can possibly be considered as the friend of his country? We shall
be at liberty to trade to his Britannic majesty's possessions in the West
Indies, in vessels not exceeding seventy tons, and bring from thence the
produce of those islands; but we shall not be permitted to export sugar,
coffee, cocoa, melasses, or cotton, to any part of the world. This article robs
us, at a blow, of the carrying trade, and deprives us of the privilege of
exporting West India produce, although imported from other islands -- Nay,
there is not an exception in favor of cotton, the growth of our own country;
and it is well known, that we export cotton from some of the southern states to
a considerable amount. Does not this article justify the opinion, that we have
again become the colonies of Great Britain? Does it not give rise to a belief,
that the man who put his seal to it, could not be a friend to America? The art
with which it is incorporated with the other articles of the treaty, excepting
the first ten, shows that either this was to be accepted, or the whole must
totter, and, rather than such an immaculate conception should be stifled in
embryo, we have accepted the treaty with a most extraordinary provision.

You will see, fellow citizens, that the treaty, in all its parts, is
prohibitory upon America -- You will discover, that the United States were an
inferior party in the contract, and that when his Britannic majesty only
permits and consents, we agree and are bound -- You will see France pointed at,
though not literally designated, and every provision, that can possibly
militate against her, solemnly stipulated -- You will see her excluded from
renewing the bonds of good will, which unite the people of both countries, and
which she had proffered to renew, when Great Britain was plotting against our
liberty and peace -- You will see our country degraded, and throwing itself
upon the mercy of a British tyrant.

Under these circumstances, I ask, nay, I demand of you, fellow citizens,
whether the revolution was designed to rid ourselves or a foreign, in order to
establish a domestic, tyranny? Whether it was for the benefit of a whole
people, or to aggrandise a few individuals? The question is in time and in
place; for if any individual among us, can pursue the dictates of his own
feelings, or his own whims, at the expense of the most solemn and sacred
covenant, and in contradiction to the universal voice of a whole people, then
have we overturned foreign to make room for domestic domination. The next
attempt that we may anticipate, will be upon the freedom of the press; for a
conduct so repugnant to every sense of propriety, as that of the
administration, cannot bear the ordeal of the press; and it must endeavor to
shelter itself, by imposing a silence upon the only voice that can speak
daggers to injustice, and awaken the public mind to tyranny. Did my imagination
create it, or is it really true! Methinks there is already a consultation of
such sort, and that the patriotic and virtuous editor of the Aurora is to be
the first victim!

Our good faith to France, my fellow citizens, will become proverbial; and our
rigid adherence to national honor, and national obligation, must procure many
admirers and many friends. We have not only formed a treaty with Great Britain,
directly to the prejudice of our allies; but we have deceived those allies, and
dishonored ourselves, by declaring to them, that the object of Mr. Jay's
mission was only to obtain a redress of wrongs. The French minister here was
officially informed, that the mission, as set forth in the president's message
to the senate, contemplated only an adjustment of our complaints; and our
minister in France, in answer to an application of the French government, gave
official information, that a redress of wrongs only, was the object of Mr.
Jay's n^gociation. Thus have we added insult to injury, and, by means of it,
exposed ourselves to the just indignation of a great, gallant, and triumphant
people. This Punic faith requires no commentary of mine -- it has stamped upon
it, in lines too strong to be misinterpreted, and too indelible to be
obliterated, an image, which must excite abhorrence in the mind of every
virtuous American.

ATTICUS.
June 29th, 1795.
No. II.
INGENUOUSNESS ought to be as much the attribute of a freeman as independence,
and the forfeiture of the former is too frequently the prelude to the
prostitution of the latter. The man that can act a double, or an uncandid part,
in one transaction, can do so in many; for if his conscience or principles are
not at all times powerful enough to restrain him, temptation may, any time,
seduce him from the path of political justice or moral rectitude. I alleged, in
my first essay, that France was deceived by the professions of our
administration, and that at the time we assured her we were only aiming at an
indemnity for robbery, and a surrender of the posts, we were, in fact,
negociating a treaty with Great Britain. This deception does not stand alone;
for the title of the treaty bears the same, if not a stronger stamp of
political unrighteousness. It is called a "treaty of amity, commerce, and
navigation, between his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, by
their president, with the advice and consent of their senate." I aver, that the
senate knew not that a treaty was to be negociated: for the president was
silent on the subject in his message; and when a motion was made in the senate,
to request the president to inform the senate of the whole business with which
the envoy was to be charged, it was negatived; how then could it be denominated
a treaty, negociated "with the advice and consent of the senate?" Two
conclusions are naturally drawn from this circumstance -- that the executive
must have believed the constitution made the advice of the senate necessary, or
he would not have had it placed on the very face of the treaty; and that a
deception was practiced by inserting the advice of the senate to a treaty
concluded in London, when the senate was not consulted.

This supercession of the constitution, and arrestation of the prerogative of
the senate, may be considered as non-essential, as the senate had an ultimate
decision upon the treaty. A little consideration will show the fallacy and
danger of this reasoning; for if the president has the right to dispense with
the advice of the senate, he has an equal right to dispense with their consent,
and render their participation with him in matters of treaty altogether
nugatory. "The president shall have power, by and with the advice and consent
of the senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present
concur." The intention of this clause appears to be, to guard against the
exorbitant power delegated to the president, by rendering the advice of the
senate necessary to a negotiation. They are the joint judges of the propriety
of forming a treaty, as well as the arbiters of it, when it is made. If the
president had the exclusive power to negociate treaties, it would be a kind of
dictatorship, an exclusive sovereignty, that would enable him to form treaties
in such a way, as would render it extremely hazardous in the senate to refuse
their consent. Our rights may be bartered away by treaty, our liberties made an
affair of hazard, as is the case in the treaty before us Could a free people
have intended a delegation of such powers to a senate, much less to an
individual? They never intended to establish a species of royalty in fact,
though not in name, and put it in the power of one man to legislate for them,
by means of treaties.

In the preamble of the treaty, fellow citizens, we find this remarkable
clause: "His Britannic majesty and the United States of America, being desirous
by a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, to terminate their differences
in such a manner, as, without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretensions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding." With this clause staring us in the face,
in the preamble of the treaty, what had we to expect from the treaty itself?
Well, indeed, might Great Britain negociate with us, when we so complaisantly
waved our complaints and pretensions! The president, in his message to the
senate, nominating John Jay as envoy extraordinary, speaks of the mission being
designed to procure a friendly adjustment of cur complaints. "But a mission
like this," says the message, "while it corresponds with the solemnity of the
occasion, will announce to the world, a solicitude for a friendly adjustment of
our complaints:" and in the introduction to the treaty, these very complaints
are abandoned! Strange paradox indeed, that the mission should have expressly
contemplated an adjustment of our complaints, if the message was not an entire
deception, and that a reference to those complaints should have been formally
disavowed! When agreements of this kind are entered into, the injuries of the
parties are supposed to be equal, and their demands the same; but in this case,
were our respective complaints and pretensions mutual?

Had we robbed Great Britain! Had we kept possession of a part of her
territory, which was to have been surrendered by solemn and positive
stipulation? Had we invaded her territory, and made military settlements within
her jurisdiction? Had we joined the savages against her, and assisted in
butchering her subjects? Had we impressed her seamen, contrary to every rule of
justice, and obligation of humanity? Had we offered her every outrage and every
indignity, which one nation could offer to another? Whence then the mutuality
of complaints and pretensions, that made a reference to them a thing so much to
be deprecated, as to be entirely laid aside? So extraordinary a phenomenon as
this, is certainly not to be met with in diplomatic history. It will stand
alone upon the list of wonders, and serve as a high water mark of prostitution
of a nation's rights. Surely the envoy could not have been so far intoxicated
with the pleasure of kissing the quee^'s hand, having already passed the
meridian of gallantry, unless we could suppose him to be in his dotage, as to
have forgotten that we had complaints to redress, and pretensions to satisfy!
Surely Grenville's wine did not possess the qualities of the waters of Lethe,
to have effaced from his remembrance that he was an American envoy, and that
America had been grievously injured, and barbarously outraged!

Fellow citizens, had our condition been a desperate one -- had we been so
humbled as to have had no resource left but in the clemency of Great Britain --
had the energy of freedom been succeeded by the palsy of despotism -- then,
indeed, might we have waved every reference to our injuries and our dishonor:
but in the zenith of vigor and prosperity, to abandon our claims, and, with a
beggar's suppleness, demand our own in charity, is such a flagitious departure
from every principle that ought to animate the American bosom, that we ought at
the same time to pity and despise the man who could so far forget his own and
the dignity of his country.

ATTICUS.
July 15th, 1795.
[TO BE CONTINUED.]
REMARKS ON TREATIES.
SOME very mistaken notions appear in circulation on this subject, the essence
of which you find in a late paper, where a writer calls a treaty an act more
binding than the constitution, and more influential than any law. This is
surely heresy against the constitution. All that is said in that instrument
about treaties, is as follows:

In art. 2. sect. 2. "The president shall have power, by and with the advice
and consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the
senators concur."

In art. 3. sect. 2. "The judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and
equity, arising under this constitution, the laws of the United States and
treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority."

In art. 6. "This constitution, and the laws of the United States, which shall
be made in pursuance thereof -- and all treaties made, or which shall be made,
under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land,
and the judges of every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the
constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding."

Now, surely, from all this, it is apparent, that, in the order stated, the
constitution stands first, as the supreme law of the land; next, the laws of
the United States, made in pursuance thereof; next, treaties: Undoubtedly,
therefore, no act can be more binding than the constitution; no treaty more
influential than any law passed by the three branches of the government;
otherwise, in fact, two branches of the government would supersede entirely the
authority of the third -- How the judges would decide, should these three
supreme laws happen to differ, remains to be seen. It is also worthy of
enquiry, what authority could absolve us from a treaty made the supreme law of
our land, supposing it violated by the other contracting party? It can hardly
be supposed we should go on to continue to consider it as obligatory, when it
should have been broken by the party with whom it was made.

OBSERVER.

Reply of the President of the United States, to the President of the Boston
Chamber of Commerce.
TO THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire.
SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 13th instant, covering a copy of the
dissent, See vol. I. pages 126, 129.
of a number of citizens of Boston, expressing their disapprobation of the
votes adopted at a late meeting in that town, relative to a treaty of amity,
commerce, and navigation, between the United States and Great Britain; and also
a copy of the proceedings of the Boston chamber of commerce, on the same
subject.

While I regret the diversity of opinion which has been manifested on this
occasion, it is a satisfaction to learn, that the commercial part of my fellow
citizens, whose interests are thought to be most directly affected, so
generally consider the treaty, as calculated, on the whole, to procure
important advantages to our country.

This sentiment, I trust, will be extended in proportion, as the provisions of
the treaty become well understood.

With due respect, I am, Sir, Your obedient, GO. WASHINGTON.
United States, 22d August, 1795.
[No. VIII.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARRET-STREET.

-- NOVEMBER 14, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. ATTICUS, No. III. Page 219 2. -- No. IV. Page 222 3. -- No. V. Page 225 4.
The Federalist, No. IV. Page 228 5. -- No. V. Page 240 6. -- No. VI. Page 247
7. -- No. VII. Page 259 8. Resolutions of the Freemen of Mercer County
(Kentucky) September 22d, 1795 Page 265 9. American Commerce in Europe Page 266
10. Savannah Address to the President of the United States Page 267 11.
President's Answer Page 268 12. Resolutions of a Number of the Inhabitants of
Kentucky, at the Courthouse in Lexington, August 28th, 1795 Page 269 13.
Proceedings of the Inhabitants of Williamsburgh (South Carolina) August 5th,
1795 Page 270 14. Proceedings of the Citizens of Laurens County (South
Carolina) August 12th, 1795 Page 273 15. Address of the Citizens of Laurens
County, to Pierce Butler Page 277 16. Striking Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty
Page 278 17. There is Nothing new under the Sun Page 280 18. Proceedings of the
Town of Plymouth (Massachusetts) October 28th, 1795 Page 283 19. Resolutions of
the Citizens of Washington District (South Carolina) November 19th, 1795 Page
285 20. Resolutions of the Inhabitants of St. James's Parish (south Carolina)
August 8th, 1795 Page 287 21. First Fruits of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce,
and Navigation Page 288
American Remembrancer, etc.
ATTICUS -- No. III.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 215.]

AFTER reading the preamble, we might shut our eyes upon the treaty, and augur
its contents; for when a reference to the merits of our complaints is
positively forbidden in the introduction, it would be folly to look for an
adjustment of them in the treaty it self. In this, to be sure, we have acted
with much christian meekness; we have forgotten and forgiven; and, with a
submission very uncommon to men or to nations, after being smote upon one
cheek, we have held the other. To evidence our humility, however, it was not
essentially necessary to commission the chief justice to prostrate the American
character and interest, at the foot of the throne of his majesty, George the
third -- we might have been silent to our outrages, passive under our
indignities, and groaned beneath our wrongs, without having them reverberated
from the throne of a despicable despot. The "solemnity of the occasion" would
then have been less awful; for America might have mourned over her injuries,
without inviting the world to behold her degradation. Let the light of
investigation, however, now shine upon such a work of darkness; let its caverns
be explored; let the trap doors to liberty, be unequivocally marked out, that
the unsuspecting, and yet confident, American, may behold in those dismal
recesses, the guillotine of his country's rights and independence. Be assured,
my fellow citizens, the moment the treaty acquires a legal existence in our
country, that moment we naturalize an hydra, which will require an Hercules to
exterminate him -- that moment we sign the death warrant of our liberty, and
toll the bell for its execution.

Let us take a view of the 2d article, which is to relieve us from the ills of
Pandora, that have issued, in the most hideous shapes, upon the citizens of our
frontier, from the western posts, and have drained the United States of many
millions of dollars, and much of the blood of their citizens. The treaty of
peace solemnly stipulated, that his Britannic majesty should " with all
convenient speed, withdraw all his armies, garrisons, and fleets, from the
United States, and from every port, place, and harbor, within the same;" and
the present treaty provides for the surrender of the posts in June, 1796. Near
twelve years have elapsed since the definitive articles, of the treaty of
peace, were signed at Paris; and yet these posts still remain in the possession
of the British, and if "all convenient speed" can be interpreted to mean twelve
years, the evacuation, in June 1796, may be expounded to mean a century. We had
a reliance upon the faith of Great Britain, at that time, and she proved
perfidious; we have renewed that reliance, under another instrument, and we
flatter ourselves she will be more scrupulous in the observance of the
contract! Quem Deus vult perdere prius dementat; we seem to be marked for
destruction, and folly is paving the way for it.

By this article, the king has been "graciously pleased" (to use the language
of the envoy) to permit the United States to extend their settlements within
their own boundary line, at their discretion, except within the precincts or
jurisdiction of any of the posts. What a favor! The treaty is said to contain
no reciprocity; but is not this reciprocity enough! To be permitted to extend
our settlements within our own territory, is an indulgence, for which we cannot
be sufficiently grateful! What a pity the envoy did not obtain his majesty's
gracious permission to enlarge the boundaries of Philadelphia or New York! So
"great, good, and dear a friend" could certainly not have refused "such an
envoy" such a request!!!

The vocabulary of submission appears to have been ransacked, to suit the
American part of the treaty (if any part can be strictly called American) and
the rights which valor gave, and blood confirmed, we seem now to receive as a
boon. -- Does not this article contain a tacit confession, that Great Britain
had a right to prevent our settlements within our own boundary line? Why was it
not stipulated equally on the part of Great Britain, that she should be allowed
to extend her settlements, at her discretion, within the Canadian limits? She
never would have stooped to such an insult.

But what are WE to understand by the precincts or jurisdiction of the posts?
The British have given a very liberal allowance of territory to that
jurisdiction, and, in some instances, they have been modest enough to claim an
extension of precincts to the Ohio. -- Who is to draw the line? No doubt this
will receive an exposition, in the usual way, and a British lexicon will be
found to explain this knotty point. We have an administration so complaisant,
that they never can find it in their hearts to cavil with his majesty George
the Third. Whatever quirks and quibbles may be made use of to French sans
culottes, a king is certainly entitled to more deference and more respect. --
Quere. Is the settlement which Simcoe made at the rapids of the Miami, and
about which a hollow vociferation was made, within the precincts and
jurisdiction of the posts? That eunuch of a statesman, whose political gender
remains yet to be defined, and who is "every thing by turns, and nothing long,"
will deign to inform us.

The most extraordinary part of this article, fellow citizens, remains yet to
be considered -- a part which allows a British colony to be established within
the jurisdiction of the United States. British subjects shall have their
election either to remain subjects of Great Britain, within the precincts or
jurisdiction of the posts, or to become American citizens! We have often been
stunned with the "imperium in imperio:" but what will be now said of a British
imperium in an American imperio! We cannot charge this to self-creation, when
the first of our government has given it a being. By this article, we have
given a carte blanch to conspiracy, and a premium for insurrections against
our government. By the constitution of the United States, treason consists "in
levying war against the United States, or in adhering to their enemies, giving
them aid and comfort." -- Now I would ask, whether, according to the second
article of the treaty, a British subject, within the precincts or jurisdiction
of the posts, who has not elected to become an American citizen, can be guilty
of treason? May he not levy war, give aid and comfort to OUR enemies, without
incurring the penalties to which American citizens are subject?

"They shall not be compelled to take any oath of allegiance to the
government;" but, owing allegiance to Great Britain, by positive compacts, is
he not furnished with a security against punishment for acts, which are
treasonable to us, but which his sovereign calls on him to perform? The tacit
condition of being subject to the laws, cannot surely operate against a
specific grant; and a British subject, within that jurisdiction, seems to be
excluded from the general principle comprehended in the law of nations. In the
26th article, a remedy is provided against British merchants who shall
transgress our laws; but, in the article before us, nothing of the sort is
contemplated. If there was not to be a difference between the persons
comprehended in the 29th article, and those comprehended in the 2d, why were
they not equally expressive? It appears, that his majesty was desirous of
securing a corpse within our territory, that would always be devoted to him,
whenever he should call for their services, and, in case of a war, they might
prove useful instruments, as useful as the savages, in carrying his gracious
intentions into effect.

How this article is made to harmonize with the territorial. rights of the
individual states, guaranteed by the constitution, must be left to those to
determine, who have the wonderful faculty of making the constitution mean any
thing or nothing. The constitution says, that " the congress shall have power
to dispose of, and make all useful rules and regulations respecting the
territory or other property of the United States; and nothing in this
constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United
States, or of any particular state." Have any of the states claims upon the
territory within the jurisdiction of the posts? If they have, are not those
claims prejudiced by the cession to British subjects, of lands acquired even
since the treaty of peace? If congress is charged with the power of making
rules and regulations respecting the territory of the United States, does this
power extend to the president and senate?

Violation of constitution, prostration of character and of rights, and an
ignominious submission to outrage and insult, have gone hand in hand in this
transaction. The ermine of American honor has received a stain almost too foul
ever to be effaced, and confidence a wound which will defy the healing powers
of time. Before it be too late, fellow citizens, exercise an unalienable right,
and speak with a decision, that shall make your servants pause, before they
barter away your dear-bought privileges.

ATTICUS.
July 21st, 1795.
No. IV.
THE telescope of Herschel is necessary to discover the advatages said to be
contained in the treaty with Great Britain; for they are so distant and so
obscure, that, like the mountains in the moon, they can only be seen through an
extraordinary magnifying medium. We are told, that the oftener we view the
treaty, the more we will like it; but although a repetition of impression
diminishes our sensations, even with respect to the beauty or deformity of
things, the treaty stands an unrivalled exception; for the oftener we gaze at
it. the more do the features of deformity unfold themselves to shock the sense.
Reciprocity ought to be the basis of all commercial treaties; but this
instrument discovers such favoritism, that we look in vain for equality; for
while the ghost of reciprocity is to be our portion, the substantial reality is
embraced by Great Britain. In illustration of this, let us refer to the 3d
article, and pursue the ignis fatuus through the bogs and quagmires contrived
for the ingenuous and unsuspecting American. --

"It is agreed that it shall, at all times, be free to his majesty's subjects,
and to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians dwelling on
either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and re-pass by land or
inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two
parties on the continent of America (the country within the limits of the
Hudson's Bay company excepted) and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and
waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the sea ports, harbors, bays, or creeks of his
majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers in his majesty's
said territories, as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal
and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent the
possibility of any frauds in this respect. Nor to the admission of British
vessels from the sea into the rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
port of entry for foreign vessels from the sea. The river Mississippi shall,
however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports or places on its eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to, and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty, in Great
Britain."

Unequal as are the benefits which the contracting parties have to bestow,
these benefits are far from being reciprocal to the United States, although the
whole inland navigation, forming a semicircle from the mouth of the Mississippi
to the river St. Lawrence, together with the Atlantic waters, are thrown open
to Great Britain. Are the territories and countries of the two parties on the
continent, equal, and if they are equal, are the privileges granted to both,
the same? for there must be an entire equality, to constitute the boasted
reciprocity. -- What are the limits of the Hudson's Bay company, from which
there is to be an exclusion?

The returns of the Hudson's Bay company from America, are in value L. 29, 340
sterling, annually, and from the limits of this company we are to be totally
excluded. -- This company engrosses the most valuable part of the fur trade, as
the country over which their privileges extend, abounds with animals whose furs
are preferable to those inhabiting a less northerly region. Thus we have not
only refused interfering with a profitable branch of their commerce, but we
have afforded them an opportunity of extending it to our own prejudice; for
when their traders are at liberty to make settlements within our territory, to
"hire and possess houses and ware houses" we are wholly interdicted, and,
therefore, there can be no doubt on which side the current of advantage will
run.

We have granted Great Britain the free navigation of all our waters, internal
and Atlantic, to the highest port of entry, when she has excluded us from the
limits of the Hudson's Bay company, and all her Atlantic ports in America. The
privilege of trading between Montreal and Quebec, if it can merit this
appellation, is on the other side; for the inhabitants of New York, bordering
on Canada, will derive their supplies from thence, and thus afford an
additional outlet for British manufactures. It is a question, and the
expression of this article will warrant it, how far we are liberty to avail
ourselves of the privilege granted by the treaty of peace, to dry our fish, or
to take them in any place where the jurisdiction of Great Britain is
acknowledged? By the treaty of peace we are allowed "to take fish on all the
coasts, bays and creeks of his Britannic majesty's dominions in America, and to
dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors, and creeks of Nova
Scotia, Magdalen Islands, and Labradore, so long as the same shall remain
unsettled;" by the present treaty we are barred this privilege -- "But it is
understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels of
the United States into the sea ports, harbors, bays or creeks of his majesty's
said territories." It may be said, that this article cannot be intended to
prejudice a previous treaty, and that this must have been understood -- To this
I answer, that, if the positive stipulation in the treaty of peace, that his
majesty should withdraw all his armies, etc. from the United States, without
causing any destruction, or carrying away any negroes or other property of the
American inhabitants," could be set aside, it is not difficult to conceive,
that the privilege of taking and curing fish might be equally dispensed with by
the treaty manufacturers. -- It is no forced construction of the article, to
suppose it; and the unequivocal expression of it, will justify such a belief.

We have not yet been able to trace a reciprocity in this article; but perhaps
we shall find it in the Mississippi. This river is to be open to both parties
and all the ports and places on its eastern side, to whichsoever of the parties
belonging, may freely be resorted to. Where are the ports and places on the
Mississippi, belong to Great Britain? Does this article yield a quid pro quo?
Perhaps this stipulation in favor of the beloved friend of our administration,
is intended to accelerate the negotiation with Spain, which has been so long
pending! Will Spain consent to open the Mississipi to us, when we have divided
the benefits with Great Britain? Can it be supposed that she will have less
jealousy of both, than she had of one? Events will determine these questions;
and I have no scruple in supposing, that our negotiation with Spain will be
exceedingly embarrassed, if not broken off, by this injudicious and impolitic
clause. It is not improbable that the French republic will possess Louisiana,
and if they should, will this article be a letter of recommendation to them? We
have acted so honorably, so heartily, so affectionately, and so uprightly with
France, that she certainly could refuse us nothing we would ask of her.

We are said to have a constitution; and the citizens who were not entirely
satisfied with its adoption, and those citizens who can see defects in the
administration of it, are styled "antifederalists." I would now ask, fellow
citizens, by what title those are to be hailed, who are undermining that
constitution by the exercise of improper power? The constitution says, that
congress shall have power "to establish an uniform rude of naturalization
throughout the United States," but by the ad article of the treaty, the
president and senate have established a rule of naturalization within the
precincts and jurisdiction of the posts. The pretended federalists will supply
a name for so daring an attack upon a constitution which they have extolled as
the perfection of human wisdom.

ATTICUS.
July 29th, 1795.
No. V.
THE ground of regular defense being abandoned by the Jayites, recourse is had
to bush fighting; and we are told, that it is improper and dangerous to deliver
the opinion of an aggregate body on the measures of government. This is
considered as an attempt to dictate to our government, to control its actions,
nay, to awe it into compliance with the popular voice. Whether the popular
voice, in a popular government, ought to dictate public measures, I shall
proceed to consider; and, from this digression, return again to the treaty.

If the propriety or the right of many to give an opinion on public measures is
a questionable thing, the right of an individual must altogether vanish; for
the right or wrong, the propriety or impropriety, in a republican sense, is
proportionate to the many or the few, who deliver an opinion. If a majority is
to direct the public will, then the expression of that majority must be proper
and just; and the nearer the approach to that majority, the stronger the right
to a direction of that will. A nation has the right to will; and this will, in
a legitimate government, can only be expressed by the majority, and ought only
to be operative, when this is ascertained; surely, then, the right is in an
ascending series, from an individual to the majority. If the right of many is
then to be questioned, what will become of the pretensions of an individual?
for it surely will not be contended by a republican, that one man shall have
more consideration and more rights than a number. The majority of the people of
America declared themselves independent of Great Britain; and this was supposed
by them a meritorious and just declaration, and dare not, even now, be
questioned by the aristocrats, but, according to the present doctrine, this was
an unpardonable act; for it was an attack upon the "constituted authorities,"
it was a subversion of the settled order of things. The majority of the people
of the United States, made a constitution for their government; and ^^hinged
the old system of things under the confederation; surely this was an
unjustifiable act; for it was a measure which deranged the constituted
authorities. It the people had a right to throw off their allegiance from Great
Britain, if they had a right to subvert the confederation and establish a
constitution, will their right be questioned to express disapprobation of an
iniquitous law? Dare a question be agitated, whether they have the right to
give an opinion to the constituted authorities, nay, to change the constituted
authorities themselves? Suppose the majority of the people were to declare the
present constitution anti-republican, that it was unfriendly to their
liberties, who would dispute their right to make another? will such ephemerons
as Fenno and Webster oppose such a will, or controvert such a doctrine? Who
will be bold enough to say, that the people have not the right to will their
own happiness, under any form of government, and under what laws they please?
Is our government a purchase in fee simple, or an inheritance, that the people
have no right to interfere in its operations?

Is ours a government of the people, or of the officers of government: If it is
a government of the people, they certainly have the right to say by what rules
they will be regulated; for it is a solecism to say, a man is his own governor,
when he is denied a voice on public measures. If it is a government of the
rulers, then is our system changed, and, instead of a republic, we are in
oligarchy. Although the doctrine which I have been combating, implies that we
are not a government of the people, but that of an oligarchy, will any one, on
that side of the question, come forward and avow the sentiment? Art and design
have too much to do with it to be thus explicit.

To proscribe town meetings, or indeed any other mode of collecting the sense
of the people, is not extraordinary for men who have a point to gain. It is as
easy for them to panegyrize as to condemn, when their purposes can be
accomplished; and, contradictory as this may seem, the fact will appear, by
referring to the Gazette of the United States, or any other paper under the
same influence. When the president's proclamation of neutrality appeared, the
legality and propriety of it were severely arraigned, and, under these
circumstances, it was thought proper to convene town meetings, in many parts of
the states, to approbate the measure. The merchants of Philadelphia had a
meeting, and marched in grave and solemn procession to deliver their address,
in its favor, to the president. If aggregate opinions were not improper, at
that time, by what rule of ratiocination will they be condemned now? Were they
more orderly then than they are now? This certainly will not be alleged; for
there is not an instance upon record, in which a town meeting was conducted
with more order, more decorum, and more harmony, than the late one at the state
house. Perhaps they were composed of a better order of beings at that time;
and, from their superior consideration, legitimized a thing in themselves, that
would have been criminal in others.

When men apply their scaling ladders to the citadel of republicanism itself,
no wonder they should attack its out-posts; for if the citadel is not
consecrated against invasion, its lines cannot expect security. Look into the
Minerva and the Gazette of the United States, and behold republicanism itself
arraigned; what security have we then to expect for an attribute, that is
denied to the being itself! When essays and paragraphs in favor of monarchy can
find a channel to the public eye, we must not be surprised at the more
insidious means of undermining liberty. We well know that government does not
wish an expression of the public sentiment which arraigns the propriety of its
measures; and we cannot doubt that every means will be used, to prevent that
sentiment from converging to a focus; we must, therefore, expect that every
artifice, which cunning and sophistry can suggest, will be employed to confute
and confound. Insulated opinions are treated with indifference; but combined
ones speak to the fears, as well as to the interests of rulers, and command
attention; every means will, therefore, be used to prevent a cooperation in
the people, and hence the proscription of the late town meetings.

From this view of the subject, fellow citizens, I am warranted in the
inference, that town meetings, or any other meetings, in which the sense of the
people can be collected, are republican and proper; and that no one will
dispute their propriety, whose interest is not distinct from that of the whole
people. That they should be proscribed by men who have ambition to gratify, and
other feelings to cherish, is not in the least surprising; for Esau sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage; and Judas sold his master for thirty pieces
of silver.

As argument fails, recourse must be had to other means to make the treaty
acceptable; and hence the proscription of town meetings, the calumnious epithet
of Jacobin and anti-federalist, and the appeals to our fears and to our
affections. Artifices like these, fellow citizens, you will be on your guard
against; they are designed to seduce your understandings and your American
feelings, which must ever rise up in judgment against an instrument, abhorrent
to every true friend of his country.

ATTICUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
The Objections to the Treaty, refuted.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 103.]

No. IV.
THE other part of the 11th reason is more serious, and is "Because it is
stipulated that neither the debts due from individuals of one nation, to
individuals of the other, nor shares, nor moneys, which they may have in the
public funds, or in any public or private banks, shall ever, in any event of
war or national differences, be sequestered or confiscated. It is far from
being impossible, that the exercise of this right may, in the opinion of the
national legislature, contribute to preserve the peace of our country; and
protect the rights and property of the citizens from violation: we therefore
esteem it highly impolitic that the public faith should be pledged that it
shall never be exercised, under any circumstances whatever."

It will not be denied, after some little reflection, by the inhabitants of
Boston, that credit is of the last importance to the people of the United
States. It is that which nurtured our infancy, which now gives spring and
vigor to all our exertions, public and private. Its invigorating effects have
been evidenced in the history of the publie, and of individuals, in such strong
and recent colors, as to leave no doubt that we are indebted to that, for our
rapid advance to wealth and importance. Let the town of Boston be contemplated
with its great and thriving commerce. Is it not mutual confidence, is it not
credit that supports the greatest part? Consider the wealth that is flowing in
upon us from every country, confided to the honor of our merchants, and the
justice of our laws -- Weaken this confidence, wound credit but in the smallest
degree, and you will see a thousand hands, which now labor for their own
emolument, and the public prosperity, palsied in an instant.

There is scarce an individual who would not revolt with horror at the
suggestion, that, because his nation was at war with the nation of his
creditor, he should refuse to pay what was justly due. It is grown into a
maxim, the truth of which is instantly felt, and assented to by every man of
probity, that so far as respects himself, no national differences ought to
weaken the obligations he is under to an individual.

The writer of these remarks firmly believes, that there is not a citizen of
Boston who would declare, he considered himself discharged from the debt, due
by him, because there was a war between his own nation, and that of his
creditor.

Foreign credit is the parent of domestic credit. There is no man, who will
view the extent and importance of the former, but will be convinced, that an
injury to that will annihilate the latter, and with it all the domestic labor
and industry, originating from, and supported by it.

Do the inhabitants suppose that the government would attain any thing by
sequestering or confiscating the debts of individuals? Let them recur to their
own experience of what took place the last war, when individuals were required
to pay into the public treasury what was due to their absent creditors; and
they will be convinced, that instances of compliance were so rare, as to leave
no doubt that f^w were the men who had honesty enough to pay any one, but
pres^^^ed, at great hazards, to pay their creditors.

With respect to money in the public funds, the practice of nations and the
authority of the most eminent writers on public law, has, long since, condemned
the practice of sequestering or confiscating them -- and it is laid down as the
acknowledged law, among all the modern nations, that "a state at war, does not
so much as touch the sums which it owes to the enemy -- Every where, in case of
a war, funds credited to the public, are exempt from confiscation and seizure."
The policy of a conduct, in the United States, less scrupulous in regard to
national faith and honor, may justly be questioned. The baneful effects of war
on the morals of a people, are always lamented as the greatest calamity that
awaits that dreadful pestilence. Can there be any thing more destructive of
that righteousness which exalts a nation, than the example set by a
government, of converting the confidence placed in it, by an unsuspecting
individual, into a trap to deprive him of his property! The principle, adopted
at the fountain head, would soon spread through all the branches, and involve
in deeper distress, the unfortunate victims of war, than all the losses of
quiet and property. War, in its mildest form, is to be deprecated as the
greatest evil. War, thus commenced, would be destructive of private confidence,
and leave us the slav^s of vice and immorality, without character and without
credit. The reason states, that "It is far from being impossible that the
exercise of this right may, in the opinion of the national legislature,
contribute to preserve the peace of our country, and protect the rights and
property of the citizens from violation."

Few men who are actuated by a pure love for their country, would wish to
derive its safety from a conviction in the world, that it has abandoned those
principles of honesty, and regard to public and private farm, which are
commonly practiced among nations.

But supposing there are such, let them remember that our own citizens have
property in other countries -- that the consequence of depriving foreigners of
the confidence now entertained in our laws and government, if they choose to
risque their property in America, will be a payment on our part for every
risque they run -- that means will not be wanting by which their credits may be
secreted from public grasp. Let us go further, and grant that suspicions of war
with this country, could not have guarded men, thus advised of our principles,
from being ensnared -- that we were so sudden in commencing hostili^^es, as to
afford no chance of escape; and to give to this disastrous and disgraceful
warfare, all the effect that could possibly slow from it -- is it probable such
a measure would prevent war, would protect the rights and property of our
citizens from violation? Would not the nation thus injured, immediately make
reprisals, long before we could build ships of war to support this seizure, or
call home our own defenseless property. Let it be remembered, in contemplating
this subject, that the nations of Europe have large sleets; that we are without
any; that our vessels sail unguarded, and unarmed; every moment liable to be
taken, while theirs are, in many instances, protected with military force.

Such a principle, once adopted, temptations to war would be multiplied to a
nation whose interest is concerned in the cultivation of peace. War must be
carried on by credit, either borrowing at home or abroad. The current revenues
of no country are sufficient to meet the expenses of war. In proportion to our
credit, or want of it, must we pay for the means of fighting our enemy. There
can be no doubt but a war undertaken with such an opposition to the received
maxims of public faith, would be attended with difficulties and expenses in the
procuring of money, that would infinitely outweight any amount of property thus
sequestered or confiscated. As little doubt can there be, that at the making of
peace we should be willing to contract for the payment of property thus
detained.

It may be fairly inferred, that no such right, as the town contemplates,
exists, according to the law of nations -- that if such right did exist, it
could in no case be expedient to exercise it. But that the insertion of such an
article in a treaty, should be an objection to its ratification, speaks a
language, which, it is sincerely hoped, the town, on more nature reflection,
will completely discard.

The reverse of the position is more true, viz. That a conviction on the mind
of all foreigners, that the United States would in no instance, touch the
credits or property of aliens, confided either to their private citizens or the
public says, would contribute to preserve the peace of our country, and
protect the rights and properties of the citizens from violation. The more and
absol^tely certain this was made to foreigners, with the more confidence would
they place their moneys and other property in our country. Beside the
beneficial effects derived from this credit, is case of any national difference
or misunderstanding, there would be a large and influential part of the foreign
community deeply interested in preserving the peace of America; in protecting
from violation the rights and property (...) as it was called. Thus much is
certain, that Russia, who was the most potent of the league, is now in close
alliance with Britain, and, of course, would not promote the system she adopted
the last war.

We have conceded no new rights; we have not surrendered any principles
advantageous to ourselves. The law stands precisely as it did before the
treaty; and it is not probable, that the United States had any boon to offer,
which could induce Britain to invert the rule, as now acknowledged by nations.
When it is considered, that she is at war, and we at peace -- and that she
appears to found her greatest hope of success against her enemies on her naval
strength, it should also be remembered, that though France expressly
stipulated, in her treaty with the United States, that the goods of her
enemies, on board our vessels, should be free, yet, in many instances, she has
chosen to swerve from this stipulation, and capture and confiscate the property
of her enemy on board our ships.

The words of the reason, that the treaty "precludes the hope of receiving any
advantage," etc. (if the principle before mentioned is what the town alludes
to) extend further than is warranted by the treaty; for, in that instruments,
there is the following stipulation -- "The said parties will also renew their
discussion, and endeavor to agree, whether in any, and in what cases, neutral
vessels shall protect enemies' property." It can hardly be said, that a treaty
"precludes all hope" of a benefit, when the parties have expressly contracted
to renew a discussion thereon, and endeavor to agree in what cases it shall be
made.

The 16th reason is, "Because it not only surrenders the right of carrying the
property of any nation at war with Great Britain, in our vessels freely, but
abandons all pretensions even to the freight."

It has been shown, in the remarks on the 15th reason, that we have no right,
by the law of nations, to carry the property of a nation at war with Great
Britain, free from seizure. If, therefore, the treaty expressly recognizes the
principle, that enemy's property is liable to confiscation, though on board the
vessel of a friend, it does no more than the government has done before. It
surrenders no right; for no right thus to protect enemics' goods, exists
between us and Great Britain.

The reason further states, "That the treaty abandons all pretensions even to
freight."

The writer of these remarks has looked, with attention, through the treaty, to
find the clause on which this assertion is made; he can really find none that
will support it. "Effects belonging to an enemy, found on board a neutral ship,
are seizable by the rights of war; but, by the law of nature, the master is to
be paid his freight, and not to suffer by the seizure." There is nothing in the
treaty to controvert this principle, declared by Vattel. It cannot be doubted,
that in all cases, where, prior to the ratification of the treaty, freight is
payable for goods of an enemy to Britain, found on board of an American vessel,
the same will be equally payable, when the treaty is ratified, if that event
should take place. For there is nothing in the treaty, that can imply a
relinquishment of our rights, by the law of nations, much less an abandonment
of all pretensions to freight, in such cases. In the latter part of the 17th
article of the treaty, there is an express agreement to pay freight, where, by
law, it could not be demanded.

The 17th reason is, "Because it permits the British nation to convert
provisions, destined to other nations at war with them, to their own use, on
payment of what they may deem a reasonable profit; a measure not only injurious
to the interests of the American merchant, but which will prevent our citizens
from carrying those supplies to other countries, which, by the laws of nature
and nations, they have a right to do, without molestation."

It is presumed, that the town, in this reason, refers to the 17th article of
the treaty. An examination of that article will show, that the town has
mistaken its import; and that, instead of surrendering a right, it acquires
one, to which we are not entitled, unless the treaty is ratified. All writers
on the law of nations agree, that there are cases, in which provisions are
contraband; though it would seem, by the generality of the expressions of the
town, in the last paragraph of this reason, that there is a right to carry
supplies, in all cases, without molestation. It can hardly be believed, that
this was the meaning of the town; yet, if any should think thus, they may have
the consolation to reflect, that there is nothing in this treaty, that prevents
an endeavor to support such a proposition -- the words being, "where, by the
existing law of nations, they are contraband." Now, if there is no case, where,
by the law of nations, they are contraband, then there is no right to seize
them under that article.

The article in the treaty, states, "That whereas the difficulty of agreeing on
the precise cases, in which alone, provisions and other articles, not generally
contraband, may be regarded as such, renders it expedient to provide against
the inconveniences and misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is
further agreed, that whenever any such article, so becoming contraband,
according to the existing law of nations, shall for that reason be seized, the
same shall not be confiscated, but the owners thereof shall be speedily and
completely indemnified; and the captors, or, in their default, the government
under whose authority they act, shall pay the full value of all articles, with
a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the freight, and also the
demurrage incident to such detention." Hence it is clear, that the treaty does
not give any new right to the British nation; it does not permit the taking
provisions, etc. in any case where she is not authorized by the law of nations
-- it permits the taking them only where, by the existing law of nations, they
are contraband. Here is no cause of complaint. -- The other part of the article
is a positive advantage to the nation at peace; for it expressly contracts to
pay for such provisions, where, by law, the nation seizing them would be under
no obligation to pay, viz. in cases, where, by the existing law of nations,
they are contraband; and in no other case are they seizable by treaty. The
article goes further; it not only stipulates for payment, but for complete and
speedy indemnification, reasonable profits, freight and demurrage, and that the
government shall pay, if the individual captors shall sail. It is injurious to
the interest of the American merchant, that, in cases where his property is, by
the law of nations, justly forfeited, the treaty secures to him full and
complete indemnification, payment with profit, freight and demurrage? Will our
citizens be prevented from carrying supplies to other countries, because the
hazards are lessened -- because, in every event, they are sure of making a good
voyage? Surely the answers will contradict the reasons of the town.

The 18th reason given by the town, is, "Because it limits the power of
congress, delegated to them by the constitution, to regulate our commerce with
foreign nations, by prescribing conditions, and creating impediments to the
exercise of that power."

The constitution, in the distribution of powers, as completely vests the
powers delegated to the president and senate, as it vests those it delegates to
congress. The president has power, by and with the advice and consent of the
senate, to make treaties; when, therefore, he thus makes a treaty, it is as
much an act of the whole people of the United States, as any law of congress.
Is he limited as to the kind of trea^^^ he shall make? There is no limitation
in the constitution. But then it is said, "Congress has a right to regulate
commerce with foreign nations; and, as this treaty regulates commerce with a
foreign nation, it limits the power of congress;" and suppose it does, if it is
a constitutional act, the limitation is as legal, as though the constitution
had declared in express terms, that congress should have a right to regulate
commerce, where it was not otherwise regulated by treaty. Perhaps it may be
said, that the constitution intended such treaties, as did not interfere with
the powers delegated to congress. The inference, from this construction, would
be, that no commercial treaty could ever be made; and, looking at the powers of
congress, it will be doubtful if any other treaty can be made, or if the United
States can make any treaty -- for congress has no power to make a treaty -- and
if the president, who, with the advice and consent of the senate, is alone
authorized to make treaties, can make no treaty, which respects any of the
powers, vested in congress, there is no man or body of men authorized to treat
with foreign nations.

Treaties, generally speaking, are mere treaties of peace, or treaties of
commerce; congress has power to make war, grant letters of marque and reprisal.
If the president with consent of the senate, makes a treaty of peace, according
to the reasoning of the town, he limits the power of congress, which has
authority to make war, and in the treaty spoken of there is a stipulation, that
there shall be a firm and inviolable peace between the parties -- It is equally
objectionable on this ground, as on that of regulating commerce. If the United
States should be at war with any nation, on such construction, they must remain
eternally at war -- congress has declared war -- has done an act which that
body alone had a right to do; the president, by making peace, does not barely
limit a power to act; but does that which is in direct violation of an act
constitutionally done by congress, and operates as an absolute repeal of their
declaration of war. Such a construction of the constitution is not to be
admitted.

We ought never to admit a construction of any instrument, which leads to an
absurdity, or to the destruction of any part; we ought to reconcile all parts
thereof, if possible, so that every portion of it may take effect, and no word
but what may operate in some shape or other. Let us endeavor to construe this
instrument by these rules: -- The president, with the advice and consent of the
senate, makes a treaty of peace with a nation, with whom the United States are
at war. He has done an act which he thought wise; the next or the same day,
congress receives such information, as, in their opinion, renders it expedient
to declare war. This militates with what was done; but it by no means follows
that either was wrong; or that the constitutional power of either was limited
by their constitutional acts. Both have exercised that power which each had a
right to exercise. The state of war was complete until the president made
peace; and the state of peace, the true and legal state, until congress
declared war, which repealed the doings of the president.

In a treaty of commerce, it is contracted, that duties shall be no higher than
at present. Afterward congress chooses to impose higher duties, and actually
does impose higher than is stipulated in the treaty. The treaty is contravened,
and the nation must abide the good or evil consequences that flow from the
measure, in like manner as it would, if congress should choose to declare war,
and annul an article which declares, there shall be a perpetual peace, as is
the case in some treaties. If this construction is right, there can be no
limitation, even in terms, of the power of congress, especially when it is
recollected, that a bare majority of both houses, with the president, is
sufficient to pass a law, while two-thirds of the senate is necessary to make a
treaty. But suppose any doubt this construction, and in the case of an
imposition of higher duties than is stipulated by the treaty, the party,
considering himself injured by the law, refuses to pay; a suit is commenced,
and the cause, in the last instance, is decided by the supreme judicial court,
who are authorized to determine whether such an act be, or not, conformable to
the constitution. If the act of congress is determined to be unconstitutional,
the treaty could not be called a limitation of the power vested in them by the
constitution; since it appears that the constitution did not vest in congress a
power to make such act. Therefore, in no case, can the treaty be called a "a
limitation of the power of congress, delegated is them by the constitution."

The foregoing has been attempted to obviate the objection of the town as
stated, and to show that there can, neither in fact nor terms, be any
limitation to the powers vested in congress -- In the opinion of this writer,
there is a short, but equally satisfactory answer to those who fear a real
interference in the departments of government, from the wording of the
constitution. -- The people of the United States were well aware, that there
were two modes of regulating commerce -- one by treaty, where nations are
disposed to treat on terms beneficial to each other; the other, where nations
are unwilling thus to treat, by laws constitutionally made. -- Under this
impression they framed their constitution. -- If nations are unwilling to treat
with the United States on the rights of commerce, or we are unwilling to treat
with them, congress is the constitutional body to make laws, regulating the
commerce between them and us. -- If nations are willing to treat on their and
our commercial relations commercial nations, all of whom will probably regulate
our trade by this partial standard."

It may be answered, that we are under no obligation to make other treaties,
because we have made this; and if, in the course of two years, from a cessation
of the war in which Great Britain is now engaged, it should appear to be
injurious to us, we can drop all its load of commercial burdens, and
embarrassments. -- It might have been well in the town to have stated the
peculiar embarrassments the treaty imposes upon us, and which are to be avoided
by its destruction. It surrenders no rights we now enjoy, but grants some we
had not before, and renders absolute what was before precarious. Our other
treaties admit us to trade in Europe, as the most favored nations. The treaty
with Great Britain does the same. It also admits us into their East India
settlements, and their colonies on the continent of North America, to trade
with them on terms highly favorable to our commerce. No other nation has
granted to us like advantages. The treaty with France admits us into certain
free ports in the West Indies, under regulations not mentioned in the treaty,
but varying according to the will of the ruling power.

The last reason, is, "Because, in the opinion of the inhabitants of this town,
the nature and extent of the exports of the United States are such, that in all
their stipulations with foreign nations, they have it in their power to secure
a perfect reciprocity of intercourse, not only with the home dominions of such
nations, but with all their colonial dependencies."

It is not wonderful, that the town of Boston should violently oppose the
treaty, if such be their opinion; but then they should equally wish for the
annulling of all the existing treaties. -- Restrictions and regulations should
be imposed on all foreign commerce, till those treaties are destroyed, or such
trade can be obtained. But as the town has not chosen to give their reasons for
this opinion, it is not impossible the president may trust to the experience of
the United States, from the treaties already made, and his own knowledge of the
temper of foreign powers on this subject, rather than to the opinion of the
town of Boston, however respectable.

A FEDERALIST.

No. V.
THE first number of the Constitutionalist, in answer to the Federalist,
expresses his fears of the danger that may arise, from the smallest branch of
the legislature possessing a power to make treaties, independent of the larger.
This remark is aimed against the constitution, that if it has no other effect,
it may prepare the mind of the reader for his construction: which, if true,
will be a death blow to the treaty, and end all contest on account of its
expediency. The town, on being convinced of this, may remain quiet and
undisturbed; for if made by people who have no power, it can never be a law --
it, is a mere dead letter.

After quoting various passages of the constitution, which describes the powers
of congress, he considers it as clear, that no treaty can be made, in which the
organ authorized, by the constitution, to make treaties, shall exercise any of,
those powers. The constitution would, according to this writer, read thus --
The president, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall have
power to make treaties, provided two thirds of the senate concur; and provided
always, that such treaties do not relate to peace or war, that they do not
regulate commerce with foreign nations -- and that they do not provide for the
common defense, and general welfare of the United States.

It would be strange, if the people of America had made such a constitution, as
prevented them from any negotiation with foreign powers -- on such
construction, this would be the case. The president and senate are the only
body empowered to make treatin^; and, according to this reasoning, their power
is so restrained, that it can never be exercised on such subjects, as nations
treat upon. The mere stating the consequences of such construction, is
sufficient to show its absurdity; and to convince any reasonable man, that it
originated in no regard to the constitution.

Does it follow, because the constitution vests a power in two bodies to do an
act, that the exercise of such power by either will be wrong? If by either,
then both -- and the power is void. If commerce cannot be regulated by treaty
with foreign nations, because a power to regulate commerce is given to
congress; then congress cannot regulate commerce, because the president and
senate have power to make treaties, in which is undoubtedly included a power to
regulate commerce with foreign nations.

The people of the United States, as has been elsewhere remarked, willing to
provide for the two common methods of regulating commerce, viz. by legislative
acts, and by treaties, appointed congress to make laws where those were
necessary; and the president, with consent of the senate, to make treaties
where that method was attainable, and thought most beneficial. The power,
vested in this latter organ of the people, is as full and complete, as that of
making laws in the ordinary mode of legislation, is in the other.

The wisdom and caution of the people, is, in no instance-more signally
displayed than in thus vesting a power to make treaties. Promptitude in seizing
the fittest occasion, secrecy and dispatch, are often necessary in the forming
of treaties. Such qualifications are not be found in large bodies. Hence the
wisdom of vesting a power of negotiation in the president. To avoid too great
haste, imprudence, or want of knowledge, which might arise from an individual,
the people appointed the senate (two-thirds of which must concur) to weigh and
discus^ the merits of a treaty, and sanction it with their approbation, before
the president can render it obligatory on the United. States.

When it is considered, that the senate will ever be composed of some, who have
been of that department, nearly six year^, at least, their knowledge of the
laws of the United States, of its foreign and domestic relations, of the state
of its commerce, and what regulations will most advance its prosperity, cannot
be questioned. These qualifications render that body pre-eminently sit for the
duty of advising the president, in his negociations, with foreign powers. The
secrecy used in such affairs, and which is so bitterly exclaimed against by
this writer, is indispensably necessary to the safety and prosperity of the
people. It avoids the violent opposition, which arises from the influence and
intrigue of foreigners, or of those who prefer the interest of a foreign nation
to the interest of their own. The people appointed the president and senate to
regulate their affairs with foreign nations, and neither directed, nor
authorized them to take the advice of any man or body of men. To have
communicated their transactions while in train, would have been to hazard the
interest of the people; and such a breach of trust as to have justly exposed
themselves to the severe reprehension of those for whom they acted.

Under the confederation, the powers of congress were not greater on this
subject, than those of the president and senate, under the present
constitution. Congress then made treaties of alliance and commerce. The
treaties were discussed, and ratified in secret. If it had been otherwise, the
peace, happiness, and independence of the country might have been greatly
endangered. Does any one believe, that the court of France would have
negociated with our ministers, if they had supposed the negotiation would
instantly be made public -- and that after a treaty was formed, instead of
being discussed in congress, it was to combat all the assaults of foreign
influence in the cities of America?

It is highly probable, that had it not been for the secrecy, as well as the
consummate skill and firmness of Mr. Jay and Mr. Adams, foreign influence would
have prevented the explicit acknowledgment of our independence by Great
Britain, and our right to the fisheries.

In the important treaties, negociated and ratified under the confederation,
there never was a lisp against them, because they were transacted in secret.
The people knew that their rights depended on this mode of conducting such
business; and no one was hardy enough, then, to interfere with the essential
rights of the people. Let those who clamor at the president and senate for
doing the business entrusted to them, in the manner which the experience of all
nations, especially of the United States, has stamped as alone safe and wise,
show that foreign influence and domestic intrigue is less to be apprehended now
than formerly -- that the people's rights will be better conducted by them,
than by those whom the people have chosen.

The objection to the treaty, because the president and senate had no power to
make such, will appear still more extraordinary, when it is remembered that the
whole ground of bringing forward the commercial resolutions, by Mr. Madison,
the winter before last -- of their recommendation by Mr. Jefferson, then
secretary of state, was to induce Great Britain to make a treaty with the
United States. The resolutions were to apply only to nations, who had no
commercial treaty with the United States; and they were supported against Great
Britain, because it was said she would make no treaty with us. Both parties
then agreed, that if commerce was regulated by treaty, it was out of their
power; and the supporters of the resolutions advocated them, on the probability
of their forcing Great Britain to regulate commerce by treaty. But if they had
been blessed with half the logic of the Constitutionalist, they would have seen
that it was wrong and insi^^^ous in the president, to have directed Mr,
Jefferson to write to Mr. Hammond, demanding "if he was authorized to conclude
or negociate arrangements with us, which might six the commerce between the two
countries, on principles of reciprocal advantage" -- in Mr. Jefferson, to have
made "proposals of friendly arrangement to Great Britain, on the subject of
commerce" -- and because of that government's unwillingness to enter into such
arrangements with the executive, to have proposed to congress, to commence a
system of prohibitions, duties and regulations, to produce what he thought
might be better done by treaty. The house of representatives (whom this writer
seems to have mistaken for congress, speaking of the senate's consenting to a
ratification of the treaty, he says, "assumes powers constitutionally vested in
the house of representatives") instead of debating whether or not it was the
intention of the British nation, to treat with us on commerce, should have
addressed the executive on the insidious conduct of demanding powers from a
man, authorizing him to treat, and proposing to him to negociate on subjects,
on which they themselves were not authorized to treat.

A particular objection is made to the 6th article of the instrument, because
it stipulates for the payment of certain British debts; to execute which
stipulation, it will be indispensably necessary to lay and collect taxes,
duties, imposts, or excises. -- It is doubtless true, that congress must lay
and collect taxes to make this payment, if the treaty is ratified. The
president and senate have done what they thought just and right; and it remains
for congress to do what is necessary on their part, to fulfill the engagements
of the United States. -- "Congress is to pay the debts, and provide for the
general welfare of the United States." And no good man can doubt, but that body
will do what their duty directs. It is true, congress may refuse to do this --
so they might refuse to pass any laws; but it is not a supposeable case. The
constitution is framed on the idea that every part of the government will do
that, which it is authorized to do for the public good. What is to become of
our unhappy fellow citizens in Algiers, if the doctrine advanced here is true?
Congress cannot make a treaty for their redemption; because congress cannot
make any treaty. The president can make none for their redemption; because he
must incur a debt to the United States, and to pay that debt, it may be
indispensably necessary to lay and collect taxes. What a nerveless arm do these
people give to the constitution! Under a pretense of supporting it, they
destroy the power of the nation, and the liberties of their fellow citizens.

The Constitutionalist says, the Federalist was incorrect in his statement of
the occurrences of the meeting; but does not even hint in what he was
incorrect, unless it be in the statement made of the publication of the treaty
prior to the meeting. The Federalist, after stating the publication of the
treaty, in Boston, as allowed to be true by the Constitutionalist, says, the
foregoing was the only publication of the treaty, prior to the meeting of the
inhabitants on the 10th, except a publication of its supposed contents, by some
one who read it: and which, on comparison with Mr. Mason's copy, appears to be
incorrect. The Constitutionalist says, "The inhabitants of this town, through
the medium of several newspapers, had read nearly a counterpart, in substance,
of the treaty, before the arrival of the express from Philadelphia, with Mr.
Mason's copy." The only incorrectness, charged against the Federalist, is, in
saying, that this counterpart in substance, as it is called, was incorrect.
Some of the reasons, on which he said this was incorrect, are as follows, viz.
-- In the 7th article, as stated in this counterpart, it says, "By this the
United States are to refund the value of English prizes taken in our waters, or
by privateers fitted out in our ports." In the copy of Mr. Mason, it is not so.
The United States are to refund only in such cases, where they forbore to use
all the means in their power to obtain restitution. In the counterpart, as it
is called, 9th article -- "The subjects and citizens of the contracting parties
shall hold real estate in each others territories, with the same advantages as
the citizens and subjects of the respective states." This is grossly wrong, and
well known to have caused much of the zeal excited against the treaty. In the
treaty, the holding of lands is limited merely to those who now hold lands,
their heirs and assigns. In the 13th article of this supposed counterpart, it
is said, that we can carry nothing that we export from the East Indies, to any
country but the United States, and that we cannot partake of the India carrying
trade. This was an article that gave more umbrage to the inhabitants of Boston
than any other.

By inspecting Mr. Mason's copy, it appears, that the goods exported from East
India are to be carried to America; that we have an express stipulation for a
direct trade to and from India; that we are perfectly free to export from
America, to any part of the world, the goods we import from India; that the
coasting trade, and the trade from India to other parts of the world, rest on
precisely the same sooting as they did before, except that which is stipulated
in another article, that they will not refuse to us any privileges in the trade
which they may grant to other nations.

In this counterpart, it is stated, under the 13th article, "As it is difficult
to determine the cases in which provisions carried to an enemy are contraband;
to avoid dispu^e; in these cases, should such provisions be seized, the owners
shall be paid for them, also their freight, etc. and a reasonable mercantile
pro^^^."

By an examination of the article in Mr. Mason's copy, it appears, that
provisions are never to be seized, but in cases where, by the existing law of
nations, they are contraband, and even then they are paid for. In the one case,
it was a manifest giving up of rights, now enjoyed, of carrying provisions;
while, by the accurate copy, it is a clear and decided advantage to our
citizens: stipulating for payment of freight, profit, and demurrage, in cases
where, by the law of nations, we had forfeited all claim to any thing. Can it
be said that the Federalist was wrong in stating, that this counterpart was
incorrect?

It is conceded by the Constitutionalist, th^^ this counterpart was what the
inhabitants of the town had read and consulted, previous to their meeting, and
that the preparatory steps to the town meeting were totally unconnected with
Mr. Mason's copy of the treaty -- This confirms what the Federalist had
suggested, and sully accounts for the warmth that was so visible against the
treaty. If, preparatory to the meeting, the real copy had been read and
consulted on, there is little reason to doubt, that a majority of the
inhabitants would have been well satisfied with it, -- The Constitutionalist
need not discover his anger, at an imputation, that Mr. Bache excited the
patriotism of the petitioners for the town meeting. It was not even hinted by
the Federalist. They are perfectly welcome to the whole merit of the thing and
to the reputation of their spirited resentment against the treaty, before they
had reed i^; as the Constitutionalist declares, that some days before the
arrival of Mr. Mason's copy, they had drawn their petition for a town meeting.

The Constitutionalist says, the committee could not know what the two
ministers, while in the act of forming the treaty, brought into consideration;
and, therefore, could not have intended, in the objection, the assertion with
which the Federalist charges them. The Federalist did not charge the committee
with knowing what the two ministers brought into consideration -- He says, they
assumed a fact for which they did not choose to give any evidence. He gave in
his opinion, that they did not know; if they did, it would have been stated as
the. Federalist presumes.

The Federalist then concluded, that the committee meant, by the words, brought
into consideration, that they were not the subject of negotiation; that such is
certainly the natural meaning of the terms; and it was evidently the design of
the committee then; because they go on and state, as objections to the treaty
itself, their complaints not being provided for; and nobody could be so
uncandid as to believe, th^^ they endeavored to stretch their objections into
many articles, intending the same thing, until the explanation made by the
Constitutionalist. He now says, that all the evidence the committee had, on
this subject, is derived from these complaints and pretensions not being
mentioned in the treaty itself. Then they ma^^ two charges on the same subject:
1st. We object to the weary, because our complaints have not been considered,
by which we mean, provided for and allowed; for the Canstitutionalist says, the
committee did not know what passed in the negotiation; and 2dly, We object to
the treaty, because our conplaints are not provided for and allowed; or else
the charge is, that the consideration did not appear in the treaty, that it,
that the whole negotiation old not make a part of the treaty -- this last would
be (...) absurd to impute to any body.

Until the Constitutionalist had stated, that the and objection was not of a
sufficient weight to prevent the ratification of the treaty, it was really
supposed, that the town meant each of their reasons as a support of their
general charge against the treaty, for being derogatory to national honor, etc.
etc. but a se^s now, that the second objection was only part of a ^^^son,
whether half a reason, a 10th or 20th pars of a reason, we are not informed --
possibly the 20th p^^^; the whole (...) objections forming one reason
sufficiently important to prevent ratification; if this be the ease, and the
smallest part fails, the objection to its ratification falls. It is said, that
the British debts are to be pat in one scale, and the damages for deten^^^ of
posts in the other; but it seems this would not keep (...) beam even; for Mr.
Madison states, that the an^^^^ loss by detention of posts, amounts to one
million two hundred thousand dollars, making more than fourteen millions of
dollars; now it is presumed, that this would more than balance the unpaid debts
-- and the clamor would have been equally great against Mr. Jay and the
senate, if a stipulation had not been made for payment of the whole; for it is
not to be believed, that men who feel so much more keenly for the public
interest than those whom the people have appointed to guard and protect them,
would have quietly given up fourteen millions of dollars, for one million. In
answer to an observation made by the Federalist, that damages for detention of
territories were rarely, if ever given, after long and expensive wars,
terminating in favor of the party dispossessed; it is said, that such is the
magnanimity of conquering nations, that they are willing to take the territory
demanded, without insisting on any damages. This is a new history of the
politics of nations, as well as the feelings of the human heart. Whether true
or not, if such would be the issue of a contest for the posts, as seems
conceded by the Constitutionalist, it will certainly be considered wise by the
people of America, that the minister was willing to take the posts now, without
damages for detention, rather than involve his country in war, to obtain them
and damages, when even those, who oppose the treaty on this ground, think the
issue of a war, would, if we were conque^^^s, give or no more than we now have
with peace, and without expense.

A FEDERALIST.

No. VI.
THE Federalist, in his remarks on the third reason of the town, did not mean
to state the reasoning of the British, on the 7th article of the treaty of
1783, as in his opinion, conclusive against the demand of the American
minister, for the value of negroes embarked from New York, and supposed
formerly to have been the property of Americans. In those observations he gave
no opinion. The weight of the reply by the British minister, must ever depend
on its own intrinsic merit -- and every candid American will give to it, all
due force. The Federalist stated, that, under such circumstances, it was not
supposeable, the British nation would recede from their construction. If that
was to be presumed, the agent for America ought not to have adhered to his, as
a point indispenfible; because, by breaking off all negotiation on that
account, be gave up the forts; he gave up all indemnification for our property
captured on the ocean, and also the commercial advantages of the treaty.

The merchants of Massachusetts will consider, if they are willing to surrender
all claim to their property captured by the British -- to saddle themselves
with an Indian war, at the annual expense of a million of dollars, in a vain
attempt, to gain, by force, indemnity for a few slaves, once the property of
their southern brethren.

The Constitutionalist says, "That after a communication of the treaty to the
British general, every species of the property of the American inhabitants,
ought to have been held sacred; yet, in the succeeding month, a large number of
negroes did embark for the British provinces." It may be true, that a number of
negroes did embark for the British provinces; but it by no means follows they
were American property.

It is agreed, that all the negroes which were embarked, were found in New
York, by Sir Guy Carl^ton, and that he arrived there during the war. It is not
pretended, that any negroes were taken from their proper masters, or from any
parts of the United States, under the control of the American government after
the receipt of the treaty, by the British generals. Those negroes were either
property, or they were free people. (...) property, they were as liable to be
lost and acquired by the rights of war, as any other property. It is not
disputed, that the negroes which embarked from New York, were either captured
in war, or invited by a proclamation, declaring they should be free on
acceptance of the terms therein proffered. Had the southern gentlemen any more
right, under the treaty of 1783, to claim negroes of the first class, than the
New England men, their vessels, or other goods, taken during the war? They were
both equally property in the view of a so^^^ern merchant. Human^n flesh,
provided it is black, and a ship, are held in the same light by slave-holders,
differing only as (...) their value in the market. -- If captured during war,
wa^ not the propeaty completely changed? It was in a vessel; why not then
equally so with a slave, which was as much property as a vessel? The
Constitutionalist is desired to point out the di^^^ence if there be any.

The other class was composed of such, as induced by the British proclamation,
had left their masters, and withdrawn themselves into the British lines. It
will not be denied, that this is a rightful mode of depriving an enemy of
property. After they had arrived within the British lines, it will not be
contended, that the British could deliver them up, without a manifest breach of
faith. They had ceased to be American property, as much as a vessel that had
drifted from a port in the United States, into a port of the British. Had then
the southern citizens any more claim for these negroes, than the New England
men for their vessels, drifted from their own, into the port of their enemy?
The same reasoning applies to both, and appears just.

Such has been said to be the reasoning of the British minister in answer to
Mr. Jay's repeated applications on this subject. Before Mr. Jay is blamed for
not obtaining payment for the negroes, or the senate for consenting to the
treaty, though silent on this subject, those who affect to say that the treaty
should not be ratified unless compensation is made, ought to give it a
satisfactory answer.

But it is said, that Sir Guy Carleton was charged by General Washington, with
having violated the treaty, in suffering the embarkation of negroes; that he
acknowledged the truth of the charge, by his precautions in ascertaining the
number, and thereby gave an indirect opinion that restitution should be made
for them. The mere ascertaining the number cannot support this construction. It
is equal evidence, that, in his opinion, no claim for restitution could be
maintained. Could h^, a^ an officer of the British crown, consistently with any
of the principles on which men generally act, violate the treaty, and, at the
same moment, give to the complaining party, evidence of the violation, when
fully within his power to have refused it? It is not presumeable. Examine the
words of his letter; and it will appear that he did not admit the possibility
of a British minister having made a treaty, that bears such a construction.
They are as follow, viz. "The negroes in question, I have already said, I found
free when I arrived at New York; I had therefore no right, as I thought, to
prevent their going to any part of the world they thought proper.

"I must confess, that the m^ve supposition, that this King's minister could
deliberately stipulate in a treaty, an ^^g^gement to be guilty of a notorious
brea^^ of the public faith, toward people of any complexion, seems to denote a
l^^s friendly disposition than I could wish, and I think less friendly than we
might expect. After all, I only give my opinion. Every negro's name is
registered, the master he formerly belonged (...), with such other
circumstances as serve to denote his value, that it may be adjusted by
compensation, if that was really (...) intention, and meaning of the treaty.
Restoration, where inseparable from a breach of public says, is, as the world,
I think, must allow, utterly impracticable."

The commissioners appointed by General Washington, to superintend the
embarkation from New York, and see that no American property was carried away,
at the close of the business, make report to him of their doings, wherein they
say: "Sir Guy Carleton affected to distinguish between the cases of such
negroes as came within the British lines, in consequence of the promises of
freedom and indemnity, held out in the proclamations of his predecessors, and
such as came in, either previous to the proclamations, or subsequent to the
cessation of hostilities. Negroes of the first description he supposed not
included in the treaty, as the public faith had, prior to the treaty, been
ple^^ed to th^^ for their security against the claims of their former masters."

The Constitutionalist wishes to have it believed, that among 3000 negroes,
there were none sick, none so young or so old, as to be of little value; that
they were all prime slaves; and that free negroes were so enraptured with this
land of liberty (where, to be sure, such people are held as slaves) that they
would not go with those, who acknowledge them free, and where the laws would
protect them with equal security, as in America; and that, under a military
government, those who were really slaves, could not be compelled to go with
their proper masters. On these, and his observations on the value of so many
thousand human beings, the Federalist need make (...) remark. The
Constitutionalist much under-rates the understandings of the Americans, if he
supposes that any advantage can be derived to his arguments, from such attempts
at imposition.

The (...) question before the public is -- wo^^^d the British ^^tion ^c^^ds
(...) a construction that destroyed their public faith? It is not probable they
would. What then was the wi^est ^^^p to be (...) on the part of America? To
accept the treaty thus; or, in order to establish a construction, to say the
(...), doub^^^l, give up all hopes of obtaining the po^ts p^^^^ably, s^cri^^^^
our navigation, now ^^^^ting unprotected, and i^^^^^ly abandon our c^ti^e^s,
whose property has been captured on the oc^^^. No man can doubt but that to
undertake a was, for such a purpose, would be the height of madness; that
nothing but l^^^ and disgrace could follow it. To give to this objection all
the consequence that is attempted, betrays extreme thoug^^^^^^ness, if nothing
worse -- Beside sacrificing all that (...) gai^^ by treaty, it would be
wantonly sporting with the treasure and li^es of Americans, for an object of
dubious right, trivial i^ its value, and confessedly unattainable.

The Constitutionalist mistakes, if he thinks the Federalist stated that any
treaty between the kings of Great Britain and Prussia had regulated the law of
nations in that particular case -- He stated, that the king of Prussia, in
1753, complained that the property of his subjects had been unlawfully seized
on the high seas by British subjects, and condemned -- That the answer by the
British court was, that all captures at sea were tried by admiralty courts, and
that this was the immemorial custom of Europe. The Constitutionalist says, that
this doctrine, though just, does not apply to our cases; that they are not
similar.

Of what do the United States complain? of unlawful captures at sea; of what
did the king of Prussia complain? of unlawful captures at sea. -- The United
States and Prussia were respectively at peace, when the captures were made, and
Britain at war. What was the doctrine stated, and acknowledged true by the
Constitutionalist? "That by courts of admiralty, acting according to the law of
nations, and particular treaties, all captures at sea now are, and have been
immemorially judged of, in every country of Europe, and submitted to by neutral
powers, and that any other method of trial would be manifestly unjust, absurd,
and impracticable." This he agrees to be according to the usage of nations --
He is desired to point out the distinguishing mark in property claimed by the
American merchants, as captured from them by the British, which is not included
in the terms all capture^ at sea. He is desired likewise to show wherein the
doctrine ^^id down by Mr. Jefferson ^^es not apply.

In a treaty of peace, made in 1763, between the king of Great Britain, the
king of France, and the king of Spain, it is expressly stipulated, that "the
d^^ision of the (...) in time of peace, by the subjects of Great Britain, on
the Spaniards, shall be referred (...) ^^rts of justice of the admiralty of
Great Britain, conformably to the ^^^es (...) among all nations; so that the
validity of the ^^id p^i^^s, between the British and Spanish nations, shall be
decided and j^^^ged, according to the law of nations, and according to (...),
in the courts of justice of the nation who shall have (...) the capture."

In the treaty of peace made between France and Great Britain in 1783, it is
stipulated, that the decision of the pri^^^ and seizures made prior to the
hostilities, shall be referred (...) the respective courts of justice: so that
the legality of the said prizes and seizures be decided according to the laws
of nations, and to treaties, in the courts of justice of the nation which shall
have made the capture, or ordered the seizure.

Thus we see, that after long and expensive war^ by the most powerful nations
on the globe, this mode of trial and obtaining compensation for seizures made
in time of peace, was considered right, and acquiesced in. It is not,
therefore, probable, that after immense expense of blood and treasure in a war
with England, if successful, we should obtain better terms. Is it not wise,
then, to accept that with peace, which, in the most prosperous event of a war,
would be all we could expect to gain?

He attempts to derive force to the reason of the town by saying that the
United States have agreed to a more summary mode of trial of the British
claims; and as an equivalent, they should have granted a like mode. A little
attention to the causes of complaint on the part of the British, will show,
that a determination by commission will only take place, where it is impossible
for the ordinary course of judicial proceedings to reach the evil. -- First,
The British debts due in 1783. The treaty authorizes commissioners to take
cognizance only of such debts as where, by the operation of various
impediments, created by law, British creditors have been prevented from
obtaining justice, and where judicial courts connot now procure them
compensation. If they can obtain justice in the courts of law, they are obliged
to resort there. The commissioners cannot sustain their complaints. It
establishes this summary mode to compensate for losses, occasioned by our not
permitting British creditors to have the advantage of the laws of the land,
which was expressly stipulated in the treaty of peace. For redress of our
complaints, the courts are open, and what we cannot obtain in this way, shall
be made up to us by commissioners. Surely it will not be said, that we have
agreed to a more summary mode of trial for British complaints, than they have
for American complaints.

The other ground of complaint on the part of the British, is in permitting
their vessels to be taken in our ports, or by privateers fitted out in our
harbors; and forbearing, for particular reasons, to make use of all the means
in our power to prevent their being captured, or to obtain restitution when
captured. It is well remembered what the particular reasons were -- A
foreigner, intent on involving our country in a war, and supported by an
unprincipled faction of Americans, created such a ferment as rendered it
hazardous to attempt executing the laws.

The government forbore to afford them justice in our courts, at that time. It
cannot now; those who then insulted the sovereignty of our country are fled,
and have taken the property with them -- It would be a mockery of justice to
refer the British complainants to our courts, when neither their property, nor
the persons who injured them are within our jurisdiction. It will not be
pretended that these complaints are in a similar state with ours.

The Constitutionalist concedes that the country occupied by Indians within the
British territory, contains, by far, the greatest proportion of furs, but then
it is said, that this is not advantageous, because the British traders can
supply their stores from the United States. By his own statement, then, the
advantage is double. We can purchase largely of furs, and can pay for them by
the sale of goods. Is it disadvantageous to have a new market open, where we
can buy a valuable article, either for our use at home, or for exportation to
foreign countries? because a market is likewise opened, where we may vend many
goods imported from Europe and Asia, at our own prices; for this writer says,
by reason of ice in the St. Lawrence, the British traders cannot import goods
from Europe more than half the year -- and will be obliged to supply their
stores from the United States.

In the next paragraph he says -- "They will also be able, however
extraordinary the grant of this privilege may appear, to import their goods
into any port of the United States, and from such Atlantic port transport the
same throughout our whole territory, free of an alien duty, upon the same terms
as our own citizens" -- What this writer would intend here cannot be
conjectured -- He certainly cannot intend to say, that British subjects can
import goods into the Atlantic ports of the United States, at less duties than
they did before the treaty -- If he does he intends to deceive his readers --
There is not a word in the treaty that gives such right -- Goods imported into
the Atlantic ports by British subjects are liable to the same duties before and
after the ratification of the treaty. If they should choose to import all their
goods into the Atlantic ports of the United States, and pay us duties, and
transport them through our territories, what would be the injury to us? None --
We should be great gainers. And no sensible man could ever suppose any other
than beneficial consequences, if all the British colonies were to be supplied
through the United States.

In the next sentence, the note is entirely changed, and it is there asserted,
"that British traders have such large capitals and such connexions with the
Indians; and Americans have such small capitals and without such connexions,
that the article can be of no advantage to the Americans." His only meaning
here can be, that we can neither have a market for importation or exportation.
He is requested to reconcile the contradiction between this and the former part
of the paragraph; where he gives us to understand that the British traders must
be supplied from the United States, because they cannot import more than half
the year by sea. He says, "Asiatic goods under the treaty cannot be afforded on
better terms, by American citizens, than by British subjects; because the
British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on American vessels
entering into the British ports in Europe, a t^nnage duty equal to that which
shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of America; and also such duty
as may be adequate to countervail the difference of duty now payable on the
importation of European and Asiatic goods, imported into the United States, in
British or American vessels." The Constitutionalist is desired to point out how
this article can possibly produce the consequences he predicts, or what
relation it has to this subject. We import our Asiatic goods, direct from Asia.
We do not import them from any British ports in Europe.

It has not been denied, that Asiatic goods are a third cheaper in the United
States than in England, whence the colonists must get them, unless they import
them from America. How then can it be said, with or without this wonderful
reason, which, with equal aptness, might be applied to increase the clamor on
the negro business, that Asiatic goods cannot be afforded on better terms, by
American citizens, than by British subjects? He goes on to say, "that more is
required than the naked assertion of the Federalist, to prove, that the
American citizens will be able to import the goods, that are consumed by the
Indians, into the United States, upon better terms than British subjects can
import the like merchandises into the British provinces." It is true, and the
knowledge of every reflecting man is what supports the assertion; but, lest the
assertion of the Federalist should not be believed, for the reasons given by
him, the Constitutionalist endeavors to confirm it, by telling us, that the
British traders will have an advantage in buying of us, rather than importing
by the river St. Lawrence; that the British can even import into the Atlantic
ports of the United States, and thence transport by land into the interior of
their own country, on better terms than they can into their own ports.

This writer asserts, "that the British subjects could not enter our ports as
freely before the treaty as they may in case of its ratification, for they were
before subject to an alien duty, which will be completely suspended by its
ratification." The assertion of the Federalist was, "they, speaking of the
British, enter our seaports as freely now as they can by treaty." This is
true; and the Constitutionalist is desired to show a word in the treaty, that
lessens the duty now paid, by British subjects, in our seaports.

After allowing that the traffic with the Indians is within the British
territories, he remarks, that "just removing her posts, over the line of
intersection, between the two territories, by which means her settlers and
trading houses, will remain an insurmountable barrier to the traffic of our
citizens with the Indians within the British territories." By treaty we have a
right to go into all their territories, by land, or inland navigation, not
merely to their posts. Pray then, Mr. Constitutionalist, tell us how her
settlers and trading houses will be an insurmountable barrier to this trade?

The fur trade, he says, will not be worth a pepper corn, Mr. Jefferson says,
"delaying to surrender us the posts cuts us off from the fur trade, which,
before the war, had been always of great importance, as a branch of commerce,
and as a source of remittance, for the payment of our debts to Great Britain."
Mr. Madison stated the fur trade, withheld by the posts, worth 200,000 dollars
per annum. -- But the article, which admits us into a fur trade, six times
greater, to say the least, than that derived from a mere surrender of the
posts, this advocate of the committee calls a mere pepper corn!!

The 15th article of the treaty is brought forward as an objection of immense
weight against the treaty. Let us see how it stands. It is acknowledged, that
British vessels now pay an higher duty in American ports, than American vessels
pay in British ports. The parties stipulate to treat for the more exact
equalization of duties, within two years after the present war, and agree that,
in the interval, the difference now subsisting shall not be increased. This is,
in its nature, a very temporary arrangement; and, without an express
stipulation, hardly any language can be more strong, that Great Britain will
not raise her duties. She must equally raise them on all other nations, if she
does on us; and their duties have remained the same for many years.

He asks the Federalist, whether any such article exists in our other treaties.
The answer is, no. The reason is, because, at making those treaties, no such
difference subsisted, and there was no national government authorized to impose
duties. And further, let it be remarked, that this article is equally
beneficial to the other powers, with whom we have stipulated not to impose
higher duties, than those paid by the most favored nations. The horrible event,
therefore, of offending our allies, need not be apprehended from this article.

The Constitutionalist allows, that all the assertions made by the Federalist,
respecting the right of nations having colonies, are true; and observes, that
there are but few, in this enlightened country, who are so ignorant as not to
know, that unless we gain a right by treaty, Great Britain may prohibit our
trading, or even entering the ports of her colonial possessions, without
affording us any just cause of complaint. Every admission, then, of American
vessels into her colonies must be considered a grant in our favor, of certain
acknowledged rights.

It is unnecessary to remark, that by the confession of this writer, he, and
those whose cause he attempts to advocate, complain of the article ceding us
certain rights in the East Indies, without any just cause of complaint. Having
an absolute right, according to the Constitutionalist, to deny us all trade,
the permission of even a partial commerce must be considered an advantage
gained by the treaty.

The Constitutionalist is requested to point to any thing that we give in
exchange for this important trade to the East Indies. Here is the cession of a
right which it is acknowledged Great Britain was under no obligation to grant,
for which in return we have granted nothing; but they say the treaty wants a
reciprocation of benefits from Britain to America.

The Federalist expressed no admiration, nor even an opinion of the writings of
Lord Sheffield; he only quoted his words: he has frequently quoted the
Constitutionalist -- By the same rule it may be concluded, he admires the
writings under this signature -- to draw such conclusions from such premises,
is a species of logic yet unknown to the Federalist -- he forbears any further
remarks -- he writes merely with a view of pointing to the truth -- to lead men
to think and act for themselves.

The Constitutionalist, after having fully and completely allowed the rights of
Britain to an exclusive trade with her colonies, and absolute want of a right
in us to trade there, unless ceded by treaty, has the wisdom to contend that we
ought not to receive any by stipulation; and that the treaty ought not to be
ratified because of an article which gives us a valuable trade to her colonies.

But then he implies that a trade to the East Indies will not be substantially
beneficial, because, in his opinion, on comparison with its present advantages,
it will not be equally so as now. This may be offered as a sample of logic --
it is certainly neither truth nor common sense, to say that a thing cannot be
substantially, or positively good, because it has been better.

Goods are usually sold cheaper in Ostend than here -- proof offered -- they
are sometimes imported from that country to this. India goods are sometimes
imported from England into America; therefore, they are cheaper there, than
here. They are sometimes imported from France into America. According to such
reasoning, it would not be difficult to prove that almost every article of
commerce is cheaper in every part of the world, with which we trade, than in
America. Do merchants never send goods from one port to another, but when they
are dearer in the place sent to, than in the place sent from? This would be to
suppose certain knowledge in a merchant of the different markets, in distant
quarters of the world, not only of times past and present, but of future times.
This would be a kind of prescience extremely valuable, but not yet attained. Do
merchants never send goods to a port for a remittance, because they are cheaper
in the place sent to than the place sent from? The Constitutionalist says,
goods sent from America to the East Indies, are generally sold at a loss.

Suppose, for a moment, that the reason given supports his assertion, what has
it to do with our trade to Asia? The true question by a merchant would be,
where can I procure Asiatic goods on the cheapest and best terms? If in Ostend,
rather than in India, it will be better to import such goods from Ostend than
India. But until it can be shown, that India goods can be imported on better
terms from Europe, after the merchants have added their profits, than from
Asia, it is probable the trade will continue, and be considered a beneficial
one, although they are sometimes imported from Ostend.

This reason, though it came out modestly in the first part of the paragraph,
in the latter part is made to prove that not only our trade to India will in
future not be beneficial, but that we might obtain our India goods in Ostend
cheaper than in Asia. What a pity, that this reasoning had not been brought to
the public eye, before this late hour. The merchants of Salem and Boston had
more than thirty vessels, chiefly ships, in the year 1793, amounting to more
than five thousand tons, stupidly pursuing a voyage of fifteen months, at three
times the expense that it would have cost them to have obtained the same
profits from Ostend, in five months, according to this writer -- for the charge
of five per cent. to procure bonds exists no where but in his imagination.
There is not a word in the treaty rendering bonds necessary. The increase of
twenty per cent. likewise, which he has conjured up, has no other foundation.
The words of the treaty are, "neither is this article to be construed to allow
the citizens of the said states to settle or reside within the said
territories, or to go into the interior parts thereof, without the permission
of the British government established there; and if any transgression should be
attempted against the regulations of the British government in this respect,
the observance of the same shall and may be enforced against the citizens of
America, in the same manner as against British subjects or others transgressing
the same rule." It cannot be denied by any who read this part of the article,
that we have the same right after as before the ratification of the treaty; and
a candid man would have thought, that putting our citizens on exactly the same
footing as their own, would have rescued this part of it, at least, from
censure; especially when we consider the immense expense Great Britain incurs
for securing this trade to her own subjects. It is yet possible that the
merchants will continue to rely more on their own calculations, than this
sublime logic of the schools.

The Constitutionalist agrees that Great Britain may prohibit us from all trade
in her East India settlements, without just cause of complaint on our part --
That she has stipulated to grant that which we could not claim of right, and
which she has not stipulated to grant to any other nation -- That having
stipulated to grant us certain rights, does not impair her power to permit us
the exercise of others -- That our rights by permission will be as strong
after, as before a ratification of the treaty -- Yet he concludes that we are
expressly prohibited by treaty from all trade not absolutely granted. This
appears to be a palpable contradiction in the Constitutionalist -- He may,
however, console himself by setting down this remark as a self-evident
proposition -- He says, "America had certainly a right to expect the same
indulgences would have been secured to her citizens in their intercourse to the
British settlements in India, as are enjoyed by other nations." ( Indulgences
-- Strange that this writer would use such a term as applying to us from
Britain.) Let it be remarked in answer to this observation; that other nations
have no indulgences secured to them. Further, Great Britain cannot prohibit us
any indulgences without prohibiting them to other nations, according to the
15th article of the treaty, wherein it is said, "Nor shall any prohibition be
imposed on the exportation or importation of any articles, to or from the
territories of the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend to
all other nations."

He says that "British vessels by the treaty, receive from us indulgences,
which are not allowed even to our allies." This is not true -- It cannot be
supported by a word in the British treaty. And the treaty between us and
France, expressly stipulates, that her subjects shall enjoy and receive every
right and immunity that other nations do or shall enjoy.

The Constitutionalist supports the 8th reason of the town, by asking, whether
in other treaties, there is any stipulation that we will export goods directly
from India to America. -- The answer is, there is not; and the reason is
obvious. No other nation has permitted us by treaty, to go to India. There is
no restriction of a trade there, in our treaties with other powers, because
they do not allow us to trade there at all. This may be put down in the class
of self-evident propositions. The Federalist rejoices that he has so many;
wherever he finds any in the writings of his opponents, he will certainly pay
them the tribute of acknowledgment.

He has mentioned some of the errors, and contradictions of the
Constitutionalist. There are others so self-evident, that it would be an
affront on the public, to suppose they can be read, without being instantly
seen and felt. -- Such are those on the clause by which Great Britain reserves
a right to place her duties on a par with ours. This is an article which
appeals so forcibly to our sense of justice for its fitness, that objections to
it could not have been thought possible; and it cannot escape the notice of the
most cursory observer, that all who attempt to support their objections,
constantly assume premises, or draw conclusions so apparently false, as to
convince their readers of the very reverse of what they intended.

A FEDERALIST.

No. VII.
THE fourth number of the Constitutionalist in support of the town's committee,
"that the reciprocity contained in the treaty, was merely nominal and
delusive," offers the 3d, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, 10th, and 28th articles. The
observations, therefore, made by the Federalist, on the third, sixth, seventh,
tenth, and twenty-eighth articles, and which have remained uncontroverted by
the Constitutionalist, have satisfactorily proved, as he trusts, that they are
highly beneficial to the United States; that the third opens to us a very
lucrative trade, and liberali^es the colony system in our favor, more than
Great Britain has ever done to any other nation, and more than any other nation
has ever done to the United States -- which trade, by the acknowledgment of the
Constitutionalist, she might have withheld without any just cause of complaint
on our part; that the twenty-eighth article secures to our citizens payment for
provisions, in cases where, by the existing law of nations, such provisions
would have been justly forfeited. It is not denied, that this is the natural
and obvious construction of the article; indeed words could not have made this
plainer. What then can be the motives of writers who see and confess this to be
the true sense of the terms; and, at the same time, assert that "by this
stipulation the United States surrender to Great Britain the right never before
restricted, to send certain articles to France, and even legalize her arbitrary
seizure of them." Do they think that a falsehood, because it is repeated, can
be palmed on the public for truth? Or do they think because they frequently
tell of their love for the people, and their respect for an enlightened public,
that they can thus insult their understanding, at the expense of truth and
common sense?

The ninth article is considered as extremely injurious -- and the
Constitutionalist has been pleased to remark that British subjects now hold
vast tracts of land in the United States, in fee simple, and that American
citizens now hold a few rods of land in the British dominions, in fee tail
only. Whence this writer assumed this fact is not known -- It is believed to
exist only in his own imagination.

Among the artifices attempted to impose on the public, none have been more
industriously used, than that of exciting an idea in the people, that their
lands were to be holden by British subjects, and that this article would even
deprive them of their own soil. -- The most ridiculous falsehoods have been
circulated in conversation, and in the public papers; such as have shown the
utmost contempt for the understandings of our fellow citizens, with a view of
frightening weak and childish minds. The words of the article merely extend to
lands now holden. It gives a British subject no right to buy real estate; he
cannot acquire lands by purchase under this article. It contains no other right
than is in the treaty of peace; with this addition, that they who now hold
lands may convey them by devise or otherwise -- Whereas by a rigid construction
of the article in the treaty of peace, and the law respecting a right to hold
lands by aliens, the best subjects could only hold lands during their lives,
and if a descent was cast before a conveyance, the lands became escheated to
the government.

Until the last session of congress, any alien, being a free white person, who
had resided two years in the United States, and one year in any particular
state, and could give satisfactory proof to any court of record, that he was a
person of good character, on taking an oath to support the constitution of the
United States, might become a citizen of the United States. This naturalized
not only the alien, but also all his children under twenty one years of age.
Thus cheap and easy was the mode not only of acquiring a right to hold lands,
but of most of all the rights that could in any case appertain to a citizen.

The state of Georgia the last winter, sold many millions acres of land, and in
their deeds of cession enacted, that if aliens purchased, they should hold the
same, with all the privileges that could appertain to them, if citizens. In the
month of May, ^ast, the state of Connecticut proposed to sell a tract of land,
containing several millions of acres -- and, in their act, they expressly
authorized their committee to make sale of the land, and execute deeds thereof
to any persons, whether inhabitants of the United States, or others. It is
said, that in the state of Pennsylvania, any aliens may purchase and hold
lands. In our treaty with France, Frenchmen are expressly authorized to hold
lands. After such an expression of the sense of the people, on the subject of
aliens holding lands, it cannot be presumed, that it is in the power of the
most ranting madman to impose a belief on the weakest, that a clause in the
treaty which permits British subjects to retain and convey the lands they now
hold, can be of the smallest evil.

The Constitutionalist says there was no doubt in the ministers who negociated
the treaty, as to the name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the treaty of
peace. The ministers themselves say there were doubts, and the senate has
acceded that there were doubts as to the name of the said river -- whom will
the public believe -- their own officers, men of their own choosing, and
speaking of their own apprehensions, or an anonymous writer, who pretends to
know more of the sentiments of men, than they know themselves? Our own
government has expressly stated, that there were doubts respecting the river
St. Cro^^, intended by the treaty of peace -- Mr. Jefferson, secretary of
state, in a letter to Mr. Hammond, British minister, written with the express
view of bringing into discussion the disputable points, and infractions of the
treaty of A. D. 1783. says. -- "A difference of opinion, too, having aris^n as
to the river intended by the plenipotentiaries to be the boundary between us
and the d^^^^ious of Great Britain, and by them called the St. Croix, which
name, it seems, is given to two different rivers, the ascertaining of this
point, becomes a matter of present urgency: it h^s heretofore been the subject
of applications ^^^m us to the government of Great Britain."


The 6th article is nominal and delusive, as this writer asserts, because it is
not therein stipulated that commissioners shall be appointed to decide on debts
due from British subjects to citizens of the United States, and lost by lawful
impediments. If such a stipulation had been inserted, it might well have been
termed nominal and delusive; for it is well known that there is not the
smallest pretense for saying that any lawful impediment exists in Great
Britain, since the treaty of peace, against the recovery of debts due to
American citizens, by the operation whereof, full and adequate compensation
cannot now be obtained in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings.

The quotation from Vattel, respecting the manner in which republics treat with
monarchs, is fully agreed by the Federalist -- and the character of our envoy,
long since established in the grateful remembrance of his countrymen, would not
suffer a doubt in the mind of any man, that this equality of republics would be
fully vindicated by him. The treaty of commerce, which is the subject of
discussion, has only added another proof of his ability, in vindicating the
rights of republics. In the treaty of peace, which he, with his compatriots, so
ably negociated at Paris, he gave the fullest evidence of his skill and power
in treating on equal terms with royal governments, though opposed by an
insidious ally, and deceitful court. At that time the same men, who now attempt
to destroy his well earned fame, would have prostrated the republic of America
at the feet of a royal court, now acknowledged to be the most corrupt and
perfidious in Europe. The firmness and abilities of Mr. Adams, the
vice president, and Mr. Jay, saved our country from the disgrace.

The suggestion that the Federalist can be offended by the establishment of a
doctrine like that mentioned by Vattel, excites no other emotions in his breast
than those of contempt.

From the establishment of the federal constitution to the present moment,
there has been a party in the United States, which with unceasing and active
malignancy has opposed the freest republic on earth -- This party,
nevertheless, boasts of its republicanism.

The Constitutionalist in his fifth number, in vindication of the 11th reason
of the town, and in opposition to the treaty, because it expressly stipulates,
that in case of war, debts, neither public nor private, shall be confiscated,
seems to concede that credit has been of great efficacy in producing the
prosperity of our country; and that, in the last war, nothing was gained by a
sequestration of debts -- considers such truths as irrevelant to the subject.
Surely if the people are satisfied, that credit has produced and is producing
the most conspicuous advantages to this country, they will avoid every thing
that tends to impair credit, for by lessening that, they will assuredly lessen
their advantages. -- If, in the last war, they essayed this method of deriving
benefit, and found it unsuccessful, they will call for complete proof of its
supposed advantages, before they attempt it again. The question he makes, is --
Has the United States a right, by the law of nations, to confiscate such debts?
He asserts that they have, and to prove the assertion, quotes Vattel; but
either overlooked a very material part of a paragraph, respecting private
debts, or for some purpose, did not choose to bring it into view. Immediately
following his first quotations, and between that and his last quotation, are
these words -- "But at present, in regard to the advantage and safety of
commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe, have departed from this rigor; and as
this custom has been generally received, he who should act contrary to it,
would injure the public faith; for strangers trusted his subjects only, from a
firm persuasion, that the general custom would be observed." Vattel is here
speaking of debts, due from individuals of one nation to those of another; and
this is the writer quoted by the Constitutionalist, to support the right of
confiscating private debts. Which are we most to admire at, the weakness of the
committee's advocate, or his audacity in thus attempting to impose on the
public?

If we had occasion to remark on the meanness and falsity of conduct in
excluding an intermediate passage that so completely destroyed a doctrine the
Constitutionalist was laboring to support, we can feel nothing but contempt
for a writer who insults the public understanding, by making the following
quotation, viz. -- "A state at war, does not so much as touch the sums which it
owes to the enemy. Every where, in case of a war, funds credited to the public,
are exempt from confiscation and seizure." And then asserts, that he has
demonstrated, that "a right to sequester or confiscate moneys in the public
s^nds, does exist according to the law of nature and nations."

The Constitutionalist says, "the situation of European nations, might have led
them to this custom, but they have not recognized the same by any national
compacts or treaties." The word custom, as quoted from Vattel, referred to
private debts, as any one may see, who will turn to Vattel, 3d book, chap. 5th,
sect. 77.

The Constitutionalist, with his usual disposition to pervert the truth,
applies it to the last quotation from Vattel, which respects moneys credited to
the public. The Constitutionalist further asserts, in speaking of a right to
confiscate debts generally, "the exercise of this right, has never yet been
restricted by treaty. It has, by common consent, rested entirely with the
wisdom and humanity of nations."

These assertions of the Constitutionalist, are absolutely untrue, There is
scarcely a treaty made in the last century between any of the European nations,
but what restricts the right to confiscate debts, and recognizes the doctrine,
as laid down by Vattel, to have originated from custom. In the treaty between
Russia and Great Britain, 12th article, it is stipulated, "that if the peace
should come to be broke, the persons, ships, and commodities, shall not be
detained, or confiscated; but they shall be allowed, at least, the space of one
year, to sell, dispose, or carry off their effects; -- and they shall farther
be permitted, either at or before their departure, to consign the effects which
they shall not as yet have disposed of, ^o such persons as they shall think
proper, in order to dispose of them as they desire, and for their benefit;
which debts the debtors shall be obliged to pay in the same manner as if no
such rupture had happened." In the treaty made between Spain and Great Britain,
in the year 1667, is the following article; "if a war shall happen, the
respective subjects and people shall have notice thereof, given them in time,
viz. -- six months to transport their merchandise and effects, without giving
them in that time, any molestation or trouble, or retaining or embarrassing
their goods or persons." In the treaty between Great Britain and Portugal,
concluded in 1642, the 18th article is as follows; "in case of difference, two
years are allowed on both sides, to transport their merchandises and goods,
and, in the mean time, there shall be no injury or prejudice, done to any
person or goods, on either side." In the treaty between Russia and Denmark,
35th article, it is stipulated, "merchants shall have a year to depart, may
sell, part with, or remove their effects, and those who owe them money, shall
be obliged to pay their debts, equally as if no rupture had happened." In the
treaty made between France and Great Britain, in the year 1786, it is agreed,
in the 2d article, "that if at any time there should arise any
misunderstandings, breach of friendship, or rupture between the crowns of their
majesty's, the subjects of each of the two parties, residing in the dominions
of the other, shall have the privilege of remaining and continuing their trade
therein, without any manner of disturbance, so long as they behave peaceably,
etc. etc. and in case their conduct should render them suspected, and the
respective governments should be obliged to order them to remove, the term of
twelve months shall be allowed them for that purpose, in order that they may
remove with their effects and property, whether entrusted to individuals or to
the state."

The 20th article of our treaty with France, the 3d of that with the United
Netherlands, and the 23d with that with the king of Prussia, restrict the
exercise of this right which the Constitutionalist says, never has yet been
restricted by treaty. -- What confidence can be placed in a writer, who makes
such false assertions, to induce the people to adopt principles which are
exploded by all the civilized world; and which, even the barbarians of Algiers
have abandoned, as too disgraceful for their character?

After a review of the assertions of the Constitutionalist, in his 5th number,
none can wonder at his attempts to ridicule morality, and his exclamations at
what he is pleased to call a saint-like zeal against injustice.

After all, the public cannot avoid the conclusion, that writers like the
Constitutionalist, who object to the treaty, on account of the article
respecting the confiscation of debts, are guilty of the grossest affectation.
For no one can suppose, from the display they are pleased to make of their own
principles, that any restriction by treaty would bind them to respect the
rights it contracted for.

A FEDERALIST.

Mercer County Resolutions. At a numerous Meeting of the Freemen of Mercer
County (Kentucky) at the Courthouse in Harrisburgh, on the 22d Day of
September, 1795 (being the Court Day for the said County) the Time and Occasion
of the Meeting having been previously advertised -- The following Resolutions
were unanimously agreed to, and ordered to be printed.
RESOLVED, as the opinion of this meeting, That Humphrey Marshall, one of the
senators from this state in the congress of the United States, has betrayed the
trust reposed in him, by voting for the conditional ratification of the treaty,
lately concluded between America and Great Britain, and has thereby proved
himself unworthy the confidence of the people of Kentucky.

Resolved, therefore, That it be recommended to the legislature of this state,
to instruct the said Marshall to vote against any further ratification of the
said treaty upon every future occasion on which it may be brought before the
senate; and to refuse his assent to any other treaty with Great Britain, which
shall sacrifice the honor, the faith, the independence, the just privileges, or
the true interest of the United States.

Resolved, as the opinion of this meeting, That that part of the federal
constitution, by which it is declared, that the senators in congress shall hold
their offices for a term of six years, is dangerous to the liberties of
America, destroys their responsibility, and may enable them to carry into
execution, schemes regnant with the greatest evils.

Resolved, therefore, That it be recommended to the legislature of this state,
to instruct our representatives in congress, to propose an amendment to that
constitution, by which the time of the service of the senators shall be
abridged, and by which it shall also be declared lawful for the legislature of
a state, to recall its senator, during the time for which he shall be elected,
and to make a new appointment, for the residue of the term.

FROM THE GAZETTE OF THE UNITED STATES. American Commerce in Europe.
MR. FENNO,
OUR commerce in Europe, has been of late carried on chiefly in our own
shipping, which accounts, in part, for their wonderful augmentation in number
and size. Part of our commerce to Europe is, in fact, an indirect West India
trade; the jealous policy of Spain, having led her to shut her West Indies to
all nations, we have, with some exceptions, been included in the universal
prohibition: but, on the other hand, wanting our supplies, she takes them at
Cadiz, St. Andero, Ferrol, etc. and transports the flour from thence, in her
own ships, to the Havanna, Curracoa, etc. Even this is a much better footing
for us than Britain proposes in the 70 tons article; because it gives our
shipping a freight to Europe, in common times, of one to one and an half dollar
per barrel, forming an immense object of profit to the United States; which,
indeed, augments the price to the Spanish planter in the West Indies; but is
not otherwise injurious to us than as it hampers and makes circuitous the
intercourse with our neighbors, and shows a strange conduct in the government,
whose subjects must eat stale and dear flour by this circuitous channel, when
they might have it so much cheaper and fresher, direct. Our chief trade in
Europe with Spain, therefore, consists in a sale of flour for her West Indies,
which we are chiefly paid for in specie, or bills on London of equal value,
remitted in payment for manufactures we take from Britain. With the Italian
states we have but little intercourse: they produce grain and rice in
abundance, usually, themselves: tobacco and fish are the only articles we could
sell to advantage there; but for this we must wait, not till the nations of
Europe make peace, but till we can make peace with Algiers and Morocco, which,
I suppose, will happen by and b^ Portugal and the Canaries take off
considerable quantities of grain and lumber for their own consumption; it goes,
generally, in our vessels, and we are paid partially in wines, but chiefly in
bills on London, which so far goes to pay off our balance to England. With
respect to France, our trade is generally in grain, flour, tobacco and rice, in
that quarter: -- the peace must benefit this immensely; for it is to be
presumed the republic will not suffer, as formerly, farmers general to
monopolize tobacco, and British ships to carry it, to our and their great
prejudice: I anticipate, therefore, an immense increase, at the peace, in our
commercial concerns with our good old friends and allies. Our chief trade in
England is in buying her manufactures, for which we pay in the balances due us
from the rest of Europe. Holland takes off rice and tobacco, and pays partially
dry goods, but chiefly in bills of exchange. The Hanse towns, the 12th article
would have nearly destroyed our trade with, which is growing immensely
important in supplying Germany, the Swiss, etc. with the surplus West India
produce, we receive for our trade to Hispaniol^, etc. It is supposed upwards of
400 large ships are now employed in this commerce, which must all have been put
out of employ by the 12th article, had it prevailed. We receive from the Hans^
towns a few goods of the Baltic, but chiefly bills on London to pay for
manufactures there. From Russia we import canvas, hemp, iron, tallow, etc. and
pay partially in New England rum, but chiefly, I believe, in bills on London,
arising from other branches of our commerce.

A. B.

Savannah Address to the President.
Copy of the Address to the President of the United States, which accompanied
the Proceedings See Vol. I. page 134.
of the Citizens, convened in the City of Savannah, on the 1st Day of August,
1795. To the President of the United States of America.
SIR,
THIS accompanies the proceedings of a very considerable number of the citizens
of the United States, convened in the city of Savannah, for the purpose of
taking into consideration the impending treaty of amity, commerce, and
navigation, between his Britannic majesty and the United States of America,
expressive of their sentiments thereon.

To a people who feel for their country, and have its welfare at heart, it must
be a very unpleasant task to complain of public measures; but whatever painful
sensation it may excite, it is a duty they owe to themselves and posterity to
notice any act militating against their rights and interests. In this light we
have viewed the treaty; and under that impression have stated our objections,
which we hope will appear to be well founded.

We feel a confidence, sir, that in laying our grievances before you, they will
be attended to; and that the man who was so instrumental in establishing our
rights and liberties, will not take any step to impair them.

In giving our opinions on so momentous a subject, we conceive that we have
expressed the sentiments of a large majority of the citizens of this as well as
of the other states. Should this be the case, we doubt not but you will meet
the wishes of your country, by withholding your signature from a treaty, which,
if ratified, will be productive of the most ruinous consequences to the United
States.

By order of the citizens, N. W. JONES, Chairman.
Savannah, Georgia, August 1, 1795.
PRESIDENT'S ANSWER.
To Noble Wimberly Jones, Esquire
SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 1st inst. with the proceedings of the
meeting at Savannah, relative to the treaty lately negociated between the
United States and Great Britain.

My determination on this important subject, and the general principles upon
which it has been formed, have been already promulgated to the public. Next to
the consciousness of having discharged my duty, according to my best judgment,
nothing could have afforded me a greater pleasure, than to have found my
decision consistent with the wishes of my fellow citizens. On this occasion I
have, however, been directed by the great principle which has governed all my
public conduct -- a sincere desire to promote and secure the true interest of
my country.

With due respect, I am, Sir, your obedient, GO. WASHINGTON.

Lexington Resolutions.
At a Meeting of the Inhabitants from sundry Parts of the Commonwealth, at the
Courthouse in Lexington (Kentucky) on Friday the 28th Day of August, 1795; the
Treaty, lately concluded on by Lord Grenville and John Jay, was fully
discussed, and the following Resolutions unanimously agreed to.
RESOLVED, That the citizens now assembled have the undoubted right, at all
times, to express their opinions publicly, on every measure of government, and
that on none can it more behove them, than on the proposal of a treaty with any
foreign power, as a treaty is not constitutionally a subject of discussion in
the house of the people's immediate representatives.

That the treaty concluded on by John Jay with the British government, contains
a catalogue of terms and conditions, shameful to the American name;

Because the American character is disgraced by its very language, it being on
the part of Great Britain, couched in terms haughty and imperious, and on the
part of America, in language submissive and humiliating.

Because it does expressly contraven^ our treaty with our only natural allies,
the French, and it is thereby a base infraction of the rights of amity and
gratitude, which they are entitled to from us; in behalf of a government who
cordially despise us, and who, in conjunction with their allies the Indians,
have never ceased to spill our blood, and plunder our property for twenty years.

Because it has let the subjects of this hostile and treacherous government
into a participation of our right to navigate the Mississippi, and has thereby
dispelled every hope of obtaining an amicable adjustment of our differences
with Spain on that subject.

Because, by it, we tamely and submissively agree to receive, when it suits the
British king, the posts on the lakes, without any concessions or reparation for
their detention.

Because Jay has dared to cede, and that to British subjects, a part of the
American soil, and has, moreover, submitted the bounds of such cession, to the
discretion of the British king.

Because the whole of the British debts, with interest, are saddled,
ultimately, on the whole people of the United States; a thing not ever asked
for, or expected by the most griping creditor.

Because it has waved all claim for the value of the negroes plundered and
carried off in violation of the treaty of 1783, to the total ruin of many of
the owners.

But lastly and principally, because this government is and has long been
totally destitute of that, without which, treaties become only plots and
robberies, FAITH. Her magnanimity shows itself, through the Indian's tomahawk
and scalping knife; her friendship in the Algerine cruisers; and her truth,
honesty, and justice, in violating the treaty of 1783, in detaining the posts,
in her commercial regulations, and in her late robberies of the American
vessels.

The alliance of such a corrupt, degenerate, and sinking government, ought
religiously to be avoided by the American people.

That H. Toulmin, James Hughes, and James Brown be a committee to prepare an
address to the president, expressive of our sentiments upon this subject, and
that they make a report to this meeting at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, on the
next Fayette court day.

Adjourned to meet at the courthouse at the time above mentioned.

JOHN CAMPBELL, Chairman, JOHN NANCARROW, Clerk.


Williamsburgh Proceedings.
At a Meeting of the Inhabitants of Williamsburgh, District of Georgetown
(South Carolina) on Saturday the 5th of August, 1795, to consider, communicate,
and report their Sentiments on the impending Treaty between the United States
and the Court of Great Britain -- Captain William Frierson was un^nimously
called to the Chair.
AFTER a calm, dispassionate and mature discussion of every article of said
treaty, the following declaration and resolutions were agreed to:

Actuated neither by party spirit, prejudice nor malevolence; uninfluenced by
the proceedings of the unwise and intemperate; strangers to intrigue, but (we
hope) fortified against it; we declare our sentiments of our present political
situation to the world.

At a time when another nation is struggling to secure liberty, it becomes us
to be watchful of our own. Nineteen years have now elapsed since the
independence of our country was declared; our blood, our treasure, and the
lives of many of our friends and fellow citizens, were sacrificed to purchase
it. We conceive that we should be unjust to our lives, and traitors to our
country, to remain silent when insidious attempts are made to wrest from us our
dearest privileges. As a portion of the people we feel as they do, and our
interests are inseparable. Attempts have been made to vilify the people, by
traducing the popular societies, loading them with slander, contumely, with
every epithet of reproach, and representing them as enemies to their country,
and disturbers of the public peace; these "self-created societies," the organs
of the public mind, the guardians of the rights of the people, like to the
hundred eyes of Argus in preventing illicit intrigues, will be dreaded,
despised, or censured, by none but the guilty and base. An honest man, whether
in the humble paths of private life, or in public national trust, need never be
afraid of the strictest scrutiny. -- The designs of the traitor as of the
private assassin, may be known only to himself: but overt actions speak for
themselves. When the base designs and conduct of men in authority are so
glaring, it is a duty, which every man owes to his country, to come forward to
declare his sentiments and expose such as have abused their power and perverted
their trust. Such are the principles and such has been the conduct of Mr. Jay,
as appears from his former opinions, and late conduct as envoy; by his
principles, always favorable to the unjust claims of our former enemy, and by
his conduct attempting to undermine the liberties of his fellow citizens, to
load them with unmerited obloquy, and to raise up this monster of aristocracy,
the enemy of mankind, and the scourge of nations. We are sorry that we have not
been disappointed in our expectation of Mr. Jay's negotiation; but we are
deceived in the object of his mission: we were told that he was sent to demand
the delivery of the western posts and compensation for our domestics, carried
away by the British plunderers, as the former treaty of peace gave us a right
to demand; we were told that he was instructed to demand satisfaction for the
depredations committed on our merchant vessels and goods, on the high seas; but
we were never told, that he had any instructions to form a treaty, insulting to
our national honor, prejudicial to our domestic happiness, and injurious to our
rights and interests, as citizens of a free nation. The event, however, has
justified our opinion of the envoy, and our expectation of his negotiation.

Resolved, therefore, That feeling indignant at the many attempts made by some
of our men in trust against the exercise of our rights in endeavoring to bring
us under the tyrannical insolence of Great Britain, we will cooperate with our
fellow citizens, on every just and lawful occasion, in opposing and
counteracting every attempt to degrade the citizens of America. -- That
although peace is the greatest of all blessings, yet war, with all its
attendant horrors, is to be preferred rather than to accept of it at such
disgraceful and dishonorable terms as are held forth to us in said treaty.

Resolved, That we consider this treaty as militating against the principles of
our constitution, as subjecting the commerce of this country to Britain -- as a
surrender of the power of congress to form commercial regulations; and in
particular as hostile to the people of France, with whom we ought to be on the
terms of friendship, if we were under no obligations of gratitude, and if we
had not been bound by a former treaty with that nation.

Resolved, That in the present situation of this country, we conceive treaties
with any foreign power, not only unnecessary, but impolitic, and especially
with Great Britain, who has not fulfilled the former treaty of peace, and whose
faith cannot be depended on.

Resolved, That our fellow citizen Charles Pinckney, has our warmest thanks,
for his noble, manly, and spirited speech See Vol. 1. page 5.
delivered at the meeting in the city of Charleston, on the 22d of July, and
printed in the City Gazette of the 4th instant.

Resolved, That our fellow citizen, Pierce Butler, has merited the thanks of
all his constituents that are real friends to their country, for his steady and
patriotic opposition in the senate of the United States, to the aforesaid
treaty; we present him ours, unfeignedly; and we hold in high estimation the
other minority members of the senate of the United States, on the 24th of June
last.

Ordered, That the chairman and secretary do sign these resolutions, and that
they be printed in the City Gazette, that our opinion of men and measures may
be made known.

WILLIAM FRIERSON, Chairman, JAMES BURGESS, Sec'ry.


Laurens County Proceedings.
At a Meeting of the Citizens of Laurens County (South Carolina) at the
Courthouse thereof, on Wednesday, the 1^th of August, 1795 -- Sylvanus Walker,
Esquire, in the Chair. --
ON motion, resolved, That five persons be chosen, by ballot, as a committee to
report on the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between the United
States and his Britannic majesty, on Wednesday, the 19th instant, at the said
courthouse; and upon counting the votes, it appeared that the following
gentlemen were chosen: Thomas Wadsworth, John Hunter, Samuel Saxon, Lewis
Saxon, and Sylvanus Walker, Esquires.

On motion, resolved, That this committee do draw up an address to major Pierce
Butler, approving his conduct with respect to the said treaty, as, also, to
testify their resolution to support him in this and every laudable action.

The meeting adjourned till Wednesday, the 19th instant, at 10 o'clock, A. M.
when

The committee met, according to adjournment, in the presence of a numerous
collection of the citizens of the county aforesaid.

Sylvanus Walker, Esquire, resigned, and Jonathan Down^, Esquire, was called to
the chair.

Resolved, That the treaty of amity, etc. be read, and that it be taken into
consideration, paragraph by paragragh; and laid before the citizens, together
with the report and resolutions of the committee; and, upon taking their
opinion on the same, it was unanimously agreed, that the report and resolutions
be adopted, which are as follow:

The committee, to whom their fellow citizens referred the consideration of the
treaty, signed at London, on the 19th of November, 1794, between his Britannic
majesty and the United States, called a treaty of amity, commerce, and
navigation, report -- That they have investigated the same, as time and
circumstances would permit, and are of opinion, that it cannot be the basis of
amity and friendship; because, on the one side, it is arrogant and dictatorial,
and, on the other, pusillanimous and submissive.

Therefore, resolved, That it is the opinion of the citizens of Laurens county,
in the state of South Carolina, that the following, among the other objections,
ought, of right, to obstruct its ratification.

1. The preamble is an open declaration, that the merits of the complaints and
pretensions of the contracting parties shall not be taken into consideration.

2. The 1st article of the treaty abrogates laws of the different states, and
makes provision for the return of persons who were banished only for crimes of
the deepest dye, a sight of whom will open the wounds which time had kindly
cicatrized.

3. The 2d article has done, for the enemies of the United States, what neither
a seven years war, nor eleven years peace could accomplish; it gives them
protection in our bosom, while they continue to demonstrate the most inveterate
hatred, both against our citizens and government. It procrastinates the
evacuation of posts held by British forces within our boundaries, which, by
right and sound policy, ought to have preceded all negotiation. It even holds
that up as a favor granted, which the United States ought to have demanded as
their right. -- Besides, the United States make a cession, the limits of which
to them are unknown, as his majesty may (for ought they know) have granted to
the above described persons, all the lands within their precincts or
jurisdiction, and which, by this treaty, the United States guarantee to them
the quiet possession of.

4. The 3d article is not only altogether partial in favor of Britain, but
authorizes an intercourse between the subjects of his Britannic majesty and the
Indians within the territories of the United States, which will be a constant
source of irritation and disturbance, and may finally lead the United States
into a war, not only with the Indians, but the British themselves, which this
treaty ought to have made provision against.

5. By the 6th article, the United States undertake to make good such losses on
debts to British creditors as have been occasioned by legal impediments, when
no such impediments have existed in any of the states that did not equally
apply to citizens of the same; and because no indemnification is made to the
citizens of the United States, for property taken from them at the close of the
war, the restitution of which is provided for by the treaty of 1783.

6. We think the 7th article, as it respects the injured citizens of the United
States, altogether illusory, and calculated only to deceive, while the United
States are bound to make good the damage (not done by our citizens, but)
committed by other nations on our coasts.

7. The 9th article gives to aliens some of the precious rights of citizens,
while they continue without the control of the federal and state governments;
which we think both unjust and impolitic.

8. The 10th article cedes what the United States most indubitably ought to
retain; and more especally so respecting Britain, the whole of whose conduct
toward the United States and citizens thereof, has been limited by the want of
power more completely to distress us. By this article, the United States cede
the only possible present means of restraining that wanton nation in her
unbounded insults, which she has (since first capable) offered to all nations.
It is also an undue restraint on the powers of congress, constitutionally
committed to them by the people of the United States, and ought never to be
abridged by treaty.

9. By the 12th article, the United States obtain his majesty's consent to
supply his subjects in the West Indies with the prime articles of life; and
even that, in the first instance, in a most cramped manner, and subject to such
regulations, in future, as the British government shall think fit to impose;
for which ideal favor, the United States have ceded a most lucrative branch of
the carrying trade, and agreed to give British ships a preference in our own
ports, in transporting all West India goods, and even cotton, the produce of
our own states. As this article is temporary, it declares that, before its
expiration, the contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate the said
trade, as the then situation of his majesty may require, without mentioning the
situation of the United States. It also postpones the consideration, whether
neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property, until after the close of the
present war, during which time, America being at peace, ought to have been her
great harvest.

10. The 17th article is a formal acknowledgment, that Britain is the
legitimate legislator of the marine world; that the orders of her admiralty
shall be considered as the law of nations. This unequivocal declaration of what
shall be right, in future, will, doubtless, have weight in determining what is
past, and not only preclude the recovery of our most equitable demands, for
unheard of (in the history of any civilized nation) depredations made on our
commerce, but also lead our allies to distrust our fidelity, by which our
citizens may lose their property, and the United States their allies.

11. The 18th article is a sacrifice of American commerce to British interest.
-- Our produce, of almost every kind, is contraband in time of war (which, for
the last hundred years, has, with Britain, been three of war to four of peace)
during which, in future, Britain has only to declare the world in a state of
blockade, and the United States must trade with her, or no where.

12. The 20th and 21st articles create doubts, what construction the British
mean, in future, to give to the word Pirate. -- Should an American be robbed of
his property, by a British privateer or ship of war, on the high seas, would he
be permitted to expatriate himself and take a commission under some power at
war with his Britannic majesty, in order to make reprisals! or, if he did,
might he not, by this treaty, be taken, tried, and suffer as a pirate, when he
is pursuing the only mode in his power, in order to obtain restitution for
unmerited injuries, and which his country, by this treaty, has refused to
redress?

If he may be thus taken and suffer, we think it unjust, while the barbarous
practice of privateering is carried on to such unheard of lengths by that
wanton nation: at the same time, the United States allowing, nay, even
compelling persons emigrating to this country to expatriate themselves, before
they can become citizens of these states.

13. In the 23d article, his Britannic majesty pretends to grant, as a favor,
what the most barbarous nations seldom refuse, viz. giving aid in distress.

14. The 24th and 25th articles have a direct tendency to lead our allies to
doubt, whether we are not inimical to them and their cause, which (as it
respects the people) is not true, however it may be with the government.

Whereupon, resolved, That it is the opinion of the citizens of this county,
that, if the said treaty should be ratified, the United States, so far as it
respects their commercial situation, are far worse than colonial.

Resolved, That the thanks of the citizens of this county be given to the ten
patriotic senators, who voted against the ratification of the said treaty, in
the senate of the United States.

Resolved, That the thanks of the citizens of this county be given to S. T.
Mason, one of the senators from Virginia, for his firmness in publishing the
treaty, so long kept secret from the good citizens of these states, by which
means they are made sensible of their dangerous situation, and enabled to
express their disapprobation thereof.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of the citizens of this county, that the said
treaty has a general tendency to mislead the people, and to restrict the
legislative powers of congress, and is a most flagrant violation of the federal
constitution.

Resolved, That the citizens of this county do approve of the proceedings of
the citizens of Charleston, in their address to the president of the United
States, requesting him not to ratify the said treaty.

Resolved, That a copy of the foregoing proceedings, attested by the chairman,
be immediately transmitted to the honorable John Mathews, Esquire, chairman of
the citizens of Charleston, and that he be requested to notify the same to the
president of the United States.

On motion of the citizens of this county, resolved, That thanks be given to
the select committee of the same, for their care and firmness with regard to
the treaty.

Resolved, That the address to Major Butler, presented by the committee, be
adopted, and a copy thereof sent to him.

True extracts of the proceedings, attest. the 20th day of August, 1795, by
JONATHAN DOWNS, Chairman.

TO CITIZEN PIERCE BUTLER.
SIR,
YOUR fortitude excites our admiration, your virtue, our esteem, and your
attention to our interest, our gratitude. Be assured your opposition, in the
federal senate, to the ratification of the treaty, signed at London on the 19th
of November, 1794, has our fullest approbation, and merits, our warmest
applause and firmest support. We, sir, have examined it with care, and
anxiously sought that reciprocity which is so artfully held up as the basis of
friendship; but, to our great surprise, only find it cautiously worded, and
wonderfully calculated to deceive the good citizens of these states, by holding
up phantoms as though they had existence, and representing ideal as though they
were real advantages. We conceive it altogether illusory, as to any sensible or
possible good that can result to the United States as a government, or the
citizens thereof as individuals. We are sorry to say, that in this treaty, we
behold our constitution violated, our commerce bartered for illusions, our
allies justly led to distrust us, and we ourselves made the sport of caprice
and British polities. We think the treaty altogether nugatory, as to the end
proposed, and highly derogatory to us as sovereign states. We lament there were
no more, yet we rejoice there were so many, in the senate, who spoke the
language and acted the will of the people. This is but a tribute due to
patriotism, and we rejoice, sir, to pay it to you. While natives forge the
language and sentiments of freeborn citizens of these states, what do we
behold! A man not by chance of birth an American, but one by reason and by
choice, who is more firmly attached to the federal government, and the dignity
thereof, that even its indigenous sons. Our hope, sir, is, that you will stand
fast in virtue, be firm and true to the rights of the people; then will we not
fail to do you justice as you pass through life; nor shall history record those
virtuous acts but with eclat, and say to posterity, This man, this SENATOR,
deserved well of his country.

By virtue of a resolve of the citizens of Laurens county, met at the
courthouse of the same, on the 19th day of August, 1795, you are addressed by,

Sir, your most obedient and very humble servant, JONATHAN DOWNS, Chairman of
the Committee.

FROM THE INDEPENDENT GAZETTEER. Striking Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
CITIZEN OSWALD,
The following Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation,
with Great Britain, are presented, through the Medium of your Independent
Gazetteer, to the serious Consideration and calm Reflection of the Citizens of
the United States.

I. IT begets a base and unnatural political connection between a republican
government and a monarchy.

II. It sacrifices to that connection, past injuries, a reparation for wrongs,
and the most essential interests of commerce, that an independent nation can
yield.

III. It prostrates the constitution of the United States, at the feet of the
president and senate, rendering that fundamental charter of our rights any
thing or nothing, as the president and senate shall, in their discretion, by
treaty determine.

IV. It declares war against the independent and constitutional rights of
congress, by attempting to take away their power to decide on any question
similar to those proposed in the session of congress before the last, by
Messrs. Madison, Dayton, and Clarke: viz.

1. Mr. Madison's, for restricting the commerce with Great Britain. 2. Mr.
Dayton's, for sequestering British property. 3. Mr. Clarke's, for suspending
the commercial intercourse with Great Britain.
V. It enlarges the ground of this warfare, by attempting to divest congress of
the power

To regulate trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes;

To levy and collect duties of impost and excise;

To define and punish piracies on the high seas, and offenses against the law
of nations;

To grant letters of marque and reprisal;

To declare war --

An which powers are, by the constitution of the United States, expressly
vested in congress.

VI. It seeks to maintain this warfare, by arraying the president and senate,
supported by Great Britain, on one side, against the representatives of the
people, their constituents, and the constitution of the United States, on the
other side; thus introducing foreign intrigue and influence into our public
councils and domestic politics, and engendering causes of disaffection,
disunion, and intrigue.

VII. It insidiously aims to dissolve all connection between the United States
and France, and to substitute a monarchic, for a republican ally; virtually, if
not expressly, violating our neutrality, in the following instances: -- 1. By
admitting and legalizing seizures for adjudication, in all cases of suspicion
of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the enemy, articles
which are contraband of war. 2. By declaring to be contraband "all timber for
ship-building, tar or rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and,
generally, whatever may serve directly for the equipment of vessels." --
ALTHOUGH GREAT BRITAIN, IN HER COMMERCIAL TREATY WITH FRANCE, HAD HERSELF
DECLARED THOSE VERY ARTICLES NOT TO BE CONTRABAND. 3. By admitting seizures of
vessels laden with provisions, in all cases, under the frivolous pretext of
"difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases, in which alone, provisions and
other articles not generally contraband, may be regarded as such." 4. By
placing Great Britain on the footing of the most favored nation, and
stipulating "That no prohibition shall be imposed on the exportation or
importation of any articles, to or from the territories of the two parties,
respectively, which shall not extend to all other nations." 5. By bettering the
condition of Great Britain, pending the war with France; thereby increasing her
resources, and enabling her to prosecute and continue the war with that
republic.


VIII. It records and perpetuates the dishonor of America, and the political
depravity of her government; exhibiting the sad spectacle of the United States,
servilely cringing to the corrupt monarchy of Great Britain, for a close and
intimate alliance, at the sacrifice of the most essential political and
commercial interests; whilst, pointing the finger of hostility to France, it
seeks, in the hour of her difficulty and distress, to wound that magnanimous
republic, which was no less the instrument of American emancipation from
British tyranny and oppression, than she is now the guarantee of that
independence, which we have thus so shamefully abused, by negociating the
present inglorious and disgraceful treaty.

AMERICANUS.

"There is nothing new under the sun."
THAT I deny; for it must be a new thing to all the world to read the
sentiments of the president of the United States, who know that he is the same
identical man who was, during the late American war, the commander in chief of
the American army.

As a small proof -- in his late answer to the merchants and traders in the
city of Philadelphia, who approved of the treaty, he has the following very
extraordinary expression: "Such sentiments, deliberately formed, and proceeding
from men whose interests are more immediately concerned than those of any other
class of citizens."

Has the adulation, which has been poured upon him, from all quarters, for
these twenty years past, so bewildered his senses, that, relinquishing even
common decency, he tells 408 merchants and traders of the city of Philadelphia,
"that they are more immediately concerned than any other class of his fellow
citizens," in a treaty, which embraces so many various and important objects,
in no respect connected with trade or commerce?

A treaty so repugnant to the sentiments of the best patriots of this country,
as to have occasioned a manly, firm, but constitutional opposition, from one
end of the continent to the other.

An opposition which he ought to have respected -- an opposition which must and
will be respected -- an opposition that (...), ultimately, while
constitutionally, enforce all that success which it so justly merits.

A treaty which children cannot read without discovering that it tends to
disunite us from our present ally, and unite us to a government which we abhor,
detest, and despise.

A government, which, in compliance with his sentiments, often expressed in the
most energetic terms, when he was our worthy commander in chief, our children
were learned to lis^ their detestation of.

Has that government altered its system of arrogance and despotism? Or has he
altered his sentiments of freedom?

That it continues the same, is certain; that the is greatly changed, I most
firmly believe.

Should this conduct produce a serious rupture amongst ourselves (which God
forbid) how many of these 408 would court the honor of being his body guard,
provided he should think proper to expose himself to danger?

How many of them have most fervently prayed for his and our destruction,
during the late war?

Ought he not to have considered, that many amongst those who addressed him
from the same city, requesting that he would not ratify the treaty, stood, in
the public view, amongst the foremost and most sincere friends of their
country; and are employed, at this moment, in some of its highest offices and
trusts?

Does his answer to them, in point of complaisance and politeness, though they
consist of several thousands, bear any analogy to that transmitted to the 408
merchants and traders? -- Who, I hope, to prevent mistakes, will for ever
hereafter be distinguished by the significant title of, " The president's 408
respectable friends in the city of Philadelphia."

And, that their real respectability may be more fully verified, I most
sincerely hope, further, that their absolute occupations -- the yearly amount
of their dealings -- their political sentiments and actions during the late war
-- the length of time they have been real citizens of America, etc. will be
exhibited to public view, by some impartial biographer, in a handsome volume,
neatly gilt and lettered, like themselves.

But why should I go farther than this state, to show the impropriety of his
expression, or the respectability of those who oppose his present wishes?

At his own table (it was an expression made use of for the public ear, or it
would not now be revealed by me) I have heard him observe, in an hour of his
own and of his country's most extreme distress, that "the people of the United
States ought to be particularly thankful to a kind Providence, through whose
conspicuous bounty, George Clinton had been appointed governor of the state of
New York;" and yet this very Mr. Clinton, if I am not very much misinformed, is
as unshaken an opponent to the treaty, as any man in the United States.

Let me ask, on the other hand, who are the most numerous, the only
consolidated class of inhabitants (for many of them are not citizens) who speak
in favor of it?

The answer flushes on my mind quick as lightning: every m^n, who, in our
struggle for obtaining a right to establish that government which enabled us to
fix the president in his present exalted station, was known to him and us, as
our individual and joint enemy, by the despicable title of tory, as he and we
then esteemed, in a political point of view, the men of that description.

But, gracious heaven, what a change has this deleterious instrument effected?
Not a man of that description now, who does not speak of the president as of an
angel from heaven, and of the treaty, as a gift of the first magnitude,
procured through his divine influence, as the only remedy against the errors of
republicanism, and the influence of the rabble!

Those men, too, while they are the warmest friends of the president, are the
most inveterate enemies of a Clinton, a Jefferson, a Burr, a Madison, and all
others who embrace, or even countenance their sentiments and opinions.

Reflection, on this uncommon instance of human inconsistency, leads me to a
very weighty question, which I most earnestly entreat the president to answer
to himself, having first seriously considered the unexampled change both of his
friends and opposers, from Georgia to New Hampshire: It is this; Have your old
friends deserted you? Or have you deserted what was formerly yours, and still
is their favorite cause, "The rights of man?"

This question comes not from an anarchist, but from one who loved, admired,
respected, revered, and almost adored, General Washington, and who has received
the written thanks of that great man, for his exertions in that cause, of which
his beloved commander in chief was then the great defender.

Gratitude and respect for the virtuous conduct of his former general will
never be obliterated from his mind; and a due obedience to his present
president shall be punctually paid, as long as the love of his country, and a
determination to preserve its constitution unimpaired, can possibly admit.

An Old Soldier of '76.
New York, August, 1795.
Plymouth Proceedings. At a Meeting of the Town of Plymouth (Massachusetts)
assembled and held at the Courthouse in Plymouth, October 28, 1795.
ANDREW CROSWELL, Esquire, was chosen moderator. -- and Messrs. Stephen
Sampson, Andrew Croswell, Samuel Jackson, Jesse Harlow, William H. Jackson,
Abner Bartlet, Robert Brown, Joseph Croswell, Lemuel Morton, Nathaniel Curves,
and Seth Holmes, were appointed a committee to consider the treaty, lately
entered into by the president of the United States and the king of Great
Britain, and make report to the town. -- Captain Jesse Harlow being in the
committee, -- and Abner Bartlet was not present.

The meeting was then adjourned the term of two hours, at the expiration of
which, they met, when the following report was made, viz:

REPORT.
The committee, appointed by the town, to consider the treaty entered into by
Mr. Jay with the government of Great Britain, beg leave to report as follows:

Philosophy and reason have, at last, to the honor and advantage of mankind,
decided questions long obscured by ignorance, and contested by despotism. They
have established on grounds, never again to be shaken, the equal rights of
mankind, the sovereignty of the people, the responsibility of the magistrates,
and the rights of every citizen, freely to discuss, and freely to give his
opinion on, all public measures and public men.

This right may be more important in its operation, but cannot be diminished,
by the numbers associated to exercise it -- whether the association be
self-created, or grounded on the imperious authority of those who are only the
servants of the public.

The inhabitants of the town of Plymouth, strongly impressed with the above
sentiments, so congenial to their conduct in the American revolution -- alarmed
by the ruinous nature and tendency of the treaty, lately negociated by Mr. Jay,
with the king of Great Britain, have thought it their duty, on this occasion,
to assemble in town-meeting, to give their marked and decided reprobation of
the said treaty, in all its parts.

The numerous objections to this treaty have been so fully detailed, so
forcibly stated, and so conclusively deduced from its several parts, by many
very respectable meetings of citizens, as not only to preclude the necessity,
but propriety, of a repetition. We, therefore, forbear the disagreeable task of
delineating the picture of a business, suspicious in its origin -- dark and
insidious in its progress -- without reciprocity, the only basis of treaties --
without policy -- without gratitude to our best friends -- violating the
constitution of the United States, and prostrating the American character at
the shrine of British arrogance, with no object, apparent to us, but to
embarrass and distress the republic of France, and to break down the republican
system of this country.

Before we conclude the business of the meeting, our duty impels us to the more
pleasing task of expressing our respect and gratitude to the ten senators of
the minority, whose patriotism formed an honorable opposition: and particularly
to one of them, who drew from secrecy and darkness, and exposed to the public
vi^w, the treaty, before it had arrived to its stage of maturity. We place our
hopes and confidence in divine providence, so often and so signally interposed
in favor of America, and, under that, in the virtue and patriotism of the
congress of the United States, to relieve our apprehensions, by their adopting
such measures, as shall effectually secure us against the impending dangers and
distresses of the treaty with Great Britain.

Per order. STEPHEN SAMPSON.
Then, voted unanimously, to accept said report, and directed the town clerk to
give a copy thereof to the moderator, and he to get it published in the
Chronicle.

Attest, EPHRAIM SPOONER, Town Clerk.



Washington Resolutions.
At a Meeting of the Citizens, Inhabitants of Washington District, in the State
of South Carolina, the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, between his
Britannic Majesty, and the United States of America, concluded at London, on
the 19th Day of November, 1794 -- was taken into Consideration, when the
following Resolutions, expressive of their Sentiments on the Subject, were
entered into.
RESOLVED, That although an undue, and over-jealousy of public officers is
often, in its consequences, impolitic; yet freemen always have the right, and
in many cases it becomes their absolute duty, to exercise that right, of
enquiring fully, and with freedom, into the measures and conduct of the
servants of the public. On this occasion, the magnitude of the present subject
of deliberation, and the ruinous consequences of Mr. Jay's treaty, if finally
ratified, to the trade, agriculture, and various interests of the United States
of America, induce us to join our other fellow citizens in opposing a system
founded on inequality, and on principles of themselves, as to one party,
unequal and unjust; and we will, in expressing this our disapprobation, point
out a few of the many injuries that America would feel from the operation of
the said treaty.

Resolved, That the restriction on American vessels trading to the West Indies,
to 70 tons, and all remittances of West India produce made in them confined to
American markets only; and the prohibiting cotton to be exported from America,
unless in British bottoms, though the product of our own country, and now
becoming a valuable and increasing staple in South Carolina and Georgia, whilst
British vessels of any tonnage, with or without excepted articles, are allowed
to trade to any port or place they please; is a manifest injustice to America,
and degrading to her as a nation, having neither equivalent nor reciprocity on
her side, and ought, therefore, to be discarded as incompatible with her honor
and interest as a sovereign and independent government.

Resolved, That the board or court of judicature, established by the 6th
article of the treaty, is highly dangerous; as the mode of procedure and the
kind of testimony to be admitted, are in the breasts of the judges only, and
are not to be confined to any of the known rules of law or equity. Add to this,
a majority of the judges may be British subjects, who will be deciding between
the United States and their fellow subjects, for unknown and large sums of
money, thereby exercising an indefinite and unlimited power over the funds of
the United States, contrary to the constitution and against the safety of the
government.

Resolved, That it is impolitic and unjust for the United States to oblige
themselves to make good the defalcations of the debts of the British creditors
in America, for a supposed infraction of the treaty of 1783, when no
satisfaction is made by the British government to America, for the injury done
her by the detention of the posts, or for the thousands of negroes carried off
from her citizens in direct violation of that treaty.

Resolved, That the apparent equal right of the parties mutually to settle, and
carry on trade, on the eastern banks of the Mississippi, is ill founded and
fallacious; as the British, long since, had ceded to the Spanish government all
claims of territory they had on the said river to the south of the 31st degree
of north latitude, the now south boundary of the United States; and to the
north up the said river, they themselves think they have no claim, otherwise
their plenipotentiary, Mr. Grenville, would not have supposed that a line
running due west from the lake of the Woods would pass above the source of that
river, and on that supposition had an article put in their treaty with us,
appointing commissioners to ascertain and fix that part of the boundary:
therefore, the allowing British subjects to make settlements and establish
factories, if they choose, on the banks of the said river, is giving them
privileges they have no color of right to, and that without an equivalent on
our part: a privilege, which, in the event, from their manner of trade and
influence among the numerous tribes of Indians, might endanger the peace of the
United States. Also, we conceive the right given by treaty to both parties to
use in common the bays, rivers, creeks, ports, harbors, etc. is unequal, and
leaves these states without a sufficient equivalent for the advantages they
give up -- for whilst a British subject has a right to pass, settle and trade,
where and how he pleases in any part of the United States, a citizen of America
is prohibited from trading, or even going into the limits of the territory of
the Hudson's Bay company, the only part of his Britannic majesty's possessions
in North America, where it would be advantageous to have the privilege, as
nearly the whole of the fur trade with the northern tribes of Indians passes
through that channel.

Resolved, That in all the commercial parts of the treaty, the British have
greatly the advantage; and although the appearance of reciprocity is kept up,
yet, on investigation it will be found that the United States would enjoy the
shadow only, and not the substance of almost any one equal advantage.

Resolved, That in our opinion, the president of the United States would act
worthy his uniform great and good character, by refusing to sign the said
treaty.

Resolved, That the sense of the people, who did not attend our meeting, be
taken at the ensuing reviews, which are orpered at five different places, of
the five regiments of this brigade, composed of Washington district, and the
result, being properly certified, be published in the City Gazette.

THOMAS FARRAR, Clerk.
September 6, 1795. I DO certify, That the foregoing resolutions were publicly
read to the people at each of the different reviews; that others were offered
in addition to those, some of which, however, were rather of the inflammatory
kind: but as the object of the people was only to show their disapprobation to
the treaty, by endeavoring to point out a few of the most-prominent objections
against it, in the language of mildness and moderation, they did, therefore,
unanimously agree to the foregoing resolutions, as offered to their
consideration.

Certified the 29th of September, 1795. ROBERT AND ERSON, B. G.



ST. JAMES's PARISH.
At a numerous Meeting of the Inhabitants of the Parish of St. James's, Goose
Creek (South Carolina) on the 8th of August, 1795, the following Resolutions
were moved and adopted.
RESOLVED, That it is the opinion of this meeting, that the treaty of amity,
commerce, and navigation, now pending between the United States of America and
Great Britain, is derogatory to the honor, and extremely prejudicial to the
interests of this country.

Resolved, therefore, That this meeting concur in sentiment with their fellow
citizens in Charleston, and highly approve the measures taken and resolves
entered into by them.

Resolved, That the chairman do sign and transmit these re^^lves to the
honorable John Mathews, chairman of the citi^ens in Charleston.

By order of the meeting, HENRY DEAS.

First Fruits of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation.
1st, AMITY.

AMOST insolent and despicable letter from a captain of a British man of war,
to the governor of Rhode Island, ^^^^^^ing to lay the town of Newport under
contribution -- or, (...) case of resistance, to reduce it to ashes -- for
which, and for ^^^ency's sake, the British consul and messen^^^ of the letter
has ^een dismissed from holding any office in these stares, by pro^^^mation --
a pretty instance of AMITY!

2d, COMMERCE.

The capture (already known) of twenty-eight of our vessels, (...) with
provisions for France and other ports (including the (...) Hercules lately
sailed from this port for London inself, and ^^^^ied into Halifax) under the
specious promise of ten per cent. profit, when they might have obtained 100 per
cent. in their destined ports; some months have elapsed since their being
carried into England, and no instance yet known of payment being made for one
of them. A pretty instance of COMMERCE!!

3d, NAVIGATION.

The condemnation of several of our ships in British courts of admiralty, on
the most palpably-false and frivolous grounds, announced in this country, since
the 18th of August, the day the finishing stroke was put to the treaty, made
between his most gracious majesty and the United States of America, and signed
the 19th of November last, by

Grenville, John Jay.
A very pretty instance indeed of NAVIGATION!!! ha, ha, ha,

Blessed be the treaty makers! By their fruits, ye shall know them!



END OF VOL. II
[No. IX.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MAREET-STREET.

-- NOVEMEER 28, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. Address to the Independent Citizens of Virginia Page 3 2. Memorial and
Petition of a number of the Citizens of the Commonwealth of Virginia to the
General Assembly thereof Page 4 3. Tully, No. II. Page 12 4. Camillus, No. XXI.
Page 15 5. -- No. XXII. Page 24 6. -- No. XXIII. Page 36 7. -- No. XXIV. Page
45 8. -- No. XXV. Page 56 9. Cato, No. XVI. Page 63 10. Atticus, No. VI. Page
67 11. -- No. VII. Page 70
American Remembrancer, etc.
FROM THE PETERSBURG INTELLIGENCER.
To the Independent Citizens of Virginia.
THE president of the United States, in his letter to the selectmen of Boston,
dated 28th of July, 1795, copies whereof have since been transmitted to similar
meetings of the people in other parts of the United States, having, as it is
conceived, virtually refused to view the representation of the people as a
source of information worthy of his consideration, in deliberating upon the
propriety of ratifying or rejecting the late treaty between Great Britain and
the United States, as recommended by the senate -- and having, as it is
believed, first refused his consent thereto, until Great Britain should
withdraw her infamous orders for seizing provisions in America^ vessels bound
to France -- and since ^^at time, during the continuance of the same orders, in
the ^^^^^^t of ^^^erous r^^^^se^^^tions from the people in almost all parts of
the United States, disapproving the fatal instrument, ha^^^^ ^^^^^lly proceeded
(...) its ratification, and given it all the energy which his constitutional
functions could effect; and having, by these proceedings, rendered all further
representations and applications to him, upon the subject, absurd and nugatory
-- It is important, when such inattention to the public voice is manifested,
that the people should boldly exercise their right of addressing their
objections to all other constituted authorities, within the United States, who
possess any agency relative to this highly interesting subject.

Upon this principle, the following Petition to the General Assembly of
Virginia, in virtue of their constituti^^ ^^^^ght of appointing senators for
this state, to the congress of the United States, is submitted to the
independent citizens thereof. It is presumed, that the time, previous to the
meeting of the assembly, is too short to afford that general circulation of the
petition throughout the state, which is desirable: but it is hoped, that such
patriotic citizens, as may approve its contents, will be active in favoring
their fellow citizens with an opportunity of testifying, in like manner, their
approbation, by their respective subscriptions thereto.

Through these means, one more effort may be made, by a declaration of the
public sentiment, to prevent the final ratification and ultimate energy of an
instrument, which is deemed fatal to the interests, the happiness, and perhaps,
finally, to the liberty and independence of the United States.

October 12, 1795.
To the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Memorial and
Petition of the Subscribers thereof,
Respectfully shows --
THAT they have seen and maturely considered the twenty, lately negociated with
Great Britain, and con^^^ionally (...) ^y the presid^^^ ^^d s^^^^e of the
United States.

That they (...) of the condition (...) the (...) the (...) twenty ought to
(...), and (...) again receive, (...) of the constituted (...), (...) it can be
s^^^^^ly ^^^ding on the United States (...) (...) the (...) of that part of the
^^^^y, which re^^^^s to (...) the United States and the West Indi^^, must ^e
(...), ^i^ (...) new article proposed to be a^^le^l; and in as much as the
connection established by that article, between the ports suspended, and the
temporary resi^^^ of the treaty, constitute them essentially conditions of each
other, and must involve the latter in the ^^te of the former, whereby a change
will be made, both in the form and substance of the instrument, that will be
equivalent (...) compact.

Th^^ (...) present ^^age of the transaction, they d^^^ it their right and
their duty, to pursue every constitutional and proper mode of urging those
objections to the treaty, which, in their judgment, require to be entirely
removed, before it ought to be finally established.

That under this conviction, they submit the following observations to the
consideration of the general assembly.

I. Even "waving the merits of the respective complaints and pretensions of the
two parties," as to the inexecution of the treaty of peace, it is reasonable to
view the two parties as equally culpable, or equally blameless, and to
determine that the execution of the treaty of peace equally by both ought to
have been provided for. Yet, whilst the United States are to comply, in the
most ample manner, with the article unfulfilled by them, and to make
compensation for whatever losses may have accrued from their delay; Great
Britain is released altogether, from one of the articles unfulfilled by her,
and is not obliged to make the smallest compensation for the damages which have
accrued from her delay, in fulfilling the other.

These equitable and reciprocal claims of the United States are not even
allowed the chance of arbitration.

This inequality of terms, is greatly aggravated by other concessions, on the
part of the United States, which, besides adding to the violation of the
constitution, artfully introduced in this treaty, may, in a great measure,
defeat the good consequences of a surrender of the western posts, if that
article of the treaty should be faithfully executed by Great Britain.

The British settlers and traders, within an indefinite tract of country, are
allowed to retain both their land and allegiance at the same time, and
consequently to keep up a foreign and ho^^^^^ influence over the Indians,
within the limits of the United States.

The Indians, within these li^^^s, are encouraged to co^^i^^^ their trade with
the British, by the permission to bring their goods, duty free, from Canada,
where the goods being charged with no such impost as is payable on the goods of
the United States, will be offered for sale with that tempting preference; a
regulation also, but too likely to cloak the fraud of s^^^gg^^^ng traders in a
country otherwise favorable to them.

Under a like semblance of reciprocity, the advantage secured to the United
States in the fur trade, by their possession of the carrying places, is
abandoned to the superiority of ^^^i^^^h capital, and the insecurity of the
Canada duty or duties ^n imposts.

A part only of the posts, harbors, and bays, of a ^^^gle British province, is
made free to the citizens (...) United British province, is made free to the
citizens (...) United States, in consideration of a freedom of all their (...),
harbors, and bays, to British subjects. The goods and merchandise of the
United States not entirely prohibited by Canada (but which, in fact, are always
prohibited, when partial and temporary admissions are not dictated by
necessity) may be carried there in consideration of a free admission from
Canada, of all goods and merchandise not entirely prohibited by the United
States, where there never is, in fact, this entire prohibition. A like
stipulation, liable to the like observation, is extended to the exports of the
United States, and the province of Canada. There are further instances of a
nominal and delusive reciprocity.

In the case of the Mississippi, there is not even an oftensible or nominal
reciprocity. The posts and places on its eastern side, are to be equally free
to both parties; although the treaty itself supposes that the course of the
northern boundary of the United States, will throw the British beyond the very
source of that river. This item of the treaty is the more to be noticed, as a
repetition and extension, under such circumstances, of the stipulated
privileges of Great Britain on the Mississippi, will be construed into a
partiality in the United States, to the interests and views of that nation on
the American continent, not likely to conciliate those from whom an amicable
adjustment of the Mississippi is expected; and was, no doubt, intended by Great
Britain as a snare to our good understanding with the nation most jealous of
her encroachment and aggrandizement.

II. Without remarking the inexplicit provision for redressing past spoliations
and vexations, no sufficient precautions are taken against them in future. On
the contrary, by omitting to provide for the respect due to sea-letters,
passports and certificates, and for other customary safe-guards to neutral
vessels, "a general search warrant" (in the strong, but just language if our
fellow citizens of Charleston) is granted against the American navigation.
Examples of such provisions were to be ^o^^d in our other treaties, as well as
in the treaties of other nations. And it is matter of just surprise, that they
should have no place in a treaty with Great Britain, whose conduct on the seas,
so particularly suggested and enforced every guard to our rights that could be
reasonably insisted on.

By omitting to provide against the arbitrary seizure and imprisonment of the
American seamen, that valuable class of citizens remains exposed to all the
outrages, and our commerce to all the interruptions, hitherto experienced from
that cause.

By enpressly admitting, that provisions are to be held contraband, in (...)
other than when bound to an invested place, and implie^^^ ^^itting that such
cases exist at present -- not only retrospective sanction may be given to
proceedings against which an indemnification is claimed, but an apparent
license is granted to fresh and more rapacious depredations on our lawful
commerce; and facts seem to show, that such is to be the fruit of this
impolitic concession. It is conceived, that the pr^text, set up by Great
Britain, of besieging and starving whole nations, and the doctrine grounded
thereon, of a right to intercept the customary trade of neutral nations, in
articles not contraband, ought never to have been admitted into a treaty of the
United States -- Because, 1. It is a general outrage on humanity, and an attack
on the useful intercourse of nations. 2. It appears, that the doctrine was
denied by the executive, in the discussions with Mr. Hammond, the British
minister, and that demands of compensation, founded on that denial, are now
depending. 3. As provisions constitute not less than two-thirds of our exports,
and Great Britain is nearly half her time at war, an admission of the doctrine
sacrifices, in a correspondent degree, the intrinsic value of our country. 4.
After a public denial of the doctrine, to admit it, in the midst of the present
war, by a formal treaty, would have but too much of the effect, as well as the
appearance, of voluntarily concurring in the scheme of distressing a nation,
whose friendly relations to the United States, as well as the struggles for
freedom in which it is engaged, give a title to every good office which is
permitted by a just regard to our own interest, and not strictly forbidden by
the duties of ^^^trality. 5. It is no plea for the measure, to hold it up as an
alternative to the disgrace of being in ^^^^tarily treated in the same manner,
without a faculty to re^^ess ourselves. The disgrace of being plundered with
impu^^^y, against our consent, being, under no circumstances, so g^^^ as the
disgrace of consenting to be plundered with imp^ity^. By annexing to the
implements of war, en^^^^rated as con^^^^^nd, the articles of ship timber, tar
or ro^in, copper in she^^^ said, hemp, and cordage, our neutral rights and
national (...) are still further narrowed. These articles were excluded from
the contraband list, by the United States, when they were themselves in a state
of war. (See ordinance relating to captures on fourth of December, 1781.) Their
other treaties expressly declare them not to be contraband.


British treaties have done the same; nor, as is believed, do the treaties of
any nation in Europe, producing these articles for exportation, allow them to
be subjects of confiscation. The stipulation was the less to be admitted, as
the ^^^pro^^y assumed by it, is a mere cover for the violation (...) that
principle -- most of the articles in question, being among the exports of the
United States, whilst all of them are among the imports of Great Britain.

By expressly stipulating with Great Britain, against the freedom of enemy's
property in neutral bottoms, the progress toward a complete and formal
establishment of a principle in the law of nations, so favorable to the general
interest and security of commerce, receives all the check the United States
could give to it. Reason and experience have long taught the propriety of
considering free ships as giving freedom to their cargoes. The several great
maritime nations of Europe, have not only established, at different times, by
their treaties with each other, but, on a solemn occasion, jointly declared it
to be the law of nations, by a specific compact, of which the United States
entered their entire approbation (see their act of the 5th of October, 1780).
Great Britain alone dissented. But she herself, in a variety of prior treaties,
and in a treaty with France, since, has acceded to the principle. Under these
circumstances, the United States, of all nations, ought to be the last to
combine in a retrograde effort on this subject, as being, more than any other,
interested in extending and establishing the commercial rights of neutral
nations. -- Their situation particularly fits them to be carriers for the great
nations of Europe, during their wars; and both their situation, and the genius
of their government and people, promise them a greater share of peace and
neutrality, than can be expected by any other nation -- The relation of the
United States by a treaty on this point, to the e^^^^^^ of Great Britain, was
another reason for avoiding this stipulation. Whilst British goods, in American
vessels, are pro^^^^^ed against French and Dutch captures, it was enough to
leave French and Dutch goods in American vessels, to the ^^dinary course of
judicial determination, without a volu^^^^y a positive, and invidious provision
for condemning them (...) (...) everlooked, that a clause in the treaty
proposes to (...), at some future period, the discussion of the principle now
^^tled; but the question is then to be, not only in what, but whether in any
cases, neutral vessels shall protect enemies property; and it is to be
discussed at the same time, not whether in any, but in what cases, provisions,
and other articles not bound to invested places, may be treated as contraband.
So that when the principle is in favor of the United States, the principle
itself is to be the subject of discussion; when the principle is in favor of
Great Britain, the application of it only, is to be the subject of discussion.

III. Whe^ever the law of nations has been a topic for consideration, the
result of the treaty accommodates Great Britain in relation to one, or both of
the republics at war with her, as well as in the abandonment of the rights and
interests of the United States.

Thus American vessels bound to Great Britain, are protected by sea papers,
against French and Dutch searches; but when bound to France or Holland, are
left exposed to British searches, without regard to such papers.

American provisions in American vessels, bound to the enemies of Great
Britain, are left, by treaty, to the seizure and use of Great Britain; but
provisions, whether American or not, in American vessels, cannot be touched by
the enemies of Great Britain.

British property, in American vessels, is not subject to French or Dutch
confiscation -- French or Dutch property in American vessels, is subjected to
British confiscation. Articles of ship building, bound to the enemies of Great
Britain for the equipment of vessels of trade only, are contraband -- bound to
Great Britain for the equipment of vessels of war, are not contraband.

American citizens entering as volunteers in the service of France or Holland,
are punishable: but American volunteers joining the arms of Great Britain
against France or Holland, are not punishable.

British ships of war, and privateers with their prizes, made on citizens of
Holland, may freely enter and depart the ports of the United States; but Dutch
ships of war, and private^^ with their prizes, made on subjects of Great
Britain, are to receive no shelter or refuge in the ports of the United States.
-- This advantage in war is given to Great Britain, not by a treaty prior to an
existing war, but by a treaty made in the midst of war, and expressly
stipulating against a li^^^ article of treaty, with the other party, for
equalizing the advantage.

The article prohibiting confiscations and sequestrations, is unequal between
Great Britain and the United States; American citizens have little, if any,
interest in private or bank stock, or private debts, within Great Britain. So,
where much would be in the power of the United States, and little in the power
of Great Britain, the power is interdicted: Where more is in the power of Great
Britain than of the United States, the power is unconfined. Another remark is
applicable -- When the modern usage of nations is in favor of Great Britain,
the modern usage is the rule of the treaty; but when the modern usage is in
favor of the United States, the modern usage is rejected, as a rule for the
treaty.

IV. The footing on which the treaty places the subject of commerce, is liable
to insuperable objections. 1. The nature of our exports and imports, compared
with those of other countries, and particularly of Great Britain, has been
thought, by the legislature of the United States, to justify certain
differences, in the tonnage and other duties, in favor of American bottoms; and
the advantage possessed by Great Britain, in her superior capital, was thought,
at the same time, to require such countervailing encouragements. Experience has
shown the solidity of both these considerations. The American navigation has,
in a good degree, been protected, against the advantage on the side of British
capital, and has increased in proportion; whilst the nature of our exports,
being generally necessaries, or raw materials, and our imports consisting
mostly of British manufactures, has restrained the disposition of Great Britain
to counteract the protecting duties afforded to our navigation. If the treaty
is carried into effect, this protection is relinquished, and congress are
prohibited from substituting any other. Then the British capital, having no
longer the present inducement to make use of American bottoms, may be expected,
in whatever hands operating, to give the preference to British bottoms.

2. The provisions of the treaty, which relate to the West Indies, where the
nature of our exports and imports gives a commanding energy to our just
pretensions, instead of alleviating the general evil, are a detail of
particular humiliations and sacrifices. Nor will a remedy by any means be
found, in a revision of that part alone of the treaty.

If Great Britain should accede to the proposition of the se^^^^, and the
treaty be finally established, without that part of it, but in all its other
parts: She will, in that event, be able to exclude American bottoms altogether
from the channel of intercourse, and to regulate the whole trade with the West
Indies, in the manner heretofore complained of, whilst the United States will
be completely dispossessed of the right and the means of counteracting
monopoly, unless they submit to an universal infraction of their trade, not
excepting with nations whose regulations may be reciprocal and satisfactory.

3. The treaty, not content with these injuries to the United States, in their
commerce with Great Britain, provides, in the 15th article, against the
improvement or preservation of their commerce with other nations, by any
beneficial treaties that may be attainable. -- The general rule of the United
States, in their treaties, sounded on the example of other nations, has been,
that where a nation is to have the privileges of the most favored nations, it
shall be admitted gratuitously to such privileges only as may be gratuitously
granted, but shall pay, for privileges not gratuitously granted, the
compensation paid by others; this prudent and equitable qualification of the
footing of the most favored nation, was particularly requisite in a treaty with
Great Britain, whose commercial system, in relation to other countries, being
matured and settled, is not likely to be varied by grants of new privileges
that might result to the United States. It was peculiarly requisite, at the
present juncture, also, when an advantageous revision of the treaty with France
is said to be favored by that republic; when a treaty with Spain is actually in
negotiation; and when treaties with other nations, whose commerce is important
to the United States, cannot be out of contemplation.

The proposed treaty, nevertheless, puts Great Britain, in all respects,
gratuitously, on the footing of the nations most favored, even as to the future
privileges, for which the most valuable considerations may be given; so that it
is not only out of the power of the United States to grant any peculiar
privileges to any other nation, as an equivalent for peculiar advantages in
commerce or navigation, granted to the United States; but every nation,
desiring to treat on this subject with the United States, is reduced to the
alternative, either of declining the treaty altogether, or of including Great
Britain, gratuitously, in all the privileges it purchases for itself. An
article of this import is the greatest obstruction, next to an absolute
prohibition, that could have been thrown in the way of other treaties; and that
it was insidiously meant by Great Britain to be such, is rendered the less
doubtful, by the kindred features of the treaty.

4. It can be no apology for the commercial disadvantages, that better terms
could not be obtained. If proper terms could not be obtained, at that time,
commercial articles, which were no wise essentially connected with the objects
of the embassy, ought to have waited for a more favorable season. Nor is a
better apology to be drawn from our other treaties. These not only ^^id many of
the sacrifices in the new treaty; but the chief of them were the guarantees or
the auxiliaries of our independence; and, in that view, would have been an
equivalent for greater commercial concessions than were insisted on.

V. The president and senate, by ratifying this treaty, usurp the power of
regulating commerce, of making rules with respect to aliens, of establishing
tribunals of justice, and of defining piracy. A formal demonstration of every
part of this complex proposition is not requisite. We will prove, that this
treaty is dangerous to liberty, and that the constituted authorities, who have
given it their sanction, have flagrantly violated their duty, by an appeal to
the constitution itself, to that explicit instrument, which we formed as the
unerring guide of our representatives, but which some of them have dared to
violate.

VI. A treaty, thus incompatible with our constitution, thus unequal in its
conditions, thus derogating from our national rights, thus insidious in some of
its objects, and thus alarming in all its operations, is not only unworthy of
the voluntary acceptance of an independent and happy people, but is an abject
sacrifice, which ought to have been rejected with disdain, in the most
humiliating and adverse circumstances. It is sincerely believed, that such a
treaty would not have been listened to at any former period, even when Great
Britain was most powerful, and the United States most feeble. To pretend, that,
however objectionable the instrument may be, it ought to be considered as the
only escape from a hostile resentment of Great Britain, which would evidently
be as impolitic, as it would be unjust on her part, IS AN ARTIFICE TOO
CONTEMPTIBLE TO ANSWER ITS PURPOSE. It will not easily be supposed, that a
refusal to part with our rights, without equivalents, will be made the pretext
of war on us; much less that such a pretext will be founded on our refusal, to
mingle a sacrifice of our commerce and navigation, with an adjustment of
political differences. Neither is there any evidence in history, or in human
nature, that nations are to be bribed out of the spirit of encroachment and
aggression, by humiliations, which nourish their pride, or by unreasonable
concessions, which extend their resources and their power. To do justice to all
nations -- to obtain it from them by every peaceable effort, in preference to
war -- and to confi^^ in this policy, for avoiding that extremity, or for
m^^^ing it with ^^r^^ess, under the blessing of heaven, when it may be forced
upon us, is the only course of which the United States can never have reason to
repent.

The petitioners, r^lying our the wisdom and patriotism of the general
assembly, pray that the objections to the treaty, comprised in these
observations, may be taken into their serious consideration; and that such
measures toward a remedy may be pursued, as may be judge most conformable to
the nature of the case, and most consistant with constitutional principles.

Sophistry Detected [CONTINUED FROM VOL. 2. PAGE 201.] No. II.
CAMILLUS, already proverbial for prolixity and verbosity, has gone beyond his
usual tediousness on the subject of sequestration ^^d confiscation. He has
devoted to the investigation no less than four or five entire numbers, of
length sufficient to exhaust the patience of even a pensioner of Britain. But
by this elaborate discussion, he has not gained a proselyte.

When he can seize a single sent^ment, in any writer on the laws of nations,
that favors this part of the treaty, he lays as much stress upon his opinions
as the priests of Apollo ever did on the Delphian oracles. But every opinion
opposed to his, however sanctioned -- every fact, however well authenticated,
he endeavors to invalidate or explain away. -- Artful and sophist as he is, he
has, by one single sentence, overturned the fabric he has expended so much time
to erect. He has conceded enough to satisfy every rational man of the fallacy
of his arguments. He has acknowledged, that there are cases, in which not only
the sequestration, but the confiscation, of property, may be justifiable.

But lest it should be pretended, that a strained as unwarranted construction
is put on his words, I shall give the sentence at length, that the reader may
judge for himself: "It would have been an inestimable gem in our political
consti^^tion, had it contained a positive stipulation against such a practice
((...) that of sequestration and confiscation) except, perhap^^ (...) WAY OF
REPRISAL FOR THE IDENTICAL, INJURY, ON THE PART OF ANOTHER NATION.

It is plainly and justly deducible from the sentence: 1st. That when any
nation sequesters the property of another nation, the latter has a just right,
" by way of reprisal, for the identical injury" to sequester the property of
the subjects of the aggressor. 2d. That when any nation con^is^^tes the
property of the subjects of another nation, that nation has a right, "by way of
reprisal," to sequester or confiscate the property of the subjects or citizens
of the offending nation. Thus, then, there are two cases in which
sequestration, and one in which confiscation, is justifiable. This might be
sufficient to evince the fallacy of Camillus. But from these positions flow
more satisfactory consequences.


If a nation suffers as flagrant, or a mo^^ flagrant injury, than the
sequestration or confiscation of the property of her citizens, she has, a
fortio^i, a right, "by way of reprisal," although not for exactly "the
identical injury," to sequester or confiscate the property of the citizens or
subjects of the offending power.

The question is then simply this, are there, any violations of the laws of
nations, with respect (...) ^^e rights of property, as great or greater than
the sequestration or confiscation of property? That there are, England has
debarred even Camillus of the power of denying. Let us suppose, for sake of
argument (and this will surely be allowed a supposable case) that a piratical
nation, before issuing any declaration of war, clandestinely grants letters of
marque and reprisal to all her vessels, and this conducted in such an artful
manner as to reach all quarters of the globe about the same period, and thus
render the commerce of an unsuspecting rival an inevitable prey to a band of
lawless robbers. Can the Federalist, can Curtius, can Camillus, deny that this
is a more heinous violation of the law of nations, and a more deep and lasting
injury, than the sequestration or even confiscation of an equal value of
property within the territory of the piratical nation? -- Surely, if they have
the audacity to deny it, they will find few of the enlightened citizens of
America to coincide in opinion with them.

Suppose, further, that the aggrieved nation had, in its own territory,
property of the subjects of the other nation, of equal value with that which
had been thus piratically plundered, would it not be a right, nay a duty, to
seize it, for the purpose of making restitution to the sufferers?
Unquestionably it ^^uld.

Again, let us suppose (and this, likewise, will be allowed a very supposable
case) the same, or any other (...) nation, to have issued orders, on the 6th of
November, 1793, o^ on any other day in any other year, to her cruisers, to
seize the vessels of any neutral, and carry them into her ports "for legal
adjudication," that the "Algerine" judges in her admira^^ courts had construed
"legal adjudication" to mean "condemnation," and that the neutral nation,
without any real or pretended violation of the rights of neutrality, should be
basely and perfidiously plundered of her property, to an in^^lculable amount.

Is not this a more heinous violation of the laws of nations, than would have
been the sequestration of property in the country of the aggressor? Does the
difference of place, in which the robbery is perpetrated, constitute any
essential difference in the turpitude, the villainy of the deed? And if it be
lawful, in the case of the lesser crime, to retaliate by sequestration or
confiscation, can the superior enormity of the other annul the right of the
sufferer?

If a robber or murderer meets me on the highway, and stabs me, am I to defend
or avenge myself in no other way, than in the "identical" one, in which he was
guilty? Am I not to attempt resistan^^ because I have no weapons of defense but
pistols, and have been attacked with a sword? Away with these absurd and
incongruous sophisms! Blush, apostle of temerity, of meanness, and of
deception! Why will you persevere in accumulating ridicule and contempt upon
your own head? See Camillus No. 18.


The laws and modern practice of nations proscribe sequestration and
confiscation of the property of the citizens or subjects of other nations
within our territory. So do they equally proscribe robbery on the high seas, in
time of peace. And the government that commences hostilities, by a violation of
the law of nations, in either mode, has no right to complain for having justice
executed, and punishment inflicted on her, by the same or any other more
convenient violation of the law of nations.

By the modern laws of war, prisoners are entitled to good treatment, unless
they forfeit their rig^^ by misconduct or crime. -- But suppose a nation to
resort to flow but certain methods of exterminating its prisoners, such, for
instance, as infected, corrupted, or even poisoned victuals -- or the
pestilential and destroying vapors of prison-ships (ANOTHER VERY SUPPOSABLE
CASE) -- is the suffering nation obliged to observe the rigid rules of the laws
of war? Is it, for ^^^n of being dishonored, to allow its best citizens to fall
victims to the insatiable cruelty of a barbarous enemy? Surely not. And if a
violation of the laws of war is to be punished by a similar or other violation,
it is equally certain, that a violation of the laws of nations demands
vengeance, in a similar manner.

TULLY.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM VOL. 2. PAGE 199.]

No. XXI.
SINCE the closing of my last number, I have accidentally turned to a passage
of Vattel, which is so pertinent to the immediate subject of that paper, that I
cannot refrain from interrupting the progress of the discussion, to quote it;
it is in these words (b. 3. chapter 4. sect. 63.) "The sovereign, declaring war,
can neither detain those subjects of the enemy, who are within his dominions at
the time of the declaration, nor their effects. They came into his country on
the public faith. By permitting them to enter his territories, and continue
there, he incitly promised them liberty, and security for their return." This
passage contains, explicitly, the principle which is the general basis of my
argument, namely, that the permission to a foreigner to come, with his effects
into, and acquire others within, our country, in time of peace, virtually
pledges the public faith for the security of his person and property, in the
event of war. How can this be reconciled with the natural right (controuled
only by the customary law of nations) which this writer admits, to confiscate
the debts ^^^e by the subjects of a state to its enemies? I ask once (...) can
there be a natural right to do what which includes a violation of faith?

It is plain, to a demonstration, that the rule laid down in this passage,
which is to just and perspicuous as to speak o^^viction to the heart and
understanding, unites the natural with the ^^^^^ary law of nations, in a
condemnation of the prene^^^ to confiscate or sequester the private property of
our enemy, found in our country at the breaking our of a war.

Let us now proceed to examine the policy and expediency of such a pretension.

In this investigation, I shall assume, as a basis of argument, the following
position, That it is advantageous to nations to have commerce with each other.

Commerce, it is manifest, like any other object of enterprise or industry,
will prosper in proportion as it is secure. Its security, consequently,
promoting its prosperity, extends its advantages. Security is indeed essential
to its having a due and regular course.

The pro^^sion of a right to confiscate or sequester the effects of foreign
merchants, in the case in question, is, in its principle, fatal to that
necessary security. Its free exercise would destroy external commerce; or,
which is nearly the same thing, reduce it within the contracted limits of a
game of hazard, where the chance of large profits, accompanied with the great
risks, would tempt alone the adventurous and the desperate. Those enterprises,
which, from circuitous or long voyages, slowness of sales, incident to the
nature of certain commodities, the necessity of credit, or from other causes,
demand considerable time for their completion, must be renounced. Credit,
indeed, must be banished from all the operations of foreign commerce; an
engine, the importance of which, to its vigorous and successful prosecution,
will be doubted by none, who will be guided by experience or observation.

It cannot need amplification, to elucidate the truth of these positions. The
storms of war occur so suddenly and so often, us to forbid the supposition,
that the merchants of one country would trust their property, to any extent, or
for any duration, in another country, which was in the practice of confiscating
or sequestering the effects of its enemies, found within in territories, at the
commencement of a war. That practice, therefore, would necessarily paralize and
wither the commerce of the country in which it obtained. Accordingly, nations
attentive to the cultivation of commerce, which Formerly were betrayed, by
temporary considerations, the particular instances of that atrocious practice,
have been led, by the experience of its mischiefs, to abstain from it in later
times. They saw that to have persisted in it would have been to abandon
competition on equal terms, in the lucrative and beneficial field of commerce.

It is no answer to this, to say that the exercise of the right might be
ordinarily suspended, though the right itself wight be maintained, for
extraordinary and great emergencies.

In the first place, as the ordinary for^earence of its (...) would be taken by
foreigners for evidence of an intention never to exercise it, by which they
would be enticed into (...) deposites, that would not otherwise have taken
place; a departure from the general course would always involve an act of
treachery and cruelty.

In the second place, the possibility of the occasional exercise of such a
right, if conceived to exist, would be, at least, a flow poison, conducing to a
sickly habit of commence; and, in a series of time, would be productive of much
more evil than could be counterbalanced by any good which it might be possible
to obtain in the contemplated emergency, by the use of the expedient.

Let experience decide -- Examples of confiscation and sequestration have been
given -- When did the dread of them prevent a war? when did it cripple an
enemy, so as to disable him from exertion, or force him into a submission to
the views of his adversary? When did it even sensibly conspire to either of
these ends? If it has ever had any such effect, the evidence of it has not come
within my knowledge.

It is true, that between Great Britain and the United States, the expectation
of such effects is better warranted than perhaps in any other cases that have
existed; because we commonly owe a larger debt to that country, than is usual
between nations, and there is a relative state of things, which tends to a
continuation of this situation.

But how has the matter operated hitherto? In the late war between the two
countries, certain states confiscated the debts due from their citizens to
British creditors, and these creditors actually suffered great losses. The
British cabinet must have known, that it was possible the same thing might
happen in another war, and on a more general scale; yet the appearances were
extremely strong, at a particular juncture, that it was their plan, either from
ill will, from the belief that popular opinion would ultir^^^ly drag our
government into the war, from the union of these two, or from other causes, to
force us into hostilities with them. Hence it appears, that the apprehension of
acts of confiscation, or sequestration, was not sufficient to deter from
hostile views, or to insure pacific dispositions.

It may be pretended, that the menace of this measure, had (...) to restraining
influence on the subsequent conduct of Great Britain. But if was ascribe
nothing to the measures which our government ^^^^lly pursued, under the
pressure of the provocations received, we at least find, in the course of
European events, whether solution of a change of policy in the cabinet of Great
Britain, than from the dread of a legislative piracy on the debts due to their
merchants.

The truth unfortunately is, that the passions of men stifle calculation; that
nations the most attentive to pecuniary considerations, easily surrender them
to ambition, to jealousy, to anger, or to revenge.

For the same reason, the actual experiment of an exercise of the pretended
right, by way of reprisal for an injury complained of, would commonly be as
inefficacious, as the menace of it, to arrest general hostilities. -- Pride is
roused; resentment kindled; and where there is even no previous disposition to
those hostilities, the probability is, that they follow. Nations, like
individuals, ill brook the idea of receding from their pretensions under the
rod, or of admitting the justice (...) an act of retaliation or reprisal, by
submitting to it. Thus w^ learn, from the king of Prussia himself, that the
sequestrations of the Silesia debt, instead of procuring the restoration for
which it was designed, was on the point of occasioning an open rupture between
him and Great Britain, when the supervention of a quarrel with France diverted
the storm, by rendering him necessary as an ally.

Perhaps it may be imagined, that the practice of confiscation or sequestration
would be more efficacious to wound and disable Great Britain, in case of a war,
than to prevent it. But this also is a vain chimera! A nation, that can, at
pleasure, raise by loan twenty millions sterling, would be in little danger of
being disconcerted or enfeebled in her military enter-prizes, by the taking
away or arresting of three or four millions due to her merchants. Did it
produce distress and disorder among those whom it affected and their
connexions? If that disorder was sufficient to threaten a general derangement
of mercantile credit, and, with it, of the public finances, the pending war
affords an example, that the public purse or credit could be brought
successfully into action for the support of the sufferes. Three or four
millions of exchequer bills applied in loans, would be likely to suffice, to
prevent the partial evil from growing into a national calamity.

But we forget, that as far as the interruption of the payment of the debts due
to her merchants could be supposed to operate upon Great Britain, war itself
would essentially answer the purposes of confiscation or sequestration -- By
interrupting trade and intercourse, it is in fact, in a great degree, a virtual
sequestration. Remittances to any extent become impracticable. There are few
ways, in which, on account of the st^^^ of war, it is lawful to make them; and
debtors are, for the most part, enough disposed to embrace pretexts of
procrastination.

^he inconvenience of deferred payment would, therefore, be felt by Great
Britain, with little mitigation, from the bare existence of war, without the
necessity of our government incurring the discredit and responsibility of a
special interference.

Indeed, as far as the dread of eventual loss can operate, it ought, in a great
measure to have its effect exclusive of the idea of confiscation. Great Britain
must want reflection, not to be sensible, that, in making war upon us, she
makes war upon her own merchants; by the depredations upon our trade destroying
those resources from which they are to be paid. If she be indifferent to this
consideration, it will be because she is governed by some motive or passion
powerful enough to dispose her to run the risk of the entire loss -- in the
reliance of obtaining indemnification by the acquisitions of war, or in the
terms of peace.

Will it be said, that the seizure of the debts would put in the hands of our
government a valuable resource for carrying on the war? This, upon trial, would
prove at fallacious as all the rest. Various inducements would prevent debtors
from paying into the treasury. Some would decline it from conscientious
scruples, from a doubt of the rectitude of the thing -- others, with intent to
make a merit with their creditors of the concealment, and to favor their own
future credit and advantage -- others, from a desire to retain the money in
their own employment -- and a great number, from the apprehension that the
treaty of peace might revive their responsibility to the creditors, with the
embarrassment to themselves of getting back, as well as they could, the moneys
which they had paid into the treasury. Of this, our last treaty of peace, in
the opinion of able judges, gave an example. -- These causes and others, which
do not as readily occur, would oppose great obstacles to the execution of the
measure.

But severe laws, inflicting heavy penalties, might compel it -- Experience
does not warrant a sanguine reliance upon this expedient, in a case in which
great opportunity of concernment is united with strong motives of inclination
or interest -- It would require an inquisition, justly intolerable to a free
people -- penalties, which would confound the due proportion between crime and
punishment, to detect, or to deter from concealment and evasion, and to execute
the law -- Probably no means lose efficacious than a revolutionary tribunial
and a guillotine would go near to answer the end. -- There are but few, I
trust, to whom these would be welcome means.

We may conclude, therefore, that the law would be ev^^^d to an extent, which
would disappoint the expectations from it, as a resource. Some moneys, no
doubt, would be collected, but the probability is, that the amount would be
insignificant, even in the scale of a single compaign -- But, should she
collection prove as complete, as it ordinarily is, between debtor and creditor,
it would little, if at all, exceed the expense of one campaign.

Hence we perceive, that, regarding the measure, either as a mean of disabling
our enemies, or as a resource to ourselves, its consequence dwindles, upon a
close survey; it cannot pretend to a magnitude, which would apologize, either
for a sacrifice of national honor or candor, or for a deviation from the true
principles of commerce and credit.

But let us take a further view of its disadvantages.

A nation, in case of war, is under no responsibility for the delinquencies or
frauds of its citizens, who are debtors to those of its enemy, if it does not
specially interfere with the payment of the debts which they owe. But, if it
interposes its authority to prevent the payment, it gives a claim of
indemnification to its adversary, for the intervening losses which those
delinquencies or frauds may occasion. -- Whether, on the making of peace, this
would be insisted upon or waved, might depend much on the good or ill success
of the war; but every thing which adds to the catalogue of our enemy's just
pretensions, especially when the fortune of war has been pretty equal, is an
evil, either as an additional obstacle to speedy peace, or as an ingredient to
render the terms of it less advantageous to ourselves. And it is, therefore,
unwise in a government to increase the list of such pretensions, by a measure,
which, without utility to itself, administers to the indolence of negligent,
and to the avidity of fraudulent, individuals.

Further -- Every species of reprisal or annoyance, which a power at war
employs, contrary to liberality or justice, of doubtful propriety, in the
estimation of the law of nations, departing from that moderation, which, in
latter times, serves (...) mitigate the severities of war, by furnishing a
pretext or provocation to the other side to resort to extremities, serves to
embitter the spirit of hostilities, and to extend its ravages. War is then apt
to become more sanguinary, more wasting, and every way more destructive. This
is a ground of serious reflection to every nation, both as it regards humanity
and policy; to this country it presents itself, accompanied with considerations
of peculiar force. A vastly-extended seacoast, overspread with defenseless
towns, would offer an abundant p^^y to an incensed and malignant enemy, having
the power to command the sea. The usages of modern war forbid hostilities of
this kind; and though they are not always respected, yet, as they are never
violated, unless by way of retaliation for a violation of them on the other
side, without exciting the reprobation of the impartial part of mankind,
sullying the glory; and blasting the reputation of the party which disregards
them, this consideration has, in general, force sufficient to induce an
observance of them. But the confiscation or sequestration of private debts, or
private property in public funds, now generally regarded as an odious and
unwarrantable measure, would, as between us and Great Britain, contain a
poignant sting. Its effect to exasperate, in an extreme degree, both the nation
and government of that country, cannot be doubted. A disposition to retaliate,
is a natural consequence; and it would not be difficult for us to be made to
suffer beyond any possible degree of advantage to be derived from the occasion
of the retaliation. It were much wiser to leave the property of British
subjects, an untouched pledge for the moderation of its government, in the mode
of prosecuting the war.

Besides (as, if requisite, might be proved from the records of history) in
national controversies, it is of real importance to conciliate the good opinion
of mankind; and it is even useful to preserve or gain that of our enemy. The
latter facilitates accommodation and peace; the former attracts good offices,
friendly interventions, sometimes direct support, from others. -- The exemplary
conduct, in general, of our country, in our contest for independence, was
probably not a little serviceable to us in this way; it secured, to the
intrinsic goodness of our cause, every collateral advantage, and gave it a
popularity among nations, unalloyed and unimpaired, which even stole into the
cabinets of princes. A contrary policy tends to contrary consequences. Though
nations, in the main, are governed by what they suppose their interest, he must
be imperfectly versed in human nature, who thinks it indifferent, whether the
maxims of a state tend to excite kind or unkind dispositions in others, or who
does not know, that these dispositions may insensibly mould or bias the views
of self-interest. -- This were to suppose that rulers only reason -- do not
feel; in other words, are not men.

Moreover, the measures of war ought ever to look forward to peace. The
confiscation or sequestration of the private property of an enemy must always
be a point of serious discussion, when interest or necessity leads to
negociations for peace. Unless when absolutely prostrate by the war,
restitution is likely to constitute an ultimatum of the suffering party. It
must be agreed to, or the war protracted, and at last, it is probable, it must
still be agreed to. Should a refusal of restitution prolong the war for only
one year, the chance is, that more will be lost than was gained by the
confiscation. Should it be necessary finally to make it, after prolonging the
war, the disadvantage will preponderate in a ratio to the prolongation. Should
it be, in the first instance, assented to, what will have been gained? The
temporary use of a fund of inconsiderable moment, in the general issue of the
war, at the expense of justice, character, credit, and, perhaps, of having
sharpened the evils of war. How infinitely preferable to have drawn an equal
fund from our own resources, which, with good management, is always
practicable! -- If the restitution includes damages, on account of the
interference, for the failures of individuals, the loan will have been the most
costly that could have been made. It has been elsewhere observed, that our
treaty of peace with Great Britain gives an example of restitution. The late
one between France and Prussia gives another. This must become every day more
and more a matter of course, because the immunity of mercantile debts becomes
every day more and more important to trade, better understood to be so, and
more clearly considered as enjoined by the principles of the law of nations.

Thus we see, that in reference to the simple question of war and peace, the
measure of confiscation or sequestration is marked with every feature of
impolicy.

We have before seen, that the pretensions of a right to do the one or the
other, has a most inimical aspect toward commerce and credit.

Let us resume this view of the subject. The credit, which our merchants have
been able to obtain abroad, essentially in Great Britain, has, from the first
settlement of our country to this day, been the animating principle of our
foreign commerce. This every merchant knows and feels; -- and every intelligent
merchant is sensible, that, for many years to come, the case must continue the
same. This, in our situation, is a peculiar reason, of the utmost force, for
renouncing the pretension in question.

The exercise of it, or the serious apprehension of its exercise, would
necessarily have one of two effects. -- It would deprive our merchants of the
credit, so important to them, or it would oblige them to pay a premium for it,
proportioned to the opinion of the risk. Or, to speak more truly, it would
combine the two effects; it would cramp credit, and subject what was given to a
high premium. The most obvious and familiar principles of human action
establish, that the consideration for money or property, lent or credited, is
moderate or otherwise, according to the opinion of security or hazard, and that
the quantity of either to be obtained, on loan or credit, is in a great degree
contracted or enlarged by the same rule.

Thus should we, in the operations of our trade, pay exorbitantly for a
pretension, which is of little value, or rather, which is pernicious, even in
the relations to which its utility is referred. What folly to cherish it! How
much greater the folly ever to think of exercising it! It never can be
exercised hereafter, in our country, without great and lasting mischief.

Instead of cherishing so odious a pretension, as "our best, our only weapon of
defense," -- wisdom admonishes us to be eager to cast it from us, as a weapon
most dangerous to the wearer, proscribed by the laws of nations, by the laws of
honor, and by every principle of sound policy.

Every merchant ought to desire that the most perfect tranquillity, on this
point, in foreign countries, should facilitate to him, on the best and cheapest
terms, the credit for which he has occasion. And every other citizen ought to
desire, that he may be thus freed from a continual contribution, in the
enhanced price of every imported commodity he consumes, toward defraying the
premium which the want of that tranquillity is calculated to generate.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXII.
THE analogy of the stipulation in the 10th article, with stipulations in our
other treaties, and in the treaties between other nations, is the remaining
topic of discussion. After this, attention will be paid to such observations,
by way of objection to the article, as may not have been before expressly or
virtually answered.

The 20th article of our treaty of amity and commerce with France, is in these
words:

"For the better promoting of commerce, on both sides, it is agreed, that if a
war shall break out between the said two nations, six months, after the
proclamation of war, shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and towns
where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and merchandises; and
if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them within that term by
either party, or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction shall be
made for the same."

The 18th article of our treaty of amity and commerce with the United
Netherlands, is in these words:

"For the better promoting of commerce, on both sides, it is agreed, that if a
war should break out between their high mightinesses, the States General of the
United Netherlands, and the United States of America, there shall always be
granted to the subjects on each side, the term of nine months, after the date
of the rupture or the proclamation of war, to the end that they may retire with
their effects, and transport them where they please, which it shall be lawful
for them to do, as well as to sell and transport their effects and goods, with
all freedom and without any hindrance, and without being able to proceed,
during the said term of nine months, to any arrest of their effects, much less
of their persons; on the contrary, there shall be given them, for their vessels
and effects which they would carry away, passports and safe conducts for the
nearest ports of their respective countries, and for the time necessary for the
voyage."

The 22d article of our treaty of amity and commerce with Sweden, is in these
words:

"In order to favor commerce, on both sides, as much as possible, it is agreed,
that in case war should break out between the two nations, the term of nine
months after the declaration of war shall be allowed to the merchants and
subjects respectively, on one side and on the other, in order that they may
withdraw with their effects and movables, which they shall be at liberty to
carry off or to sell where they please, without the least obstacle -- nor shall
any seize their effects, and much less their persons, during the said nine
months; but on the contrary, passports, which shall be valid for a time
necessary for their return, shall be given them for their vessels and the
effects which they shall be willing to carry with them -- and, if any thing is
taken from them, or any injury is done to them by one of the parties, their
people and subjects, during the term above prescribed, full and entire
satisfaction shall be made to them on that account."

The 23d article of our treaty of amity and commerce with Prussia, contains
this provision:

"If war should arise between the two contracting parties, the merchants of
either country, then residing in the other, shall be allowed to remain nine
months, to collect their debts and settle their affairs, and may depart freely,
carrying off all their effects without molestation or hindrance."

These articles of four, and the only commercial treaties we had with foreign
powers, prior to the pending treaty with Great Britain, though differing in
terms, agree in substance; except as to time, which varies from six to nine
months. And they clearly amount to this, that upon the breaking out of a war
between the contracting parties in each case, there shall be, for a term of six
or nine months, full protection and security to the persons and property of the
subjects of one, which are then in the territories of the other, with liberty
to collect their debts, The term "debts," is only expressed in the Prussian
treaty, but there are in the other treaties, terms which include debts, and
this is the manifest spirit and intent of all.
to sell their goods and merchandises, and to remove, with their effects,
wheresoever they please. For this term of six or nine months, there is a
complete suspension of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester, giving,
or being designed to give, an opportunity to withdraw the whole property which
the subjects or citizens of one party have in the country of the other.

The differences between these stipulations and that in the article under
examination are chiefly these: the latter is confined to debts, property in the
public funds and in public and private banks, without any limitation of the
duration of the protection -- The former comprehends, in addition, goods and
merchandises, with a limitation of the protection to a term of six or nine
months; but with the intent and supposition that the term allowed may and will
be adequate to entire security. The principle, therefore, of all the
stipulations is the same; each aims at putting the persons and property of the
subjects of one enemy, especially merchants, being within the country of the
other enemy at the commencement of a war, out of the reach of confiscation or
sequestration.

The persons whose names are to our other treaties, on the part of the United
States, are Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, Arthur Lee, John Adams, and Thomas
Jefferson. The three first are to the treaty with France -- Mr. Adams is singly
to that with the United Netherlands -- Dr. Franklin singly to that with Sweden,
and these two, with Mr. Jefferson, are jointly to that with Prussia -- The
treaty with Sweden was concluded in April 1783; that with Prussia, in August,
1785. These dates repel the idea, that considerations of policy, relative to
the war might have operated in the case.

We have, consequently, the sanction of all these characters to the principle,
which governed the stipulation entered into by Mr. Jay, and not only from the
ratification of the former treaties at different periods, distant from each
other, by different descriptions of men in our public councils, but also from
there never having been heard, in the community, a lisp of murmur against the
stipulation, through a period of seventeen years, counting from the date of the
treaty with France, there is just ground to infer a coincidence of the public
opinion of the country.

I verily believe, that if, in the year 1783, a treaty had been made with
England, containing an article similar to the 10th in the present treaty, it
would have met with general acquiescence. The spirit of party had not then
predisposed men's minds to estimate the propriety of a measure according to the
agent, rather than according to its real fitness and quality. What would then
have been applauded as wise, liberal, equitable, and expedient, is now, in more
instances than one, under the pestilential influence of that balesul spirit,
condemned as improvident, impolitic, and dangerous.

Our treaty with Prussia, the 23d article of which has been cited, is indeed a
model of liberality, which, for the principles it contains, does honor to the
parties, and has been in this country a subject of deserved and unqualified
admiration. It contradicts, as if studiously, those principles of restriction
and exclusion, which are the foundations of the mercantile and navigating
system of Europe. It grants perfect freedom of conscience and worship to the
respective subjects and citizens, with no other restraint than that they shall
not insult the religion of others. Adopting the rule, that free ships shall
make free goods, it extends the protection to the persons as well as to the
goods of enemies. -- Enumerating, as contraband, only "arms, ammunition, and
military stores," it even provides that contraband articles shall not be
consiscated, but may be taken on the condition of paying for them. It provides
against embargoes of vessels and effects. It expressly exempts women, children,
scholars of every faculty, cultivators of the earth, artizan, manufacturers,
and fishermen, unarmed and inhabiting unfortified towns, villages, and places,
and in general, all others whose occupations are for the common subsistence and
benefit of mankind, their houses, fields, and goods, from molestation in their
persons and employments, and from burning, wasting, and destruction, in time of
war; and stipulates payment at a reasonable price for what may be necessarily
taken from them for military use. -- It likewise protects from feizure and
confiscation, in time of war, vessels employed in trade, and inhibits the
granting commissions to private armed vessels, empowering them to take or
destroy such trading vessels, or to interrupt their commerce; and it makes a
variety of excellent provisions to secure to prisoners of war, a humane
treatment.

These particulars are stated as evidence of the temper of the day, and of a
policy, which then prevailed, to bottom our system with regard to foreign
nations upon those grounds of moderation and equity, by which reason, religion
and philosophy has tempered the harsh maxims of more early times. It is painful
to observe an effort to make the public opinion, in this respect, retrograde,
and to infect our councils with a spirit contrary to these salutary advances
toward improvement in true civilization and humanity.

If we pass from our own treaties, to those between other nations, we find that
the provisions, which have been extracted from ours, have very nearly become
formulas in the conventions of Europe. As examples of this may be consulted,
the following articles of treaties between Great Britain and other powers (to
wit) the XVIIIth article of a treaty of peace and commerce with Portugal, in
1642 -- the XXXVIth article of a treaty of peace, commerce, and alliance with
Spain, in 1667 -- the XIXth article of a treaty of peace, and the ^^d of a
treaty of commerce with France, both in 1713, and the XIIth article of a treaty
of commerce and navigation with Russia, in 1766.

The article with Portugal provides, that if difficulties and doubts shall
arise between the two nations, which give reason to apprehend the interruption
of commerce, public notice of it shall be given to the subjects on both sides,
and afte^ that notice, two years shall be allowed to carry away the
merchandize^ and goods, and in the mean time, there shall be no injury or
prejudice done to any persons or goods on either side.

The articles with France, in addition to the provisions common in other cases,
particularly stipulate, that during the ter^^^ of the protection (six months)
"the subjects on each side shall enjoy good and speedy justice, so that during
the said space of six months, they may be able to recover their goods and
effects, entrusted as well to the public, ^^o private persons."

The article with Russia, besides stipulating an exemption from confiscation
for one year, with the privilege to remove and carry away in safety, provides
additionally, that the subjects of each party "shall be further permitted,
either at o^ before their departure, to consign the effects which they shall
not as yet have disposed of, as well as the debts that shall be d^^ to them, to
such persons as they shall think proper, in order ^^dispose of them according
to their desire and for their benefit which debts, the debtors shall be obliged
to pay in the sam^ manner as if no such rupture had happened."

All these articles are, with those of our treaties, analagou^^ in principle,
as heretofore particularly explained, to the 10th article of the treaty under
discussion. That of the British treaty with France designates expressly debts
due from the public a^ well as those due from private persons. That with Russia
go^^ the full length of our tenth article; empowering the creditou^ on each
side to assign the debts, which they are not able to collect within the term of
their residence, to whomsoever they think fit, for their own benefit, and
declaring that these deba^ shall be paid to the assigns in the same manner as
if no rupture had happened.

There is a document extant, which may fairly be supposed to express the sense
of the government of France, at the period to which it relates, of the
foundation of these stipulations. It is a memorial of Mr. Bussy, minister from
the court of France to that of London, for negociating peace, dated in the year
1761, and contains these passages: "As it is impracticable for two princes, who
make war with each other, to agree between them which is the aggressor with
regard to the other, Thus we find it the sentiment of this minister, that it is
impossible for two princes who make war with each other, to agree which is the
couressor with regard to the other. And yet Mr. Jay was to extort from Great
Britain an acknowledgment, that she was the aggressor with regard to us, and
was g^^^ of pusillanimity in waving the question.
equity and humanity have dictated these precautions, that where an unforeseen
rupture happens suddenly and without any previous declaration, foreign vessels,
which, navigating under the security of peace, and of treaties, happen, at the
time of the rupture, to be in either of the respective ports, shall have time
and full liberty to withdraw themselves.

"This wise provision, so agreeable to the rules of good faith, constitutes a
part of the law of nations, and the article of the treaty, which sanctifies
these precautions, ought to be faithfully executed, notwithstanding the breach
of the other articles of the treaty which is the natural consequence of the war.

"The courts of France and Great Britain used this salutary precaution in the
treaties of Utrecht and Aix la Chapelle."

These passages place the ^^^urity stipulated in the treaties for the persons
and property (...) subjects of one party found in the country of another, at
the beginning of a war, upon the footing of its constituting a part of the law
of nations, which may be considered as a formal diplomatic recognition of the
principle for which we contend. As this position was not itself in dispute
between the two governments, but merely a collateral inference from it,
applicable to vessels taken at sea, prior to a declaration of war, it may be
regarded as a respectable testimony of the law of nations on the principal
point.

If the law of nations confers this exemption from seizure upon vessels, which,
at the time of the rupture, happen to be in the respective ports of the
belligerent parties, it is evident that it must equally extend its protection
to debts contracted in a course of lawful trade. Vessels are particularly
mentioned, because the discussion turned upon vessels seized at sea. But the
reference to the treaties of Utrecht and Aix la Chapelle shows, that the
minister, in his observation, had in view the whole subject matter of the
articles of those treaties, which provide for the security of merchants and
their effects in the event of war.

This conformity in principle, of the article under examination, with the
provisions in so many treaties of our own and of other nations, taken in
connection with the comment of ^^^tional and full evidence that our envoy, in
agreeing to it, d^^ not go upon new and untrodden ground; that, on the
contrary, he was in a beaten track; that, in pursuing the dictates of reason,
and the better opinion of writers, as to the rule of the law of nations
respecting the point, he was, at the same time, pursuing the examples of all
the other treaties, which we had ourselves made, and of many of those of other
countries.

It is now incumbent upon me to perform my promise of replying to such
objections to the article as may remain una^swered by the preceding remarks. It
is with pleasure I no^^ that the field is very narrow -- that, indeed, there
scarcely ^^^mains any thing which is not so frivilous and impotent as ^^^most
to sothid a serious replication -- it will therefore be ^^^^aim to be brief.

It is said, there is only an a^^^^^^ reciprocity in the ar^^ticle, millions
being due on o^^^^e, and little or nothing on the other.

The answer to this is, that no right being relinquished, on either side, no
privilege granted, the stipulation amounting only to a recognition of a rule of
the law of nations, to a promise to abstain from injustice and a breach of
faith, there is no room for an argument about reciprocity further than to
require that the promise should be mutual, as is the case -- This is the only
equivalent which the nature of the subject demands or permits -- It would be
dishonorable to accept a boon merely for an engagement to fulfill a moral
obligation -- Indeed, as heretofore intimated, the true rule of reciprocity is
stipulations of treaties, is equal right, not equal advantage from each several
stipulation.

But it has been shown, that the stipulation will be benefici^^ to us, by the
confidence which it will give on the other side, obviating and avoiding the
obstructions to trade, the injuries to, and encumbrances upon, credit,
naturally incident to the distrust and apprehension, which, after the question
had been once moved, were to be expected^mdash;Here, if a compensation were
required, there is one -- Let me add as a truth, which, perhaps, has no
exception, however uncongenial with the fashionalbe patriotic creed -- that, in
the wise order of providence, nations, in a temporal sense, may safely trust
the maxim, that the observance of justice carries with it its own and a full
reward.

It is also said, that having bound ourselves by treaty, we shall hereafter
lose the credit of moderation, which would attend a forberance to exercise the
right. But it having been demonstrated, that no such right exists, we only
renounce a claim to the negative merit of not committing injustice, and we
acquire the positive praise of exhibiting a willingness to renounce explicitly
a pretension, which might be the instrument of oppression and sraud -- It is
always honorable to give proof of upright intention.

It is further said, that under the protection of this stipulation the king of
Great Britain, who has alr^^dy speculated in our funds (the assertors would be
puzzled t^^^^ing proof of the fact) may engross the whole capital of the bank
of the United States, and thereby secure the uncontrouled direction of it --
that he may hold the stock in the name of his ambaslador, or of some citizen of
the United States, perhaps a senater, who, if of the virtuous twenty, Those who
advised to a ratification of the treaty
might be proud of the honor -- that thus our citizens, in time of peace, (...)
experience the mortification of being beholden to British directors, for the
accomm^^^dations they might want -- that, in time of war, our operati^^^ight he
cramped at the pleasure of his majesty, and according as he should see fit or
not to accommodate our government with loans -- and that hoth in peace and war
we may be reduced to the abject condition of having the whole capital of our
national bank administered by his ^^itannic majesty.

Shall I treat this rhapsody with seriousness or ridicule?

The capital of the bank of the United States is ten millions of dollars,
little short, at the present market price, of three millions of pounds
sterling; but, from the natural operation of such a demand, in raising the
price, it is not probable that much less than four millions sterling would
suffice to complete the monopoly. I have never understood, that the private
purse of his Britannic majesty, if it be true, as asserted, that he has already
witnessed a relish for speculation in our funds (a fact, however, from which it
was natural to infer a more pacific disposition toward us) was so very ample
as conveniently to spare an item of such size for a speculation across the
Atlantic. But, perhaps, the national purse will be brought to his aid -- As
this supposes a parliamentary grant, new taxes and new loans, it does not seem
to be a very manageable thing, without disclosure of the object, and, if
disclosed, so very unexampled an attempt of a foreign government would present
a case completely out of the reach of all ordinary rules, justifying, by the
manifest danger to us, even war and the confiscation of all that had been
purchased. For let it be remembered, that the article does not protect the
public property of a foreign government, prince, or state, independent of the
observation just made, that such a case would be without the reach of ordinary
rules. It may be added, that an attempt of this kind, from the force of the
pecuniary capital of Great Britain, would, as a precedent, threaten and alarm
all nations. Would consequences like these be incurred?

But let it (...) supposed, that the inclination shall exist, and that all
difficu^^^ about funds have been surmounted -- Still, to effect the plan, there
must be, in all the stockholders, a willingness to sell to the British king or
his agents, as well as the will and means, on his part, to purchase. Here, too,
some impediments might be experienced: there are persons who might choose to
keep their property in the shape of ban^^ stock, and live upon the income of
it, whom price would no^^ readily tempt to part with it. (...), there is an
additional obstacle to complets success: -- (...) ^^ted States are themselves
the proprietors of two mi^^^oons of the bank stock.

Of two things, one, either the monopoly of his Britannic majesty would be
known (and it would be a pretty arduous task to keep it a secret, especially if
the stock was to stand, as suggested, in the name of his ambassador) or it
would be unknown and concealed under unsuspected names: In the former
supposition, the observations already made recur. There would be no protection
to it from the article; and the extraordinary nature of the case would warrant
any thing -- Would his majesty or the parliament choose to trust so large a
property in so perilous a situations?

If, to avoid this, the plan-should be to keep the operation unknown, the most
effectual method would be to place the stock in the names of our own citizens.
This, it seems, would be attended with no difficulty; since even our senators
would be ambitious of the honor: and if they should have qualms and fears,
others more compliant could, no doubt, be found amongst the numerous
secretaries or adherents of Great Britain in our country: probably some of the
patriots would not be inexotable, if properly solicited. Or, in the last
resort, persons might be sent from Great Britain to acquire naturalization for
the express purpose.

In this supposition, too, the article would be at the least innocent. For its
provisions are entirely foreign to the case of stock standing in the names of
our own citizens. It neither enlarges nor abridges the power of the government
in this respect.

Further, how will the article work the miracle of placing the bank under the
management of British directors? It gives no new rights, no new qualifications.

The constitution of the bank (section the 5th, 7th of the act of
incorporation) has provided, with solicitude, these important guards, against
foreign or other sinister influence -- 1. That none but a citizen of the United
States shall be eligible as a director. 2. That none but a stockholder, a^^^ly
resident within the United States, shall vote in the elect^^^ by proxy. 3. That
one fourth of the directors, who are to be elected annually, must every year go
out of the direction. 4 That a director may, at any time, be removed and
replaced by the stock holders at a general meeting. 5. That a single share
shall give one vote for directors, while any number of shares, in the same
person, ^^^partnership or body politic, will not give more than thirty votes.


H^^^^e it is impossible, th^^^e bank can be in the management of British
directors -- ^^^ish subject being incapable of being a director. It is also
next to impossible, that an undue British influence could operate in the choice
of directors, out of the number of our own citizens. The British king, or
British subjects out of the United States, could not even have a vote by
attorney, in the choice. Schemes of secret monopoly could not be executed,
because they would be betrayed, unless the secret was confined to a small
number. A small number, no one of whom could have more than thirty votes, would
be easily overruled by the more numerous proprietors of single or a small
number of shares, with the addition of the votes of the United States.

But here again it is to be remembered, that as to combination with our own
citizens, in which they were to be ostensible for any pernicious foreign
project -- the article under consideration is perfectly nugatory -- It can do
neither good nor harm, since it merely relates, as to the exemption from
confiscation and seizure on our part, to the known property of British subjects.

It follows, therefore, that the dangers pourtrayed to us from the s^^culating
enterprises of his Britannic majesty, are the vagaries of an overheated
imagination -- or the contrivances of a spirit of deception -- and that so far
as they could be supposed to have the least color, it turns upon
circumstances, upon which the treaty can have no influence whatever. In taking
pains to expose their futility, I have been principally led by the desire of
making my fellow-citizens sensible, in the instance, as in others, of the
extravagancies of the opposers (...) the treaty.

One artifice to render the article unacceptable has been (...) put cases of
extreme misconduct, on the other side, of flagr^^^ violations of the law of
nations, of war, of justice, and (...) humanity; and to ask, whether, under
such circumstances, (...) confiscation or sequestration of debts would not be
justifiabl^ -- To this the answer is, that if circumstances so extraordinary
should arise, as, without the treaty, would warrant so ext^^ordinary a^^^t,
they will equally warrant it under the treaty For cases (...) kind are
exceptions to all general rules. They would excuse the violation of an express,
or positive, as (...) as of a tacit or virtual pledge of the public faith:
which ^^seribes the whole difference between the existence and (...) ^^istence
of the article in question. They rosemble those (...) of extrema necessity
through ^^^essive hunger, for instance which, in the eye (...) the law of
nature, will execu^^ the ta^^^ of the property of another, (...) those cases of
extreme (...) of authority of releve, which (...) ^nuting un^^^^^ocally (...)
ran^y, are admitted to just^^^ ^^cible resistance to the ^^^blished
authorities. Ca^^^tu^^^^ of government, lawn (...) all give way to cu^^^^ians
of such a description -- the p^^^^ of obligation is, to distinguish them with
sincerity, and (...) to indulge our passious and interests, in substituting
puttend^^ for real cases.

A writer, who disgraces by adopting the name of CICE^^^ makes a curious remark
by way of objection. He affirms th^^ the article is nugatory, because a treaty
is dissolved by a state (...) was, in which state the provision is designed to
operate. If (...) be true, the article is at least harmless, and the trouble
(...) painting it in such terrific colors might have been spared. (...) it is
not true. Reason, writers, the practice of all nations a^^^^ed in this
position, that those stipulations, which contemp^^^ the state of war, in other
words, which are designed to ope^^^ in case of war, preserve their force and
obligation when (...) taken place. Vattel, B. iii chapter x.
To what end else all the stipulations which have been cited from so many
treaties? This writer is as profligate as he is absurd -- Besides impu^^^ to
Camissus, (...) general terms, a number of things of which he never dreamt, he
has (...) effrontery to forge, as a literal quotation from him (calling it his
own language (...) designating it by inverted commas) a passage respecting the
impressing of seamen, which certainly not in terms, nor even in substance, upon
fair construction, in to be found in anything he has written -- Not having all
the numbers of Cicero at hand, I may ^^^take, in attributing to him the
principal sentiment, which is from memory but I have under my eye the number
which witnesses his forgery.


Previous to a conclusion I shall observe, barely with a view to accuracy, that
the article leaves unprotected all vessels, goods and merchandises, every
species of property, indeed, except debts between individuals and the property
of individuals in the public funds and in public and private banks. With this
exception, whatever before may have been liable to confiscation of
sequestration, still remains so, notwithstanding any thing contained in this
article.

To over-rate the value and force of our own arguments is a natural foible of
self-love -- to be convinced without convincing others, is no uncommon fate of
a writer or speaks -- but I am more than ordinarily mistaken if every mind
open ^^conviction, will not have been satisfied by what has been offered --
that the tenth article of the treaty lately negociated with Great Britain, does
nothing but confirm, by a positive agreement, a rule of the law of nations --
indicated by reason, supported by the better opinion of writers, ratified by
modern usage, dict^^^ by ^^^tice and good says, recognized by formal acts and
doth^^^^ of different nations, witnessed by diplomatic testimony, sanotioned by
our treaties with o^^^ ^ountries, and by treaties between other countries --
and ^^^mable with sound policy and the true interests of the United States.

The discussion has been drawn out to so great a length, because the objections
to this article are amongst those which have been urged with the greatest
warmth and emphasis against the treaty, and its vindication from them, if
satisfactory, must go far toward securing to it the public suffrage. Citizens
of America! it is for you to perform your part of the task, it is for you to
weigh with candor the arguments which have been submitted to your judgments;
to consult, without bias, the integrity of your hearts; to exile prejudice and
to immolate on the after of truth, the artifices of cabal and falsehood! There
can then be no danger that patriotism will have to lament, or national honor to
blush at, the sentence which you shall pronounce.

The articles, which adjust the matters of controversy between the two
countries, all those which are permanent, have now been reviewed. Let me appeal
to the consciences of those who have accompanied me in the review -- if these
articles were all that composed the treaty, would it be the better, that they
should exist -- or that all the sources of rupture and war with Great Britain
should have survived the negotiation to exting^^^ them, and should still
actually subsist in full vigor? If ev^^^ enlightened and honest man must
prefer the former -- then (...) me make another observation, and put another
question. The remaining articles of the treaty, which constitute its commercial
part, expire by their own limitation at the end of twelve years. It is in the
power of either party, consistently with the Instrument, to terminate them at
the end of the expiration of two years after the present war between France and
Great Britain.

Is it at al^ probable that they can contain any thing so injurious,
considering the short duration, which may be given to them, as to
counterbalance the important consideration of pe^serving peace to this young
country; as to warrant the exc^^sive clamours which have been raised: as to
authorize the h^^rid calumaies which are vented; and to justify the system^^^
efforts which are in operation to convulse our country and (...) hazard even
CIVIL WAR? In applying the character of dishonesty and turpitude to the
principle of confiscation or sequestration -- I am far from intending to brand
as dishonest (...) all those whose opinions favor it -- I know there are some
ardent spirits charge able with the error, of whose integrity I think well.


CAMILLI^

No. XXIII.
THE proceeding articles having adjusted those controver^^^ which threatened an
open rupture between the two countries, it remained to form such dispositions
relative to the intercourse, commerce, and navigation, of the parties, as
should appear most likely to preserve peace, and promote their mutual advantage.

Those who have considered with attention the interests of commerce, will agree
in the opinion, that its utility, as well (...) general prosperity, would be
most effectually advanced by a t^^^^ abolition of the restraints and
regulations with which the jealousies and rival policy of nations have
embarrassed it. But though we are not chargeable with having contributed to the
establishment of these errors, so discouraging to the industry and perplexing
in the intercourse of nations, we found them so deeply rooted and so
extensively prevalent, that our voice and opinions would have been little
regarded, had we expressed a desire of a system more liberal and advantageous
to all.

The rights of commerce among nations between whom exist no treaties, are
imperfect.

"The law of nature," says Vattel, (b. 1 s. 89) "gives to no person whatever,
the least kind of right to sell what belongs to him, to another who does not
want to buy it; nor has any nation that of felling its commodities or
merchandise to a people who are unwilling to have them. Every man and every
nation being perfectly at liberty to buy a thing that is to be sold, or not to
buy it, and to buy it of one rather than of another." -- "Every state has
constantly," continues the same author, "a right to prohibit the entrance of
foreign merchandi^^^ and the people who are interested in this prohibition have
no right to complain of it." -- States by convention may turn these imperfect
into perfect rights, and thus a nation, not having naturally a perfect right to
carry on commerce with another, may acquire it by treaty. A simple permission
to trade with a nation, gives no perfect right to that trade; it may be carried
on so long as permitted; but the nation granting such permission is under no
obligation to continue (...) perfect right in one nation to carry on commerce
and tr^^^ with another nation can alone be procured by treaty.

From the precarious nature of trade between nations, as well as from the
desire of obtaining special advantages and preferences in carrying it on,
originated the earliest conventions on the subject of commerce. The first
commercial treaty that placed the parties on a more secure and better footing
in their dealings with each other than existed in their respective intercourse
with other nations, inspired others with a desire to establish, by similar
treaties, an equally advantageous arrangement. Thus one treaty was followed by
another, until, as was the case when the United States became an independent
power, all nations had entered into extensive and complicated stipulations,
concerning their navigation, manufactures and commerce.

This being the actual condition of the commercial world, when we arrived at
our station in it, the like inducements to render certain that, which, by the
law of nations, was precarious, and to participate in the advantages secured by
national agreements, prompted our government to propose to all, and to conclude
with several, of the European nations, treaties of comme^^e.

Immediately after the conclusion of the war, congress appointed Mr. Adams,
Doctor Franklin, and Mr. Jefferson, joint commissioners, to propose and
conclude commercial treaties with the different nations of Europe. This
commission was opened at Paris, and overtures were made to the different powers
(including Great Britain) through their ministers residing at Paris. The basis
of these numerous treaties, which congress were desirous to form, was, that the
parties should respectively enjoy the rights of the most favored nations.
Various answers were given by the foreign ministers, in behalf on their several
nations. But the treaty with Prussia was the only one concluded, of the very
great number proposed by the American commissioners. Mr. Adams, in 1785, was
removed to London, Dr. Franklin soon after returned to America, and Mr.
Jefferson succeeded him as minister at Paris. Thus failed the project of
forming commercial treaties with almost every power in Europe. Treaties with
Russia, Denmark, Great Britain, Spain and Portugal, would have been of
importance; but the scheme of extending treaties of commerce to all the minor
powers of Europe, not omitting his holiness the pope was, it must be
acknowledged, somewhat chimerical, and could not fail to have cast an air of
ridicule on the commissions that with great solemnity were open (...) Paris.

The imbecility of our nationa^ ^^ernment, under the articles of confederation,
was understood abroad as well is (...) home; and the opinions of characters in
England, most inclined to favor an extensive commercial connection between the
two countries, were understood to have been opposed to the formation of a
commercial treaty with us; sinee, from the defects of our articles of union, we
were supposed to be destitute of the power requisite to enforce the execution
of the stipulations that such a treaty might contain.

We must all remember the various and ill-digested laws for the regulation of
commerce, which were adopted by the several states as substitutes for those
commercial treatics, in the conclusion of which our commissioners had been
disappointed -- the embarrassments which proceeded from this source, joined to
those felt from the derangement of the national treasury, were the immediate
cause which assembled the convention at Philadelphia in 1787. The result of
this convention was the adoption of the present federal constitution, the
legislative and executive departments of which each possess a power to reg^late
foreign commerce; the former, by enacting laws for that purpose, the latter, by
forming commercial treaties with Foreign nations.

The opinion heretofore entertained by our government, repecting the utility of
commercial treaties, is not equivocal; and it is probable that they will, in
future, deem it expedient to adjust their foreign trade by treaty, in
preference to legislative provisions, as far as it shall be found practicable,
on terms of reasonable advantage. In the formation of the regulations that are
legislative, being ex part^, the interest of those who establish them is seen
in its strongest light, while that of the other side is rarely allowed its just
weight. Pride and passion too frequently add their influence to carry these
regulations beyond the limits of moderation: restraints and exclusions, on one
side, beget restraints and exclusions on the other, and these retaliatory laws
lead to, and often terminate in, open war: While, on the other hand, by adjust
(...) the commercial intercourse of nations by treaty, the preten^^ns of the
parties are heartily examined, and the result of the discussion, it is fair to
presume, as well from the experience of individuals in private affairs, as from
that of nations in their more important and complicated relations, establishes
those regulations which are best suited to the interests of the parties, and
which alone afford that stability and confidence so essential to the success of
commercial enterprise.

That our present gover^^ment have thought a commercial treaty with Great
Britain would be advantageous, is evident, not alone from the special and
distinct commission given to Mr. Jay to form one; but likewise from the letter
of Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, of the 29th November, 1791, which was the
first letter to that minister after his arrival; in which the executive says:
"with respect to the commerce of the two countries, we have supposed that we
saw, in several instances, regulations on the part of your government, which,
if reciprocally adopted, would materially injure the interests of both nations;
on this subject too, I must beg the favor of you to say, whether you are
authorized to conclude or to negociate arrangements with us; which may fix the
commerce between the two countries on principles of reciprocal advantage."

Further, from the first session of congress, to that during which Mr. Jay's
appointment took place, efforts were made to discriminate, in our revenue and
commercial laws, between those nations with whom we had, and those with whom we
had not, commercial treaties -- The avowed object of which discrimination was,
to place the latter nations on a less advantageous commercial footing than the
former, in order to induce them likewise to form commercial treaties with us;
and it cannot be forgotten by those, who affect to suppose that it was not
expected that a treaty of commerce would be formed by Mr. Jay, that Mr.
Madison's commercial resolutions, which were under consideration at the time of
Mr. Jay's appointment, grew out of, and were built upon, a clause of Mr.
Jefferson's report of the 26th December, 1793, which asserts that Great Britain
discovered no disposition to enter into a commercial treaty with us. The report
alluded to is explicit in declaring a preference of friendly arrangements, by
treaties of commerce, to regulations by the acts of our legislature, and
authorizes the inference, under which the commercial resolutions were brought
forward, that the latter should be resorted to, only when the former cannot be
effected.

The power of the executive to form commercial treaties, and the objection
against the commercial articles before us, as an unconstitutional interference
with the legislative powers of congress, will, in the sequel, be distinctly
examined, together with other objections on the point of constitutionality.

Against the policy of regulating commerce by treaty, rather than by acts of
the legislature, it is said, that the legislative acts can, but that a treaty
cannot, be repealed. This remark is true, and of weight against the formation
of commercial treaties which are to be of long duration, or, like our
commercial treaty with France, which is per^^^ment. For, as we are yearly
advancing in agriculture, manufactories, commerce, navigation, and strength,
our treaties of commerce, especially such as, by particular stipulations, shall
give to the parties other rights than those of the most favored nation, ought
to be (...) short duration, that, like temporary laws, they may, at an early
day, expire by their own limitation, leaving the interests of the parties to a
new adjustment, founded on equity and mutual convenience.

Of this description are the commercial articles of the treaty with Great
Britain; for none of them can continue in force more than twelve years; and
they may all expire, if either party shall choose it, at the end of two years
after the peao^ between France and Great Britain.

Did the limits assigned to this defense admit a review of the commercial and
maritime codes of the principal European nations, we should discover one
prevailing feature to characterize them all; we should see the general or
common interest of nations, every where, placed in a subordinate rank, and
their separate advantage adopted, as the end to be attained by their respective
laws -- Hence, one nation has enacted laws to protect their manufactured,
another to encourage and e^^end their navigation, a third to monopolize some
important branch of trade, and all have contributed to the creation of that
complicated system of regulations and restraints, which we see established
throughout the commercial world.

One branch, and a principal one of this system, that which establishes the
connection between the several European nations and their colonies, merits our
particular attention. An exact knowledge of this connection would assist us in
forming a just estimate of the difficulties that stand in opposition to our
claim of free and full participation in the colony trade of Great Britain.

Unlike the plan of colonization adopted by the ancient governments, who, from
the crowded population of their cities, sent forth and established beneath
their auspices new and independent republics, the colonies of modern times have
been planted with entirely different views; retained in a state of dependence
on the parent country, their connection has been made subservient to that spirit
of monopoly, which has shown itself among all the commercial powers. Every
European nation has its colonies, and for that reason prohibited all foreigners
from trading to them.

Important political events arise and pass in such quick succession, that we
are liable to forget facts and opinions familiar to us in periods within the
^^linary powers of recollection. -- No subject was more critically examined, or
generally understood before the American revolution, than that which respected
the connection between Great Britain and her colonies! all were then agreed,
that the colony trade and navigation were subject to the restraints and
regulations of the parent state. It was not against this dependence and
commercial monopoly that the colonies complained! They were willing to submit
to them. It was the unjust attempt to tax them, to raise a revenue from them,
without their consent, which combined that firm and spirited opposition, which
effected a division of the empire -- thus the congress of 1775, in their last
address to the inhabitants of Great Britain, say, "We cheerfully consent to
such acts of the British parliament as shall be restrained to the regulations
of our external commerce, for the purpose of securing the commercial advantages
of the whole empure to the mother country, and the commercial benefit of its
respective members! excluding every idea of taxation internal or external for
the purpose of raising a revenue on the subjects in America without their
consent." The "colonial codes of other nations are marked with the same spirit
of monopoly: -- thus Portugal shuts out all foreigners from the Brazils as well
as from her Asiatic possessions, Spain from South America and her West India
islands, France excludes all foreigners from her Asiatic dominions, and limits
within narrow bounds their intercourse with her colonies in the West Indies.
Holland guards, with the miser's vigilance, the access to her spice islands,
and imitates, though with somewhat less rigor, the policy of the other powers
in her We^^ India possessions. -- And England, by her act of navigation, which
has been in operation for more than a century, asserted, and hitherto has
uniformly adhered to the like system of exclusion and monopoly.

Notwithstanding the intimate alliance, the family compact, between France and
Spain, the former has not been able (...) procure admission into the Spanish
colonial territories whe^^ she might have acquired immense wealth by the sale
of her manufactures, her wines, and her brandies. -- Holland, though a part of
the Spanish monarchy long after the discovery of America, and the establishment
of the Spanish power in th^^ quarter of the world, was unable after her
separation from Spain, and the acknowledgment of her independence, eve^ in the
zenith of her splendid power upon the ocean, to obta^^^ by force or treaty a
share in the Spanish colony trade to Sou^^ America -- The rival wars between
the English and the Dutch toward the close of the last co^^^ry, which
originated in co^^mercial competition and jealo^^^^ were successively
termin^^^^ without England yielding the s^^allest departure from the ^^clusive
commercial system, contained in her act of navi^^tion.

Great Britain, though maintaining her exclusive laws aga^^^ other nations at
different periods, has shown the strongest (...) fire to share in the rich
trade of Spain with her colonies -- T^^ war that commenced in 1739, was
occasioned by the firm, (...) irregular, opposition of Spain to the contraband
efforts of the British traders.

The impediments Great Britain has uniformly met in her attempts to extend her
settlement in the Bay of Hondura^, to form establishments at Faulkland Island,
and more recently at Nootka Sound, afford additional proofs of the fixed policy
of Spain on the subject of her colony trade.

Portugal, whose political safety more than once has appeared to depend on the
efficacious aid of Great Britain, does not yie^^ to her ally any portion of her
valuable colonial commerce.

So uniform and persevering has been the practice of nations on this point,
that in the latest treaties of commerce between France and Spain, between each
of these powers and Great Britain, between Great Britain, Sweden, Denmark,
Holland, and Portugal, we do not discover, that any one of these powers, has
consented to admit the others to a participation in the trade and navigation to
their respective colonies -- the Assiento contract for the supply of negroes to
the Spanish colonies, which has been made by Spain with several powers, is an
unimportant and solitary exception to this rule.

Montesquieu calls this law appropriating the colony commerce to the benefit of
the parent state, "A fundamental law of Europe." "It has been established,"
says this enlightened Frenchman, -- "That the metropolis or mother country
alone shall trade in the colonies, and that for very good reasons; because the
design of the settlement, was the extension of commerce, not the foundation of
a city or now empire. Thus it is still a fundamental law of Europe, that all
commerce with a foreign colony shall be regarded as a mere monopoly, punishable
by the laws of the country; and in this case we are not to be directed by the
laws and precedents of the ancients, which are not at all applicable."

"It is likewise acknowledged that a commerce established between the mother
countries, does not include a permission to trade in the colonies; for these
always continue in a state of prohibition." [Montesquieu, Live. xxi. chap. xvii.]

This subject is of too gr^^^ importance not to be pursued a little further.
Principles co^^^^^ed with it, and such as will continue to operate whether we
sanction or condemn them, remain to be disclosed. It is true that the principal
end of the dominion that the European powers have held over their colonies, has
been the monopoly of their commerce, "since in their exclusive trade (as has
been observed by a sensible writer on the subject) consists the principal
advantages of colonies, which afford neither revenue nor force for the defense
of the parent country;" but this is not the sole object. Some nations, and
among them Great Britain, have viewed the exclusive navigation and trade to
their colonies, in the light in which they have seen their coasting trade and
fisheries; as a nursery for that body of seamen, whom they have considered not
only as necessary to the prosperity and protection of commerce, but as
essential to the defense and safety of the state.

The situation of Great Britain in this respect is peculiar: when compar^d with
several of the neighboring powers, her numbers and military forces are
manifestly inferior. The armies kept on foot in peace, as well as those brought
into the field in war, by the great nations in Europe, are so decidedly
superior to those of Great Britain, that were she a continental power, her
rivals would easily be an overmatch for her. The ocean is her fortification,
and her seamen alone are the soldiers who can defend it. When Great Britain
shall become an inferior maritime power, when her enemy shall acquire a
dec^sive superiority on the sea, what will prevent a repetition of those
conquests the examples of which we find in her early history? No subject has
been more profoundly thought on tha^ this has been in Great Britain. Her
policy, from the date of her navigation act, has been guided by these
considerations -- that her national safety depends on her wooden walls, is a
ma^im as sacred in Britain, as it once was in Athens. Her statesmen, her
merchants, her manufacturers, and her yeomanry comprehend and believe it.

It is then surprising, that we see her so anxious to encourag^ and extend her
navigation, as to exclude as far as practicable, foreigners from any share of
her fisheries, her coasting, and her colony trade? Does not candor require us
to admit, since her national defense rests upon her navy, which again depends
on her seamen, which an extensive navigation can alone supply, that Great
Britain having more to risk, is among the la^t powers likely to break in upon
or materially to relinquish that system of exclusive colony trade, that has so
long and uniformly prevailed among the great colonizing powers?

America has her opinions, perhaps prejudices, on the subject of commerce: she
is, and, at ^^ast until she shall become a naval power, will continue to be,
without colonies. But (...) laws manifest a similar spirit with those of other
nations, in the regulations which they prescribe for the government of her
fisheries and her coasting trade. The object of these laws is a^ exclusion of
foreign competition, in order to encourage and i^crease her own navigation and
seamen; from which resources not only in wars between other nations, but
likewise in those (...) which she may be engaged, important commercial and
national advantages may be expected. These opinions deserve attention^ they
have already had and will continue to have a suitable influence with her
government. But we should remember, that other nations have likewise their
opinions and prejudices on these subjects; opinions and prejudices not the less
strong or deeply rooted for having been transmitted to them through a series of
past generations. Thus in England, not only the public opinion, but what is
more unconquerable, the private in^^rests of ma^y individuals will oppose every
change in the existing laws that may be supposed likely to diminish their
navigation, to limit their trade, or in any measure to affect disadvantageously
their established system of national commerce.

It cannot have escaped notice, that we have among us characters who are
unwilling to see stated the impediments that stand in the way of the commercial
arrangements, which they contend, should be conceded to us by foreign nations,
and who are ready to charge those who faithfully expose them, with an
inclination to excuse or vindicate the unreasonable denials of our commercial
rivals, and with a desire to yield up the just pretensions of our country. The
artifice seems too gross to be dangerous with a sensible people, but the public
should notwithstanding be on their guard against it. -- They should
dispassionately examine the real difficulties to be encountered in the
formation of our commercial treaties. They should enquire and ascertain how far
other nations, seeking the same advantages, have been able to succeed. They
should further compare the treaty in question with those we have before made
with other nations. -- the result of such investigation so far from warranting
the condemnation of the commercial articles of the treaty before us, it is
believed would demonstrate that these articles make a wider breach in the
British commercial system than has ever before been made; that on their
commercial dispositions they are preferable to any treaty we have before
concluded, and that there is rational ground to believe that the treaty will
have a tendency friendly to the agriculture, the commerce, and the navigation
of our country.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXIV.
HOWEVER uniform may have been the law of Europe in relation to their colonial
establishments, no pains have been spared to create an opinion that France has
been guided by a more liberal policy than the other colonizing powers, and that
the regulations of her colony trade were essentially dissimilar from theirs;
moreover that her disinterestedness was so great, that she not long since
proposed to our government to establish by treaty, a trade between us and her
West India colonies equally free with that which prevails in her own
intercourse with them. The object of these attempts is readily perceived.

As there was no probability, that Great Britain would consent to our trading
with her West India colonies on the same terms as she herself does, as it was
foreseen that limitations and conditions would accompany any agreement that
should be made on this subject; to extol the liberty of France, and exclaim
against the monopolizing views of Great Britain, were deemed suitable means to
excite a prejudice against the expected adjustment of the commercial
intercourse between us and the British West India colonies.

A comparison of the footing by which our trade stood with the French and
British West India colonies, after the completion of our revolution, and before
the present war in Europe, with a concise exposition of the real views of
France on the subject of a new commercial treaty, will best demonstrate the
want of candor and patriotism in those Americans, who have submitted to become
agents in propagating these errors.

France, like England, has endeavored to secure the greatest possible portion
of advantage to herself, by her colonial laws, and the concessions yielded to
foreigners have been only such deviations from an entire monopoly, as her own
interest has rendered indispensable -- France, in imitation of the English
navigation law, as early as 1727, established an ordinance, confirming to the
mother country the monopoly of the trade to her colonies, and excluding thereby
all foreigners -- Experience proved the necessity of moderating the rigor of
their ordinance, and relaxations in favor of a limited foreign intercourse
existed at the time when our commercial treaty with France was concluded, by
the thirtieth article of which, it is agreed, that France will continue to the
citizens of the United States, the free ports, which have been and are open in
their West Indi^ islands, to be enjoyed agreeable to the regulations which
relate to them -- A system of regulations relative to the trade of foreigners
with the French islands, was promulgated in 1784: This ordinance established
one free port at St. Lucie, another at Martinique, another at Gaudaloupe,
another at Tobago, and three others at St. Domingo, to which foreign vessels of
the burden of sixty tons and upwards might carry for sale, woods of all sorts,
pit coal, live animals, fatted beef, salted fish, rice, Indian corn,
vegetables, green hides, peltry, turpentine, and tar -- This was followed by
the arrets of September, 1785, which by imposing heavy duties on foreign salted
fish, and establishing large bounties on those of the national or French
fishery, materially affected the foreign commerce with the French islands in
this important article of supply and consumption.

Such were the duties on the foreign, and the premiums on the national fish,
that together they would have been equivalent to a prohibition of the former,
had the national fishery been able to supply the consumption.

In return for these articles which alone were permitted to be imported by
foreigners into the French islands, and which it will be observed excluded some
of our principal staples especially flour, they were allowed to purchase and
bring away of the productions of the islands, only melasses and rum.

All cotton, coffee, sugar, and other productions (rum and melasses excepted)
were prohibited; and we could, except occasionally by local relaxations of the
general law, rightfully obtain none of them from the French West India islands
-- This was the footing of our trade under our treaty and the standing edict
which preceded the French revolution, and even this was liable to still further
limitations, whenever France should think proper to impose them; the treaty
securing only a right to as free a commerce as France should grant to other
foreign nations.

Great Britain has permitted the importation into her West India colonies of
all the foreign articles, allowed by France to be imported into her islands
(salted fish and salted beef excepted) and she moreover permitted the
importation of foreign tobacco, flour, meal, biscuit, wheat, and various other
grains which France prohibited -- In return for these commodities, Great
Britain permitted the exportation from her islands to our country, of rum and
melasses, and moreover of sugar, coffee, cocoa, ginger, and pimento, together
with such other articles as are allowed to be carried from their islands to any
other foreign country.

Great Britain prohibited the importation and exportation of most of these
articles to and from all foreign nations, except the United States -- France
permitted the intercourse with her colonies, under the same limitations to us
in common with all other foreign nations.

The articles received from us by Great Britain, for the supply of her West
India islands, exceeded in variety those received from us by France for the
supply of her islands, the British West Indies were, therefore, in the ordinary
and established course more extensive customers to us than the French West
Indies. Again, the articles which we received from the British West Indies and
which we were prohibited from receiving from the French West Indies, were among
the most valuable of their productions, and, from the force of habit, some of
them are included in the catalogue of articles of the first necessity in our
consumption. In point of supply, therefore, the British were better furnishers,
their colonial laws being much less restrictive than those of France.

Though the regulations of the British West India trade were more favorable to
our agriculture than those of France, and though the articles with which we
were supplied from the British islands were more numerous and valuable than
those obtained from the islands of France, the colony system of the latter was
preferable to that of the former in relation to our navigation. France
permitted our vessels of and above sixty tons burden, to carry and bring away
the articles, not prohibited in the foreign trade with her islands, while Great
Britain confined the trade to her own vessels and excluded those of all foreign
nations.

Difference of situation, and not of principle, produced this variety or
distinction in the colony system of the two nations. France being able from her
resources to supply most of the articles requisite for the consumption of her
West Indies, and from her great population, having a proportionate demand for
the productions of her islands, she has been carefully restrictive in the trade
between her colonies and foreign countries as to the articles of import and
export.

All the productions of her islands, must go to the mother country, except rum
and melasses; these articles were not confined to France, because they would
have directly interfered with the valuable manufacture of her brandies. On the
other hand, Great Britain, being less able from her internal resources to
supply the articles necessary for the consumption of her West Indies, and her
population, or home demand not requiring the whole productions of her islands,
she has been more liberal in the trade allowed to be carried on between her
colonies and foreign countries as to the articles of import and export. But her
navigation being adequate to the whole trade of all he^ dominions, while that
of France required the addition of foreign bottoms, Great Britain has excluded
entirely from her colony trade the foreign vessels of all nations, while France
has admitted them to share in the foreign trade permitted to her West India
islands.

Both France and Great Britain relax their colonial laws, in times of
occasional scarcity and when they are engaged in war; during which, the
intercourse with their West India possessions is laid more open to foreigners.
The catalogue of supplies is sometimes enlarged, and Great Britain, as well as
France, during these relaxations, permits American vessels to resort to, and
engage in the commerce of, their islands.

It is notwithstanding from the permanent laws alone of these nations, that we
are able to infer their views in relation to their colony trade! the exceptions
and deviations that become necessary by reason of accidental scarcity or the
embarrassments of war, serve only to explain more clearly the principles of the
permanent system.

The result of this comparison affords no support for the assertion that France
has been less exclusive, or more liberal in her colony system, than Great
Britain -- both these nations have in the establishment of their colonial laws
alike disregarded the interests of foreign nations, and have been equally under
the control of the principles of self-interest, which ever have, and ever will
govern the affairs of nations. The opinion heretofore cited of Montesquieu, a
Frenchman, agreeing with facts, is a positive testimony that the principle of
the French system, like the English, i^^^o^opoly.


Nothing can be more erroneous, than the opinion that any nation is likely to
yield up its own interest, in order, gratuitously, to advance that of another.
Yet we frequently hear declarations of this kind, and too many honest citizens
have surrendered themselves to this delusion -- Time and experience will cure
us of this folly.

Equal artifice has been practiced, and no less credulity displayed, on the
subject of a new treaty of commerce, which it is boldly asserted, France from
the most disinterested motives has offered to us. It should be recollected that
France already has a treaty of commerce with us, a treaty that is not limited
to two years, nor twelve years, but one that is to endure for ever -- This
treaty is as favorable to France as she can desire, or we in our utmost
fondness be disposed to make -- It secures to her our acquiescence in an
exclusion from her Asiatic dominions, and in fresh regulations as her interest
shall dictate relative to our intercourse with her West India possessions -- It
excludes us from her fisheries on the banks of Newfoundland, which she was
unwilling to share with us, and it gives to her every commercial favor or
privilege which by treaty we may yield to any other nation, freely when freely
granted, and when otherwise on yielding the same equivalent -- her productions,
her manufactures, her merchandises, and her ships may come into all our ports
to which any other foreign productions, manufactures, merchandises, or ships
may come -- they are severally to pay only the lowest duties paid by any other
nation, and no other nation in its intercourse and trade with us, is, in any
instance, to have a preference over her -- A variety of other regulations are
inserted in this treaty useful to France and not particularly disserviceable to
us.

This treaty has been religiously observed and executed on our part; France has
repeatedly violated it in the article which makes enemy goods free in neutral
bottoms, while it is understood she has faithfully observed it in the article,
that makes neutral goods lawful prize when found in enemy bottoms.

If it be true, that nations in justice to themselves are bound to decline the
abandonment of their own interest, for the purpose of promoting at their own
expense and detriment, the interest of others, ought we too readily to credit
an opposite opinion? Ought we not to expect full proof of the sincerity of
those declarations, that are intended to produce a belief of this disinterested
and self-denying course? Ought not the very proposal of such a measure, from
its extraordinary nature, inspire circumspection, and put a prudent nation on
its guard? If moreover, the overture should occur at a moment when we are
ascertained that those who make it, desire, and are, in fact, pursuing objects
incompatible with the disinterestedness which it avows? If while it is said we
wish that you should remain (...) peace with those who hold this language,
neglect no means is engage our citizens to violate their neutral duties and
thereby expose their country to war; if when we are told "we rejoice in the
freedom of a sister republic," all the arts o^ ^ntrigue, so much more dangerous
by our unsuspicious temper, and unlimited affection for those who practice
them, were employed to alienate our attachment from our own government, and
(...) throw us into a state of anarchy; if when the facinating proposal of
opening new channels of commerce, which were to give unbounded riches to our
merchants was received with more caption than was desired, we are told that in
case of refusal, ^^evasion (mark the generosity) France would repeal her
existing laws which had been dictated by an attachment to the Americans. What
must have been our infatuation, what the measure of our folly, had we given
implicit credit to words so much a variance with cotemporary actions? But it is
asked, do not the letters of Mr. Genet to Mr. Jefferson, which have been
published, prove that France desired and offered to enter into a new
disinterested and liberal treaty of commerce with us? The question shall be
fairly examined.

There are two letters from Mr. Genet on this subject -- Immediately after his
arrival at Philadelphia, in a letter to Mr. Jefferson of the 23d May, 1793, he
says -- "The French republic has given it in charge to me to propose to your
government to consecrate by a true family compact, by a national covenant, the
liberal and fraternal basis, on which it wishes to establish the commercial and
political system of two people, whose interests are inseparably connected."

If the object of this proposal was a revision of our commercial treaty, in
order to render the intercourse between us more free and advantageous, this
minister was singularly unfortunate in his expressions -- He might have
employed the fine phrase of consecrating by a true family compact, by a
national covenant, the liberal and fraternal basis on which it was wished to
establish the commercial system of the two countries, and have been
intelligible; but when he tells us, that he is instructed to open a negotiation
with our government, for the purpose of establishing the commercial and
political system of the two countries, what are we to understand? That trade
and its regulations are alone in view? Or that a family compact establishing
the political, as well as the commercial system of the two nations, must
include likewise the league or treaty of alliance, whereby the strength and
wealth of the two nations should be closely united in the prosecution of a
common object?

This ambiguous overture, if its meaning is not too plain to allow the epithet,
was received in the most friendly manner by our government, and on the
suggestion that the senate are united with the president in making treaties, it
was understood between Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Genet, that the subject should be
deferred till the meeting of congress.

Before that period, however, Mr. Genet, in a letter of the 30th of September,
1793, renews the proposal to open the negotiation relative to the proposed
family compact between us and France; and proves to us that our benefit was its
principal exclusive object, by affectionately intimating in the conclusion of
his letter, that he is further instructed to tell us, in case of refusal or
evasion on our part to enter into this family agreement, that France will
repeal the laws dictated by the attachment of the French for the Americans.

Had it before been doubted whether political engagements relative to war, were
intended to be connected with the proposed treaty, these doubts must have
disappeared on the receipt of this second letter from Mr. Genet; the intimation
that the laws of France which operated favorably to our trade with their
dominions, would be repealed, in case we refused or evaded the conclusion of a
new treaty, cannot be reconciled, with the belief, that this treaty was sought
for from motives purely commercial, or solely to enlarge and add prosperity to
our trade.

Mr. Genet at this time had so outraged our government as to have compelled
them to request his recall, he must, therefore, have been convinced, that no
conscience would be held with him except on points of urgent importance, and
such as would not admit of delay -- He was, therefore, answered by Mr.
Jefferson on the 5th of November, that his letter had been laid before the
president, and would be considered with all the respect and interest that its
objects necessarily required; and i^ Mr. Jefferson's letter to Mr. Morris of
the 23d of August, we are informed that our government were desirous to go into
a commercial negotiation with France, and, therefore, requested that the powers
given to Mr. Genet on that subject should be renewed to his successor -- It has
not appeared that this was ever done -- His immediate successor, Mr. Fauchet,
it is believed, gave no evidence of his having any powers relative to a
commercial treaty; and if reports, which arrived with the present minister,
having great marks of authenticity, may be credited, he has power only to
digest the articles of such a treaty, not to conclude one.

Notwithstanding the internal evidence contained in the two letters of Mr.
Genet was sufficient to have satisfied a sensible people, that something beyond
a commercial treaty was connected with the proffered negotiation, and though
this conjecture acquired strength from the cautious procedure of our government
on the occasion: yet these letters, and that procedure, have been pressed upon
the public as conclusive evidence, that France had offered, and our government
refused, to enter into a new treaty of commerce, that would have been highly
beneficial to our trade and navigation.

The refutation of this opinion so injurious to a reasonable and salutary
confidence in the integrity and patriotism of o^^ own executive government, and
which the agents of its propagation, had spread far and wide, might have been
more difficult, had not the minister of France for the purpose of justifying
his own conduct, published his hitherto secret instruction.

By these instructions it appears, that the essential object of this proffered
negotiation, was to engage the United States to make common cause with France
in the war then foreseen, and which soon broke out with Spain and England --
That the advantages to be yielded by a new commercial treaty were to be
purchased by our uniting with France in extending the empire of liberty, in
breaking up the colonial and monopolizing-systems of all nations, and finally
in the emancipation of the new world This mad scheme, the joining in which was
to be the price of the proffered advantages, has since been renounced by France
herself; as a political chimera.
-- This was laying out a large and difficult work, in the accomplishment
whereof arduous and numerous perils must be met, to encounter which we were
called by no obligation to others, to avoid which we were admonished by all the
duties which require us to cherish and preserve our own unparalleled freedom,
prosperity and happiness.

However contradictory this extraordinary project may appear to the friendly
communications that had been made by the French government to ours, however
repugnant to the soothing declarations pronounced by Mr. Genet, of the
fraternal and generous sentiments of his country toward ours, and of the
republican frankness and sincerity that should characterise his deportment; --
let the following extracts from his instructions published by himself in
December, 1793, be consulted in confirmation of this statement, and as an
authentic exposition of the genuine views of the French executive council in
the mission of Mr. Genet -- viz.

"The executive council have examined the instructions given to the
predecessors of the citizen Genet in America, and they have seen with
indignation, that while the good people of America have expressed to us their
gratitude in the most lively manner, and given us every testimony of their
friendship, both Vergennes and Montmorin have thought that the interests of
France required, that the United States should not obtain that political order
and consistency of which they were capable, because they would thereby quickly
attain a strength, which they might probably be inclined to abuse. These
ministers, therefore, enjoined it upon the representatives of Louis XVI. in
America, to hold a passive conduct, and to speak only of the personal vows of
the king for the prosperity of the United States. The same machiavelism
directed the operations of the war of independence, the same duplicity presided
in the negociations of the peace. The deputies of congress had expressed a
desire that the cabinet of Versailles should favor the conquests of the
Floridas, of Canada, of Nova Scotia: but Louis and his ministers constantly
refused their countenance -- regarding the possession of those countries by
Spain and England, as useful source^ of disquietude and anxiety to the
Americans."

After declaring that the executive council proposes to itself a different
course, and that it approves of the overtures, which had been made as well by
General Washington, as by Mr. Jefferson, to Mr. Ternant, relative to the means
of renewing and consolidating the commercial regulations between the two
countries, they proceed to declare furt^^er "that they are inclined to extend
the latitude of the proposed commercial treaty (observe, the first proposal of
a new commercial treaty came from us, and not from France) by converting it
into a national compact, whereby the two people should combine their commercial
with their political interests, and should establish in intimate concert to
befriend, under all circumstances, the extension of the empi^^ of liberty, to
guarantee the sovereignty of the people, and (...) punish the nations who shall
continue to adhere to a coloni^^ system, and an exclusive commerce, by
declaring that the ve^sels of such nations should not be received into the
ports of the two contracting parties. This agreement which the French people
will support with all the energy that distinguishes them, and of which they
have given so many proofs, will quickly contribute to the emancipation of the
new world. However vast this project may appear, it will be easily
accomplished, if the Americans will concur in it, and in order to convince them
of this, no pains must be spared by the Citizen Genet. For independent of the
benefits that humanity will draw from the success of this negotiation --
France, at this moment, has a particular interest that requires us to be
prepared to act with efficacy against England and Spain, if, as every
circumstance announces, these powers, in hatred of our principles, shall make
war upon us." In this state of things, we ought "to employ every means to
re-animate the zeal of the Americans, who are also intere^ed that we should
disappoint the liberticide designs of Geo^^^ the third, of which they likewise
may possibly be an object. "The executive council has reason to believe, that
these reflections, joined to the great commercial advantages, which we a^^
disposed to grant to the United States, will decide their government to agree
to all that the Citizen Genet shall propose (...) them on our part -- But as
from the rumors respecting (...) interior, our finances, and our marine, the
American administration may observe a wavering timid conduct! The execution
council, in expectation that the American government will finally decide, to
make common cause with us, charges th^^ Citizen Genet to take such steps as
shall be most likely to ser^^ the cause of liberty and the freedom of the
people."

In a supplemental instruction, the executive council say, "as soon as the
negotiation concerning a new treaty of commerc^ shall be practicable, Citizen
Genet must not omit to stipulate a positive reciprocity of the exemption from
the American tonnage duty." The mutual naturalization of French and American
citizens, so far as respects commerce, that has b^^^ proposed by Mr. Jefferson
and approved by the executive council (this it is presumed, in the eyes of
certain characters, would be free from objection, though the naturalization by
treaty, of the subjects of any nation but France, would be treason against the
constitution and against liberty) "will render this exemption from the tonnage
duties less offensive to the powers who have a right by their treaties to claim
the same exemption, for the casus faederis by this mutual naturalization will
be entirely changed in respect to them -- The reciprocal guarantee of the
possessions, of the two nations, stipulated in the XIth article of the treaty
of 1778, must form an essential clause in the new treaty to be concluded! The
executive council, therefore, instructs Citizen Genet early to sound the
American government on this point, and to make it an indispensable condition of
a free trade to the French West Indies, so interesting for the United States to
obtain. It concerns the peace and prosperity of the French nation, that a
people whose resources and strength increase in a ratio incalculable, and who
are placed so near to our rich colonies, should be held by explicit engagements
to the preservation of these islands -- There will be the less difficulty in
making these propositions relished by the United States, as the great commerce
which will be their price, will indemnify them before hand for the sacrifices
they must make in the sequel -- Besides, the Americans cannot be ignorant of
the great disproportion between their means and those of the French republic!
that for a long time the guarantee will be merely nominal for them, while it
will be real on the side of France. And moreover that we shall, without delay,
take measures to fulfill it on our part, by sending to the American posts, a
force sufficient to shelter them from all insults and dangers, and to
facilitate their intercourse with our islands and with France" -- "and to the
end that nothing may retard the conclusion of the negociations of Citizen Genet
with the Americans, and that he may have in his hands all the means which may
be employed in forwarding the success of his exertions to serve the cause of
liberty, the council, in addition to the full powers hereunto annexed, has
authorized the minister of marine to supply him with a number of blank letters
of marque, to be delivered to such Frenchmen or Americans, as should equip
privateers in America -- the minister of war will likewise supply him with
commissions in blank for the different grades in the army." This measure
countenances a conclusion, that it was the intent of the in^tructions, he
should take the measures he did with regard to privateering and military
expeditions from our territories, to force us into the war in spite of the
(...) wavering and timid conduct of our administration.


These were extraordinary means to enable the French minister to conclude with
our government a pacific treaty of commerce. The above extracts, though not an
entire translation of the whole of Mr. Genet's instructions, many parts of
which are foreign to the point in discussion, are a faithful abstract of such
parts of them, as relate to the principles and conduct of the French monarchy
toward us, and are as explanatory of the views of the executive council on the
subject of a (...) treaty of commerce -- ^t will, I think, prove, if the
assertion^ of that council are to be credited, that the gratitude, of which we
have heard so much, ought not to be demanded on account of the principles that
influenced the monarchy of France during our war, or subsequent to the peace --
and furthermore it will prove that the real view of the French executive
council in the mission of Mr Genet, was to engage us by advantages to be
conceded in a new comme^cial treaty, to make common cause with France, in the
expected war with Great Britain and the coalesced powers. If then the
established footing of our trade with the French West Indies, like that of our
trade with the British islands, has been dictated by that colonial system of
monopo^^, which forms a fundamental law in Europe -- and if moreover the
opinion that we could have procured a new and more lib^^^ treaty of commerce
with France, without plunging our country in the present war, is an error, that
has been artfully imposed on the public -- by exposing these truths, the
examination of the treaty with Great Britain is at once freed from the
objections and aspersions that have proceeded from these errors.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXV.
IT will be useful, as it will simplify the examination of (...) commercial
articles of the treaty, to bear in mind and (...) serve the division, that we
find established by the 12th, 13th and the 14th and 15th articles; each
respects a parti^^^ branch or portion of the trade between the two countries,
the regulations whereof differ from, and are severally independent of, each
other -- Thus one is relative to the West Indies -- another to the East Indies
-- and the third, distinct from both the former, respects our trade with the
British dominions in Europe.

That Great Britain will consent to place our trade with ^^^ West India
colonies upon an equally advantageous footing wi^^ her own, is improbable; this
would be doing what none of the great colonizing nations has done, or is likely
to do -- it would be to relinquish the principal ends of the establishment, and
defense of her colonies; it would be equivalent to making (...) islands in the
West Indies the common property of Great Britain and America for all commercial
and profitable purposes; and exclusively her own in the burden of support and
defense.

The senate have, however, and, I think, wisely, considered the terms and
conditions, on which it is agreed by the 12th article, that we should
participate in the trade of the British West Indies, as less liberal than we
may, with reason, expect -- The exclusion of all vessels above the burden of
seventy tons, would diminish the benefits and value of this trade; and though
we cannot calculate upon obtaining by future negotiation a total removal of a
limitation on this subject, it is not altogether improbable that a tonnage
something larger may be procured.

Those who are conversant with our present intercourse with the West Indies can
best determine whether many vessels under seventy tons burden are not, at this
time, profitably employed in that trade: it is believed to be true, that
previous to our independence, vessels of this burden were much engaged in that
employ as well in the southern as in the eastern states.

This limitation, though disadvantageous, is not the strongest objection to the
12th article: the restraining or regulating of a portion of our trade, which
does not proceed from, and is independent of the treaty, forms a more decisive
reason against the article than any thing else that it contains.

The cause of this restraint is found in the commercial jealousy and spirit of
monopoly, which have so long reigned over the trade of the colonies -- Under
our treaty with France and the French colonial laws, it has been shown that we
could not procure from the French islands sugar, coffee, cocoa, cotton, or any
of the other productions, melasses and rum excepted. -- Great Britain has seen
it to be compatible with her interest to admit us to share more extensively in
the productions of her islands; but she has desired to place limitations on
this intercourse. To have left it entirely open and free, would have been to
have enable us not only to supply ourselves by means of our own navigation, but
to have made it an instrument of the supply of other nations with her West
India productions.

When we reflect upon the established maxims of the colony system, and moreover
when we consider, that an entire freedom of trade with the British West Indies
might, at times, materially raise the price of West India productions on the
British consumers, the supply of whom is essentially a monopoly in the hands of
the British planters, we shall be the less inclined to believe that Great
Britain will yield an unrestrained commerce with her West India possessions to
any nation whatever.

But if this was the object of the restraint, it may be asked why it was not
confined to such enumerated articles as were o^ the growth or production of her
own islands, instead of being so extended as to comprehend all melasses, sugar,
coffee, cocoa, and cotton, including even the cotton of the growth of our own
country? It is very possible that the circumstances of our native cotton's
becoming an article of export to foreign markets might not have occurred to our
negociator -- This would be the less extraordinary, as heretofore it has not
been cultivated, except in a very limited degree, and as an article of export
rather in the manner of experiment than otherwise; and, as moreover, from the
expense and difficulty of separating the seeds from the cotton, we have been
hardly able hitherto to class cotton among our exports. Its cultivation is said
latterly to have become an object of attention, in Georgia and South Carolina
-- still however it cannot yet be considered as a staple commodity -- But from
the recent ingenious and simple machine for spinning cotton, it is hoped that
the cultivation may be extended, so that not only our own domestic manufactures
may be relieved from a dependence on foreign supply, but the catalogue of our
valuable exports enriched by the addition of this inestimable production.

In answer to the question that has been stated: it may be further observed,
that these enumerated articles, though the productions of different
territories, being so much alike as not easily to be distinguished, it is
probable that the difficulty (...) discriminating the productions of the
British islands from those of a different growth, was supposed to be so great,
that an apprehension was entertained that the prohibition to re-export the
former would be easily evaded and illusory, while the latter remained free.

This apprehension, however, it is believed, was carried too far; as, on a
minute examination of the subject it will be found, that our laws relative to
drawback, with a few analogous provisions in addition, can be made sufficiently
to discriminate and identify on re-exportation, all such articles of the growth
of the British islands, as may be within our country, and that they will afford
the same security for a faithful and exact execution of the prohibition to
re-export such articles as that on which our own government relies against
frauds upon the revenue. The application of these laws, with the requisite
additions and sanctions, ^^y be secured by a precise stipulation for that
purpose (...) ^^ary, in such manner as would afford an adequate g^^^ (...)
material evasions.

But though the conduct of the senate in withholding their assent to this
article, is conceived, upon the whole, to be well judged and wise, yet there
were not wanting reasons of real weight to induce our negociator to agree to it
as it stands.

The inviolability of the principles of the navigation act had become a kind of
axiom, incorporated in the habits of thinking of the British government and
nation. Precedent, it is known, has great influence, as well upon the councils
as upon the popular opinions of nations! -- and there is, perhaps, no country
in which it has greater force than that of Great Britain -- The precedent of a
serious and unequivocal innovation upon the system of the navigation act,
dissolved as it were the spell by which the public prejudices had been chained
to it. It took away a mighty argument derived from the past inflexibility of
the system, and laid the foundation for greater inroads upon opinion, for
further and greater innovations in practice. It served to strip the question of
every thing that was artificial and to bring it to the simple test of real
national interest, to be decided by that best of all arbiters, experience.

It may, upon this ground, be strongly argued that the precedent of the
privilege gained was of more importance than its immediate extent -- an
argument certainly of real weight, and which is sufficient to incline candid
men to view the motives that governed our negociator in this particular, with
favor, and the opinion to which he yielded with respect. It is perhaps not
unimportant by way of precedent, that the article, though not established, is
found in the treaty.

Though the 12th article, so far as respects the terms and conditions of the
trade to the British islands, forms no part of the treaty, having been
excepted, and made the subject of further negotiation, it may nevertheless be
useful to take notice of some of the many ill-founded objections that have been
made against it: of this character, is that which asserts, that the catalogue
of articles, permitted to be carried by us to the British islands, may be
abridged at the pleasure of Great Britain, and so the trade may be annihilated.

The article stipulates that we may carry to any of his majesty's islands and
ports in the West Indies, from the United States, in American vessels, not
exceeding seventy tons, any goods or merchandises "being of the growth,
manufacture or production of the said states, which it is or may be lawful to
carry to the said islands, from the said states, in British vessels;" not all
such articles as it is and may be lawful to carry, but in the disjunctive, all
such as it is or may be lawful to carry; in other words, all such articles as
it is now lawful to carry, together with such others as hereafter it may be
lawful to carry; the catalogue may be enlarged, but cannot be diminished. It
may also be remarked incidentally, that this objection sounds ill in the mouths
of those who maintain the essentiality of the supplies of this country, under
all possible circumstances, to the British West Indies; for if this position be
true, there never can be reasonable ground of apprehension of too little
latitude in the exportation in British vessels, which is to be the standard for
the exportation in ours.

This article has been further criticized on account of the adjustment of the
import and tonnage duties payable in this trade, and it has been attempted to
be shown that the footing on which we were to share in the same would, on this
account, be disadvantageous, and the competition unequal. What is the
adjustment? The article proposes that British vessels emplo^^^ in this trade
shall pay, on entering our ports, the alien tonnage duty payable by all foreign
vessels, which is now fifty cents per ton; further, the cargoes imported in
British bottoms from the British West Indies, shall pay in our ports the same
impost or duties, that shall be payable on the like articles imported in
American bottoms; and on the other side, that cargoes imported into the British
islands, in American bottoms shall pay the same impost or duties that shall be
payable on the like articles imported in British bottoms -- that is to say, the
cargoes of each shall pay in the ports of the other only native duties, it
being understood that those imposed in the British West Indies, on our
productions, are small and unimportant, while those imposed in our ports, on
the productions of the West Indies, are high, and important to our revenue. --
The vessels of each shall pay in the ports of the other an equal alien tonnage
duty, and our standard is adopted as the common ru^^.

Is not this equal? can we expect or ask British vessels should pay an alien
tonnage duty in our ports, and that American vessels should enter their ports
freely, or on payment only of native tonnage duties? can we in equity require
them to pay, (...) the importation of their cargoes in British vessels, an
addition of ten per cent. on the duties payable on the importation of the like
articles in American vessels, and at the same time demand to pay no higher or
other duties on the cargoes carried in our vessels to the British islands, than
those payable by the^ on the like articles imported in British vessels? the
very slating of the question suggests to a candid mind an answer, that
demonstrates the injustice of the objection. To expect mo^^ were to expect that
in a trade in which the opinions and practice of Europe contemplate every
privilege granted for a foreign ^ation as a favor -- we were by treaty to
secure a greater advantage to ourselves than would be enjoyed by the nation
which granted the privilege.

But it is added, that our laws impose a tonnage duty of six cents per ton on
the entry of American vessels engaged in foreign trade, and it is not known
that British vessels pay any tonnage duty on their entry in their ports in the
West Indies -- and so uniting the two entries, that is, the entry in the West
Indies, and the entry on a return to our ports, an American vessel will pay
fifty-six cents per ton, when the British vessels will pay only fifty cents per
ton -- If the British government impose no tonnage duty on their own vessels,
and we do impose a tonnage duty on ours, this certainly cannot form an
objection against them. They are as free to refrain from the imposition of a
tonnage duty on their own ships, as we are to impose one on ours -- If their
policy is wiser than ours in this respect, we are at liberty to adopt it, by
repealing the tonnage duty levied on American navigation, which, if we please,
may be confined to the particular case; the effect of such a measure as far as
it should extend, though the duty is small, would be to add a proportionable
advantage to our shipping in foreign competition. But the object of the
articles in this particular is to equalize, not the duties that each may choose
to impose on their own vessels, but those that they shall impose on the vessels
of each other: and in this respect the article is perfectly equal -- It is
perhaps the first time that the objection of inequality was founded on a
circumstance depending on the laws of the party affected by it, and removeable
at his own option.

This view of the subject authorizes a belief, that, in the revision of the
article, a modification of it may be agreed to that will prove satisfactory.
Indeed, from the short duration of the article, taken in connection with the
expressions made use of toward the close of it, relative to the renewal of the
negotiation, for the purpose of such further arrangements as shall conduce to
the mutual advantage and extension of this branch of commerce, we may infer
that Great Britain contemplates a more enlarged and equal adjustment on this
point.

The relaxations which now exist in the colonial systems, in consequence of the
necessities of war, and which will change to our disadvantage with the return
of peace, have been considered by some as the permanent state of things. And
this error has had its influence in misleading the public in respect to the
terms and conditions on which we may reasonably expect to participate in trade
to the West Indies -- But let it be remembered, that the restoration of peace
will bring with it a restoration of the laws of limitation and exclusion, which
constit^^^ the colonial system. Our efforts therefore should be directed to
such adjustment with Great Britain on this point, as will ^^^cure to us a right
after the return of peace, to the gre^^^^ attainable portion of the trade to
her islands in the West Indies.

It has been alleged, should the expected modification of this article retain
its present stipulation on the subject of impo^^ and tonnage duty, that as
France by treaty may claim to enjoy the rights and privileges of the most
favored nation, she would demand an exemption from the ten per cent. on the
duties upon the productions of the West Indies imported in foreign bottoms, and
would moreover be free to impose an alien tonnage on our vessels entering her
ports in the West Indies, equal to that imposed on her vessels in our ports.
This is true -- But in order to make this demand, France must agree, by treaty,
to open all her ports in the West Indies, to give (...) right to import into
them, flour, bread, tobacco, and such other articles as Great Britain should
permit, and which France by her permanent system prohibits; she must also
concede to us a right to purchase in her islands, and bring away, sugar,
coffee, and pimento, which by the same system she also prohibits; she must do
all this, because, by our treaty with her, (...) can only entitle herself to a
special privilege granted to another nation, by granting on her part to us the
equivalent of w^^^ was the consideration of our grant. Should France be
inclined to arrange the trade between us and her islands, we certainly shall
not object; because, besides the right to such an arrangement, it would be more
advantageous to us than that which now regulates our intercourse with her West
Indies.

So much of the twelfth article as respects its duration and the renewal of the
negotiation previous to the expiration (...) two years after the conclusion of
the war, in order to agree (...) a new arrangement on the subject of the West
India trade, (...) well as for the purpose of endeavoring to agree whether
any, and in what cases, neutral vessels shall protect enem^^^ property, and in
what cases provisions, and other articles n^^ generally contraband, may become
such, form a part of the treaty as ratified by the president. These clauses
sufficiently explain themselves, and require no comment in this place. Th^^^
however, prove one point, which is, that after every effort (...) the part of
our negociator, the parties were not able to agree i^ the doctrine that free
bottoms should make free goods, nor (...) the cases in which alone provisions
and other articles not generally contraband, should be deemed such. Leaving,
therefo^^ both these points precisely as they found them (except in respect to
provisions, the payment for which, when by the law of nations liable to capture
as contraband, is secured) to be regulated by the existing law of nations, it
is stipulated to renew the negotiation on these points at the epoch assigned
for the future adjustment of the West India trade, in order then to endeavor
to agree in a conventional rule, which, instead of the law of nations, should
thereafter regulate the conduct of the parties in these respects.

The eleventh article has been passed over in silence as being merely
introductory and formal.

CAMILLUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONCLUDED FROM VOL. 2. PAGE 13.]

No. XVI.
THE 9th article stipulates that such British subjects as now hold lands in the
territory of the United States, shall continue to hold them according to the
tenure and nature of their respective estates, and may sell, grant or devise
them as if they were natives, and renders this stipulation mutual. Though this
article may not be extensively dangerous, yet it merits our attention, as it
appears to infringe the constitutional independence of the respective states --
Congress alone have the power to naturalize; but neither congress, nor any
member of the federal government, appear to me to have any right to declare the
tenure by which lands shall be holden in the territories of the individual
states, without naturalization. This is an act of sovereignty which is confined
to the state legislatures, and which they have not ceded to congress, about
which, therefore, I am led to doubt the right of the president and senate to
treat. -- "Powers not delegated to the United States, being expressly reserved
to the States or the people thereof." -- Is this right of the states abridged
by the power of the president and senate to make treaties? Are not their powers
to treat confined to such objects as the constitution entrusts to the federal
government? Had they stipulated that the governor of New York should always be
a native of Britain, or that British subjects should, on their arrival, be
members of the city corporation (...) freemen of the city; we should, I
believe, have pronounced this article void, as an intrusion upon the rights of
the s^^^^ and an assumption of powers not vested in the parties treati^^. Is it
less so to declare the terms on which individuals shall hold lands in the
territories of the respective states -- to give rights to strangers which
citizens cannot enjoy, the rights of landholders without the burdens -- the
right of holding real property without being bound to defend it -- the right to
be protected in the possession of that property by states to whom they owe no
allegiance, and against whom they may even make war without incurring a
forfeiture?

Happy British subjects! As merchants you may enjoy in every part of our
country, all the privileges of our fellow citizens. -- As creditors, you are
entitled to recover your debt^ without being compelled to submit to the forms
of suits, or (...) usual rules of evidence -- As officers, you are to command
our respectful homage. -- As land-holders, you are to possess our lands in
peace, while the burden of defending them devolves on u^ your former equals,
your present vassals. -- The produce of (...) soil is to be diverted from every
other port but yours. -- Our few men are to fight your battles, but to be
treated as pirates i^ they appear in arms against you. -- Our statesmen
condescend (...) be your apologists, and our legislatures are bound in future
(...) do no act which may affect your interests! While congr^^^^ only are
entrusted with the power of declaring the rules of naturalization, left one
state by making the terms too ea^^ should intrude citizens upon others, can it
be constitution for the president and senate to exercise the more dangerous
power of investing the lands of the respective states in foreig^^ers who shall
not be compelled to defend them? If the right exists as to British subjects who
now hold lands, it may be extended, on some future occasion, to all who may
hereaf^^^ choose to purchase. It is true the article does not go th^^ length;
but the principle, that justifies it, as far as it has go^^ will apply equally
to every extension of it. It may not be improper to remind those who view this
article with indifferents, of the quantity of land held in Georgia, by
companies who^^^ avowed object is to fell it in Europe. If I am rightly
informed, it greatly exceeds all the land retained by the state. In New York,
the lands commonly called Morris's, M^Comb's, a^^^ Scriba's purchases, equal in
quantity all the remaining lands (...) the state. They have had agents for some
time past in England for sale of these lands. If is was effected before the
ratification, or at least before the signature of the treaty, as much land may
be held in this state by British subjects as by American citizens. If they were
held in trust, which is highly probable, the person in whose favor the trust
was created, is now secured from forfeiture, since they are to hold "according
to the nature and tenure of their respective estates and titles," etc. The
British construction of this article will give them the full benefit of their
purchases; it may then happen, even under the present treaty, as it now stands,
that the greater part of the lands of the two states, at least, belong to
British subjects, who may look to their own sovereign for protection, even
against the state whose lands they hold. What dangers and difficulties may not
this expose the states to? If it is admitted that the president and senate can
by treaty stipulate without the consent of a state, that their lands may be
held by British subjects, what principle is there in the constitution which
prevents their making the same stipulation in favor of the British king, or
their transferring all the vacant lands in every state to him? These were
formerly invested in him, and I doubt not that if he were to set up a claim
under this article, that he would find advocates among us to support it. Let it
be remembered that the exercise of these powers by the president and senate is
only derived from an implication founded on their right to make treaties. I
would ask, whether a stronger implication in favor of an exclusive right in the
state governments to make regulations relative to this object, is not found in
the third section, fourth article of the constitution -- " Congress shall have
the power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting
the territory, or other property of the United States; and nothing in this
constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United
States, or of any particular states." The claim of states to declare the tenure
on which their lands shall be held, has never been disputed; and so jealous
have some of them been of it, that they have repeatedly refused to admit
foreigners to hold lands without naturalization.

Several articles, which appear to me exceptionable, remain to be discussed;
but, circumstances, arising from the present unhappy situation of the city,
compel me to lay aside my pen. When these circumstances cease to operate, I may
again resume it. I trust, however, that enough has been said to show, that the
treaty has obtained no adequate compensation for the injuries we have suffered.
That it has relinquished important claims that we had upon the British
government. That it has given no protection to our seamen. That it is injurious
to our commerce, and ruinous to our navigation. That it takes from us the me^^^
we possessed of retaliating injuries without the hazard of a wa^. That it
pledges the country for immense sums of money, which it does not owe, while it
curtails our demands upon Britain. That it gives the British subjects a variety
of privileges in (...) country, which are but partially returned to us. That it
counteracts the existing laws, and violates the federal constitution, and that
it infringes the rights of individual states. It is p^^^ble, that in stating my
idea of the treaty, I may have run into errors; all I can say, is, that if I
have, none of them (...) intentional; that having no party to serve, no
personal interest to promote, I have only spoken sentiments, which an ard^^^
love for a country, which I have long served, has inspired, without wishing to
mislead. I beg my fellow citizens to re^^^lect, that if the treaty will bear
the construction I have given it, though an ingenious commentator may put a
different (...) upon several articles; that still the objections I state will
re^^^^ in force, since it is not the weakest, but the strongest nation (...)
construes the articles that admit of doubts, of which we ha^^ a striking
instance in this very tr^^ty. -- In the treaty of pea^^, the words of the
article relative to the taking away negroes, (...) are express, the intention
was acknowledged at the time by the commissioners on both sides, and not
doubted by either government; yet we find that Camillus has, by implications,
(...) given it a meaning, which he says renders it doubtful: ^e justifies Mr.
Jay in relinquishing our claim. -- If this is just reasoning in the mouth of an
American writer, it will still be m^^^ so in that of Britain; and the most
unfavorable construction of the treaty, will be the true one with respect to
us; because every doubt is to be construed against us. This argument is
^^^dered much stronger from the circumstances under which (...) Jay treated;
for if when they were more unfavorable to Britain, than we can again hope to
find them, doubtful constructions were to be construed to her advantage, by the
admis^^^^ of our envoy, they must, in future, be so. Let us not that form our
opinions of the treaty from distant implications, or ^^mote deductions, drawn
from fanciful reasonings on the la^ of nations.

The express words of the treaty are our only true guide. Where they contain
unfavorable stipulations, or where they neglect explicitly to declare our
rights, their plain and obvious meaning is to enforce the first, and to abridge
the last. Of the we have already sufficient proof in the construction they ha^^
put on some parts of the treaty by their late instructions. (...) should,
before I close, apologize for many errors, either of the copyist or the press,
or both. It has so happened, that most of the copies were made under such
circumstances as not to have been submitted to my inspection, which, together
with the errors of the press, multiplied by the different impressions it has
gone through, have introduced many mistakes, which the candid reader will
correct. It is also proper that I should mention an error of my own in the
seventh number, which has not been noticed: but which, as I have no wish to
mislead, I am bound to correct. In enumerating the impositions of Britain, I
stated, that she laid heavy duties on our commodities, rice and tobacco
particularly, and added, that we laid none upon her, but such as by treaty we
allowed her to ^^ualize -- The last part of this article is an error, which the
hasty manner in which these papers have been written, betra^^d me into, and
which I take these means to acknowledge, lest (though of no great importance)
it might tend to deceive those who had not at hand the proper means of
correcting the mistake.

CATO.

ATTICUS -- No. VI.
[CONTINUED FROM VOL. 2. PAGE 228.]

THE hero of the funding and excise systems, the parent of that immaculate
axiom, which would do honor to Constantinople, that a public debt is a public
blessing, has entered the lists as the champion of his darling brat, The
Treaty. He is brandishing his usual weapons, sophistry and seduction, but not
with his accustomed success; for since his character has been fully understood,
he has become as harmless, as to his influence upon the people, as a toad or a
cock-roach; and, like those animals, he excites sensations which are those of
aversion more than of dread. Divested of that instrumentality which he employed
but too successfully against his country, the circle of his corruptions must be
narrowed, and the whips and stings of an accusing conscience must now be
substituted for the supreme agency in the affairs of the United States. -- The
political heresies which he labored to establish, with all the zeal of a
fanatic, have unfortunately acquired an influence where they may still prove
dangerous, and the unlimited ascendency that he seems yet to maintain over
minds, which ought to be free from such flavish shackles, shadows the prospects
that are opening to the American world.

He has again raised the war whoop, and expects, by his hideous yells, to
terrify you, fellow citizens, into an abando^^ment of your rights, a
prostitution of the first blessings (...) free people. Have the funding and
excise systems parali^^^ your energies, that, like children, you are to be
terrified by scare crows? No! For whatever calculations he may (...) made in
this respect, his public blessings have not yet tran^formed you into the
eunuchs of liberty, and as you were (...) to be intimidated by the roaring of
the British lion during the revolution, you cannot be alarmed at the brayings
of an animal, who has only covered himself with his skin.

The war-whoop of "Camillus" begat the negotiation, and benumbed the faculties
of our country; and he expects, by the magic of his yelpings, to give life to
an abortion, that, like the fabled Basilisk, would look liberty to death. If
the threat of war is to produce a renunciation of our rights as a nation, and
of our freedom as a people, we had better divest ^^selves of the trouble of our
independence, and place ourse^^^^ formally under the guardianship of a foreign
power! -- Did (...) cry of war terrify us into a compliance with the dictum ^f
Great Britain, to bind us in all cases whatever? Did it ma^e us swallow the
tea, which, like the treaty, was to have palsied us into slavery? Did it make
us cringe to his Britannic majesty, and "lick the hand, just raised to shed our
blood?" We^ our energies greater at the commencement of the late revolut^^^,
than they are now! Or have we become more corrupt? This is the rub, fellow
citizens -- the instrumentality of a funding system, aided by British influence
and directed by another W^^^ pole, had not then enervated us. We were strangers
to corruption, and principle incited us to the maintenance of our rights. Is
the question war or slavery? War is the alternative annexed to a rejection of
the treaty by Camillus, and slavery the alternative of its acceptance, in the
mind of every well-wisher (...) his country. If war or slavery is then the
question, rather (...) the temple of Janus be for ever open, than that liberty
should be made a peace offering to a British tyrant. But will that ^^vereign,
upon "whose goodness and justice," we have placed such reliance, let loose the
dogs of war, if the "detestable faction," the people, refuse his friendship, as
expressed by the treaty? Should they be hardened, will not twenty righteous is
found, twenty who are uncontaminated with republicanism, (...) save Sodom?
Stern, indeed, must be that justice, inflexible that goodness, which would not
save a sinking land on account of a few righteous, that might be found within
it!!

No! No! "Camillus" -- your "great, good, and dear friend," is too much
occupied with his neighbors on the other side the channel, to find time to
attend to us -- Like the bear who was surrounded by hornets, he is too busy to
be attracted by any thing at a distance. The plethora of his body politic has
been too much reduced by the French bayonet, to be in vigor-to attack men who
once treated him so roughly. We fear him not -- we want no proxies to fight our
battles; and if your nerves are too weak, or your reverence for majesty too
great, cease your attempts to communicate your weaknesses to the athletic
freemen of America. Confine your seductions to your present circle; for by
keeping them within those limits, you may escape, for a time, the contempt and
detestation which menace you.

But if war is such a dreadful calamity, so much to be deprecated, that the
phantoms of it alone unstring the cob-web nerves of "Camillus," what will be
our condition, when the grisly monster Mars, arrayed in all his terrors, rushes
to revenge the injuries and perfidies done to the French republic? Does he
suppose, that war can become an evil only when waged against his idol, Great
Britain? Would the part which we should take in the league of despots, should
the treaty obtain, soften the horrors or mitigate the distresses of war? Would
a war with the French republic prop a funding system, that he seems so careless
about it? Should his bastard be legitimized, there can be little doubt, that
France would consider it as an infraction of our neutrality, as a supercession
of our engagements with her, and as a virtual, though not formal, accession to
the confederacy of tyrants against her. Circumstances, my fellow citizens, will
justify the suspicion, that a war with the French republic would be considered
as a thing devoutly to be wished by Camillus and his friends, and that the
treaty was formed with a solicitude for that event. There seems to have been a
deliberate plan to exterminate liberty, and this was to have been effected by
throwing off the connection with France, and consolidating ourselves with Great
Britain. -- In the arms of despotism, liberty would have been suffocated; and
in the arms of a British tyrant her fate would have been inevitable.

The increase of affection for France, in the breasts of the American citizens,
since she became a republic, seems to have produced a serious alarm among the
Aristocratic faction of the United States; and hence the repugnance to treat
with her anew -- hence the Machiavelian construction of every thing which was
due to her -- and hence the solicitude to form the unnatural alliance that has
manifested itself in the treaty. That the government of the United States has
been making rapidstrides toward aristocracy, no unprejudiced man, at this time
of day, will deny; and that a connection with Great Britain was sought for, to
facilitate this object, no one, who has noticed the steps of our
administration, and has read the treaty, unbiassed by party spirit, will
controvert. If there was not an extraordinary predilection for Great Britain,
would the United States have been passive under the many outrages they have
sustained -- would they have suffered, in silence, their seamen to be
impressed, like slaves, on board British ships of war, and would they have
beheld the unparalleled insult, without emotion, that has been offered to our
nation, in the attempt to seize a minister of France, within the limits of our
own territory!! Heaven, earth, and hell, would have been conjured, if an
attempt of the sort had been made upon the minister of Great Britain: and yet
those fiends are by treaty to be treated with that respect which is due to the
commissions which they bear; and if any insult should be offered to them, be
any of the inhabitants, all offenders, in this respect, shall be punished as
disturbers of the peace and amity between the two countries!!

Fellow citizens, I have digressed from the treaty; but you will think it
excusable, as you know the cause; for the man who can behold the barefaced
attempts upon our rights, and the audacious outrages upon our country, without
the strongest emotions, is unworthy of the freedom and inheritance of the
revolution.

ATTICUS.
August 8th, 1795.
No. VII.
A SOLEMN, an awful silence pervades the world of American politics, portentive
of some great event. The signature, the unexpected signature of the president
to the treaty, has momentarily paralized the American mind, as if by etherial
impulse; and it has not yet recovered from the incubus of astonishment and
grief, with which it was oppressed. The omnipotence of truth will, however, at
last prevail; and though the Americans are grateful, they are just; and that
sense of justice will prevent a barter of their own rights and their own
happiness for the gratification of any individual, however high his own claim
to an unlimited contrul over his country. The conflict of jarring feelings, the
strife between gratitude and self-love, has, for a moment, suspended the voice
of injured freemen; but the feeble mound of gratitude will not long resist the
impetuous and imperious cataract of self-preservation. -- Gratitude! What means
it when in contact with political justice! What means it, when thrown in the
opposite balance of our happiness! Does an individual claim more feeling than
ourselves, our families, our country! Does he demand sentiments in hostility to
our own repose! Human nature must undergo a revolution before this can come to
pass, and virtue yield its throne to vice.

The services of the president, during the revolution, are decked in all their
charms, to seduce us from a question of his present motives. He is held up to
us as the high priest of liberty, to give absolution to our own sensations. The
amiable virtue, gratitude, is appealed to in our bosoms, to neutralize our
indignation, at his having signed the treaty, after the general sentiments of
his country had been made known to him, in opposition to it. Had his signature
been given immediately after the adjournment of the senate, and before an
universal expression of disapprobation of it had taken place, ingenuity might
have found a cover for him; but the public mind seems to have been designedly
wrought up to the highest key of expectation, that the contempt of it might be
more strongly disclosed. Is gratitude to put a seal upon our lips under such
circumstances? Are freemen to be treated with the most marked contumely, and to
be passive under it like slaves? Is the president to receive more reverence
than our constitution, and more devotion than liberty! Let us be consistent,
and either renounce our constitution, and our pretensions to freedom, or rally
round them in contradiction to the will of an individual. I will endeavor to
prove to you, my fellow citizens, in the course of these letters, that our
constitution has been totally disregarded, and that the president has
substituted his will, for the will of the people -- that he has thwarted the
affections of the people, and in contempt of their attachment to the republic
of France, and aversion from Great Britain, has deceived the one, and crouched
to the other. If gratitude is due to the president, has not France likewise a
claim to it? Shall he prove ungrateful to her, and we prove grateful to him?
Shall he practice deception upon the best friend of our country, a friend to
whose generous aid he owes his present greatness, -- and shall we prove
perfidious enough to give it our countenance? Shall he take Great Britain into
his bosom, Great Britain who sought to enslave us, who has been guilty of every
baseness and every outrage against us, and shall we be obliged to smile upon
the monster, and receive the kiss of Judas? Shall he greet the tyrant George,
as his "great, good, and dear friend;" and shall we be obliged to recognize
such sacrilege of liberty? Shall he colonize us anew, and shall we be obliged
to subscribe the shameful compact? Shall that independence, which he assisted
to establish, be prostrated by him at the feet of Great Britain -- shall that
constitution, the sacred bond of union and dear bought inheritance of the
revolution, be trampled under foot by him, and gratitude still be chaunted in
our ears? Was the revolution designed to make him a monarch, and a few
speculators noblemen! Is this the gratitude that is demanded? Are we to
establish a political infallibility, and consecrate a political pope in our
country? Is it longer to continue impious to arraign presidential measures? If
so, I will preach up a reformation, and dare to be a Luther i^ politics. -- I
will strive to unmask the idol we have set up, and show him to be a man -- and
a man too, not fashioned according to the model of liberty. In signing the
treaty, the president has thrown the gauntlet; and shame on the coward hea^^,
that refuses to take it up. He has declared war against the people, by treating
their opinions with contempt -- he has forfei^^^ his claim to their confidence,
by acting in opposition to the^^ will, -- and shall we not dare to speak our
injuries, and pr^cla^^ our wrongs!

Fellow citizens, we are on the eve of some great event -- o^^ liberties are
(...) jeopardy, and we must either rescue them from the precipice, or they will
be lost to us for ever. One hope offers itself to us, and a consolatory one
too, the house of representatives of the United States. As we have looked in
vain for patriotism from the president, let us turn our eyes toward that body
-- they are our immediate representatives -- they feel ou^ wants, participate
in our injuries, and sympathize in our distresses. They never will submit to
having our country degraded -- they never will be passive under the outrages
upon our constitution -- they never will be the instruments of voting away
their own and the people's rights. As our application to the president has been
treated with scorn, let us make our appeal (...) that body, which has the power
of impeachment -- and we shall not find in them, the step fathers of their
country. A treaty which has bartered away their rights, cannot, will not be
submitted to -- Let us, then, my fellow citizens, rally round our
representatives, and we may (...) be free!

ATTICUS.
August 21st, 1795.
[No. X.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY RICHARD FOLWELL, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- DECEMBER 16, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. Cinna, No. I. Page (...) 2. -- No. II. Page (...) 3. -- No. III. Page (...)
4. -- No. IV. Page (...) 5. Resolutions of the Franklin Society Page (...) 6.
Reflections on Mr. Jay's Treaty No. I. Page (...) 7. -- No. II. Page (...) 8.
American Appeals Page (...) 9. Observations on Mr. Jay's Treaty Page (...) 10.
Observations on the XIVth article of Mr. Jay's Treaty Page (...) 11. Camillus
refuted by Alexander Hamilton Page (...) 12. Remarks on do. Page (...) 13.
Address of the Citizens of Charlestown to the President Page (...) 14.
President's Answer Page (...) 15. Proceedings of the Citizens of Frederic
County, Virginia Page (...)
American Remembrancer, etc.
FROM THE NEW YORK ARGUS.
CINNA. -- No. I.
Citizen Greenleaf,
TO expatiate on the justice, power, and resources of Great Britain -- to
justify all her acts, however wanton and unjust -- to depreciate his own
country, and to place her in the wrong upon every occasion, are favorite
themes with CAMILLUS. Hence it was no matter of surprise to find him in his
third number, attempting a formal vindication of Great Britain for carrying
away the negroes, and ridiculing our claim, on that subject. As this is the
first number that contains any thing like argument, it ought not to pass
unnoticed. By the treaty of Paris, his Britannic majesty agreed "not to carry
away any negroes from the United States." This, says Camillus, must mean either
negroes which had been, or which at the cessation of hostilities continued to
be American property. When the meaning of an instrument is doubtful, there
cannot be a safer or fairer way to obtain its true sense, than by considering
its circumstances, and the views of the parties at the time of making the
contract, and that they acted with good faith to each other. To apply this
rule; during the late war, many negroes had been taken by, or had voluntarily
joined the armies or gone into the garrisons of Great Britain. To reclaim them,
and prevent their being carried away, was an object which our commissioners had
much at heart; and it is not easy to conceive how this object could have been
expressed in plainer or less ambiguous terms. It will be remembered, that
Franklin had an agency in that treaty; and perhaps no man ever excelled him in
perspicuity and pertinency of expression; that those negroes and those alone
were in the contemplation of both parties, results from the very nature of the
case. It could not be necessary to guard against new depredations of this kind
-- peace being made, all hostilities of every kind ceased. As well might a
clause have been inserted, to prohibit ships of war, of the different parties,
from making prizes during the peace; as the captains of such vessels would have
been treated like pirates, so might every negro, or his value, been recovered
by a regular course of law, from any person who had taken him after the peace,
without any stipulation in the treaty for that purpose. To confine this
article, therefore, to an engagement to abstain from further plunder, is
rendering it altogether negative and useless; which is never to be supposed,
and cannot be presumed to have been the intention of either party. The
reasoning of Camillus is constrained and contradictory; in one breath, he
likens the negroes to "horses, cattle, and other movables, and as such liable
to become booty;" in the next considering them "as rational beings, and as
entitled to liberty under British proclamations, he concludes it would have
been odious and immoral to let them pass again into slavery." Let us bestow a
moment, for a moment will suffice, to detect the sophistry of each of these
arguments.

Admitting that slaves may become booty, and that their property becomes vested
in the captor, has he not a right to restore them, if he pleases, at a peace?
did not this city belong to the king of Great Britain by conquest? and did he
not agree to evacuate it, rather than continue an unequal war? did not the
American artillery, which he found in our forts, belong to him by the same
right; yet he agreed to leave it behind? when he finds how ably his infractions
of the treaty are defended by our own citizens, he will, no doubt, regret that
he evacuated New York as soon as he did; for the same argument ^^^d by Camillus
to justify his detention of the western posts, would apply equally strong to
his having kept garrisons till this time in our seaports, the prompt
evacuation of which this writer considers rather as a matter of grace in his
majesty, than of strict obligation on his part. To return -- as the negroes
which were taken, belonged to the king, he might prefer restoring them to their
former owners, rather than be encumbered with their maintenance, which would
probably have been the consequence of giving them freedom; to have sold them,
would have ill comported with his dignity. It must be considered also, that in
restoring them to their masters, he would take care to receive an equivalent
for such concession. What this equivalent was, none but the commissioners can
know; perhaps they agreed to recommend the tories to mercy in consideration of
his majesty's restoring the negroes: whatever the inducement may have been, he
promises, by an expression as latitudinary as can well be devised, not to carry
away any of them, that is, he will leave them all whether acquired by capture
or enticed away by his royal offers. If an exception had been intended, in
favor of any class, it would have found its way into the treaty: none being
made, the description must either be nugatory, or extend to all the blacks, who
were then living, and in the power of his troops, arming them against their
masters, and not in making amends for such an abominable warfare, by sending
them home again. But if such promises were really made, or if a treaty of amity
and alliance, offensive and defensive, actually existed between his Britannic
majesty, and who had not been actually carried from the continent before the
treaty, the other position cannot be supported without charging the king with
the greatest duplicity and want of good faith, which I shall not offend
Camillus so much as to suppose his majesty capable of. It would be odious and
immoral, says he, to return to their former masters, negroes who had joined
them on a promise of liberty. Any other but Camillus would have thought the
immorality consisted in alluring away the swarthy domestics of America. Why not
be explicit, and explain with good faith, to the plenipotentiaries, the solemn
engagement he was under; instead of stipulating a specific return, an
equivalent might then have been agreed upon; or if faith must be broken, either
with the negroes, or with the United States, would it not have been a less
reflection on Great Britain, to give up the former, whom she was no longer able
to protect, (as she did the tories) and to whom she was probably under no other
than immoral engagements, contained in proclamations, issued upon the sole
authority of some savage officers, than to break, in the very moment of
signing, a solemn compact, formally and deliberately entered into with the
latter? was she not under as solemn engagements to the tories who had espoused
her cause, and received protections from her generals; yet their persons and
properties were abandoned, or, which was the same thing, placed upon the
precarious footing of a recommendation on the part of congress, for favor and
pardon to the legislatures of the different states. Not a man of this
description who had been banished, could return without a law for the purpose.
Does Camillus imagine that the interests of these Africans lay nearer the heart
of their gracious monarch, whose virtues and humanity he takes so much pleasure
in blazoning, than those of his own deluded subjects, who, notwithstanding his
deliberate sacrifice of them, continue as firmly as ever devoted to him.

But if his majesty be really (what no one but Camillus (...) suspect) so
scrupulous about doing an odious action, or brea^ing his plighted faith to his
black allies, why justify him for keeping his wo^^^ at our expense? If he be as
just, magnanimous, and ben^v^^^nt as our envoy has represented him, why does he
not pay for the liberty which he thought it his duty to confer on our slaves?
Will Camillus pretend that his majesty's abhorrence of s^avery induced him to
carry these people away? The West India I^^ands will testify against him -- his
majesty, like some people among ourselves (I do not mean the quakers, for I
really believe them to act from principle) is a great advocate for manumission,
when his own interest or those of his subjects are not ^^^ected by it, or when
the United States, notwithstanding his unbounded affection for them) are alone
injured by it.

As soon, then, as the British king found that his recent engagements with this
country could not be executed specifically without violating his antecedent
promises to the negroes, instead of quibbling, and putting on his agreement a
construction which rendered it a dead letter, he would have acted more
consistent with the character ascribed to him by the friends of the present
treaty, by heartily communicating his embarrassments to our government. We
should readily have consented to a pecuniary compensation; Camillus, it is
true, asserts, that "when a party promises a specific thing, nothing but the
thing itself will satisfy the promise." -- If Camillus be a lawyer, he
certainly knows that nothing is more common than a satisfaction in damages for
the breach of a promise to do a specific thing; and that in a great variety of
cases it is the only satisfaction to which the law can or will compel the
deliquent party; and that such damages being paid, the promise is as completely
satisfied as by doing of the specific thing. Thus, if a person contract to
deliver me a ship, or a horse which he afterward sells to another, or to come
nearer to the case before us, he engages to restore me a negro which he
afterward sends away, and thus puts a specific performance out of his power,
my only claim against him is for a compensation commensurate to the injury
sustained by his breach of promise. It would be absurd in the extreme for
America, at this time, to insist upon a return of those negroes. Many are dead;
and of those who survive, the greater part must be in the decline of life, and
would be of little use to their former masters. A compensation then is all that
can be asked; this is precisely the controversy between the two governments.
The United States (and Camillus will not contend against their right so to do)
release G. Britain from a specific compliance, and insist upon an equivalent in
money. With what other view, then, but to deceive, does Camillus observe, that
"the party to whom a promise is made, cannot be required to accept in lieu of
in an equivalent? Did he not know that the United States were willing to
receive, and asked for nothing more than an equivalent, so that there could be
no necessity of enquiring into the right of Great Britain to force them to it?

It is proper to subjoin, that the construction of this article by Camillus, is
opposed to the interpretation which our government have uniformly put upon it,
is contrary to the explanation of it by mr. Jefferson, whose correspondence
with mr. Hammond is recommended, as the best antidote against the mischievous
and humiliating doctrines, so warmly inculcated by this writer. Every American
will turn with pleasure from a labored panegyric of the British government, a
strenuous and uncandid vindication of all its arbitrary proceedings toward
this country, and from the degrading representation of the United States, which
fill so many columns of Camillus, to the manly, energetic, dignified, and yet
candid examination of Jefferson. In the writings of this invaluable statesman,
he will discover the true source of controversy between the two countries. He
will be shocked at the perfidy and duplicity of Great Britain, and will be
astonished at the forbearance of the United States, under the most aggravated
and unprovoked insults and injuries. It is a work which should be in the hands
of every man. It will teach us to love and respect our country, a duty which
cannot be too strongly inculcated, when pains are taken to infuse a contrary
sentiment.

I shall only ask, if Camillus is right, how happened it, that a majority of
the Senate, at their late session, agreed to advise the President to renew
negociations with his majesty for a compensation for the negroes who had been
carried away contrary to the 7th article of the treaty of peace? When so many
respectable authorities concur respecting this aggression, it would evince a
becoming modesty in Camillus to retract an opinion which ought to find
advocates only in the British Cabinet.

CINNA.
July 29, 1794.
CINNA. -- No. II.
FAITHFUL to his promise, and meditating an attack upon mr. Jefferson, whose
arguments have hitherto been unanswered; CAMILLUS, in his 4th essay, proceeds
to instance certain infractions of the treaty of peace on our part; -- an
accurate enumeration of these breaches would require, says he, (...) tedious
research: and who, sir, has imposed upon you this odious task? Does the duty of
a patriot, or a citizen, demand it of you? Would not your talents and ingenuity
be better employed in vindicating the injured honor and rights of your country?
Does it become you to rack invention to cover her w^^^ obloquy, and to hold her
up as a faithless and treacherous ^^tion? Does it comport with the character of
a citizen of the United States, after their minister had silenced the objection
of the British ambassador, to justify a perfidious prince for his breaches of
faith and his violences toward America? will it answer any valuable purpose to
stigmatize the legislature of you own state, for acts which preceded the
treaty, and which were suggested by the spur of the occasion, and by a regard
to self-defence? Will the recollection produced by a review of the conduct of
the different parties during the war, be profitable, (...) conciliating? Will
not every American recur to the history^^ those times to discover, not only the
reasons which dicta^^^ but a justification of the acts of which you complain?
If (...) pursues the enquiry with pure motives, he will be astonished not that
the state of New York did so much, but that her moderation was as great as it
was. He will recollect, with e^^tions of pain and indignation, that the state
was not only invaded, and its capital, and some of its most fertile districts
i^ possession of a foreign enemy; but that she had also to enco^^ter a more
sanguinary foe, in those, from whose birth, situati^^ and connection, she was
entitled to expect support and ^^^cour, in her arduous conflict for
independence. These men (...) only turned their arms against their country,
but, outstripp^^ British cruelty, they introduced a warfare, which would (...)
disgraced the savages of our wilderness. The peaceful farmer the aged
inhabitants of either sex, whose years and infirmit^ were respected by the
troops of Great Britain, and her m^^less auxiliaries of Germany, found no
quarter from this implacable and intestine foe. Their depredations were
circu^^scribed by no principle or rule of war -- thirsting for reven^^ rapine,
plunder and secret death were their pursuit. Their success was proportionate to
their malice. America being unable to extend her protection to an immense
frontier, her citizens were driven from their farms -- their property made a
prey of; and they deemed themselves happy, when they could escape from
assassination into exile and penury. Our seas and coasts swarmed with
privateers, fitted out by these internal enemies; and even the Indians of
America were piloted by them, to the peaceful dwellings of her citizens, and
female and infants' scalps were often displayed as the joint triumph of those
monsters of the human race! Who then can be astonished, that these
provocations, which were repeating every day, should excite the most lively
sensations of indignation and resentment? Who then can wonder, that our
legislature should pass an act, which was not only extorted by a sense of
injury, and the exigencies of the times, but was peculiarly calculated to
protect our c^^^zens from future plunder, and held out a gleam of hope to these
who had already been stripped of their all, by this ruthless and unfeeling
band? Forgive me, sir, if I describe your present friends in glowing colors.
Humanity wished to forget forever, deeds of cruelty and horror, at the bare
mention of which, the most obdurate and rugged heart rovolts. America was
content to drop the curtain on a tragedy, the catastrophe of which had
confounded the adversaries of her freedom and sovereignty. This state in
particular, [New-York] although her trade and frontiers had suffered the most,
early manifested a conciliating and forgiving spirit. Persons who had betrayed
the most rancorous temper, and had been banished for their enmity and poverty
of spirit, were permitted to return to the bosom of their offended country. Men
who had evidenced not only in principle, but in action, the most rooted
hostility to our freedom and government, were permitted to remain, and to
become a part of the great body politic. Instances, without number, of
forbearance, lenity, and even of tenderness, forgiveness, and sincere
reconciliation, might be produced; even rewards and public honors and offices
have been bestowed on these men. Far from condemning a policy, to which,
however, there were many objections, I glory in the liberality and munificence
of my country. Nor was it my wish to rescue from oblivion, a memorial of the
conduct of those who have been objects of their country's generosity and
forgiveness. Camillus has courted, nay provoked the discussion. When it becomes
necessary to exculpate our country from the reproach of cruelty and breach of
says, we must be permitted to return to the times which produced the act,
which, it is pretended, fixes this stigma upon her. If Camillus had taken this
trouble, he would have seen so much room for recrimination, that in tenderness
to the feelings of these unhappy men, he would have forborne some of his severe
animadversions on the conduct of this state.

Having stated some of the provocations and inducements, we come now to the law
itself, in which Camillus discerns one of the earliest breaches of the treaty
of peace, on our part; Camillus was not more unhappy in reminding us of the
conduct of the tories, than he is unfortunate in this first proof which lie
instances of our breach of faith. The law to which he refers, is well known by
the appellation of the trespass act. This law passed the 17th March, 1783. A
mind, not warped by prejudice, nor disposed to deceive itself, is at some
difficulty to imagine how an act, passed six months before the definitive
treaty was signed, and more than a year, according to Camillus, before it
became binding on the king, can be tortured into an infraction of that very
treaty. At the time of passing this law, the legislature had a perfect right so
to do; nay, it was part of their duty, -- the war yet raged with unabated
rigor: as the royal cause became more and more desperate, its friends became
proportionably alert in their efforts to revenge a success, to which they could
not reconcile themselves. Their last cruelties exceeded any of a former date.
Every measure therefore, which tended to curb the licentiousness of our
domestic foes, to mitigate or check the horrors of a civil war, and to protect
those of our citizens whose remote residence prevented their receiving any
adequate security from the American army, was not only prudent, but necessary,
justifiable, and humane. It was also believed, that few, if any, of the
depredations and robberies, which were committed by the new levies and
refugees, were at the time sanctioned by any military order; their own fury,
and a thirst for plunder and revenge led them on; yet if a military order was
admitted to justify their conduct, how easy would it have been to obtain one?
Every man who had stolen a horse, a cow, or other property, without any
authority, and converted the proceeds to his own use (and there were thousands
who pursued no other business) would have sheltered himself from a just
compensation, under an order, which might at any time have been procured. The
legislature also knew for it was composed of the most enlightened and
meritorious patriots of the day, notwithstanding the ^dium which is now to be
fixed upon it) that if any of the provisi^^^ of the act should clash or
interfere with any treaty made with Great Britain, they would of course cease
to operate, and that our courts would give effect to those clauses only which
might not undergo such repeal.

Camillus, it is true, does not admit that treaties, made under the
confederation, were paramount to the antecedent laws of the sta^^s. Proceeding,
however, with more caution than usu^^ ^e does not flatly deny the position, but
contents himself with observing, that it was a "question of theory, about which
there was room for, and in this country did exist, much diversity of opinion."
What is meant by any law being a question of theory, I do not well comprehend.
What is the law in any particular case, in a foreign country, we have ever been
taught to consider a question of fact and not of theory; and lord Mansfield
declares, that such laws must be proved as facts. What the law may be, in any
given case, may be a matter of uncertainty, and not known to every one, but it
is still a question of fact, whether it be, as stated by one person or another.
Where this diversity of opinion prevails, courts of justice alone can settle
the question; and until this is done, we must resort, for information, to our
national engagements, and the opinions of professional men. I do not mean to
admit, that our courts have not determined the question; for it will be seen in
the sequel, (and it is somewhat mysterious that it should have escaped the
penetration of Camillus) that our courts have solemnly adjudged in favor of
the treaty, when interfering with a contrary municipal regulation.

The question deserves a more minute examination; for if it can be shown, that
all state laws, contravening the treaty of peace, were thereby repealed, and
rendered null as to their future operation, all the elaborate reasoning of
Camillus, and its superstructure, will be overthrown, and he himself be
compelled, however reluctantly, to impute the first infraction to the account
of Great Britain. The proposition is so self-evident to an American lawyer,
that without any proof, it forces the same conviction on his mind, as the
plainest axioms of Euclid, "that the whole is greater than a part," or, "that
all right angles are equal to one another," do upon that of a mathematician. To
prove either, appears a work of supererogation; however, as the doubt is
raised, we will attempt a solution of it.

By the 9th article of the confederation, "the United State; in congress
assembled, have the sole and exclusive right of entering into treaties and
alliances." These articles were acceded to by this state, by a solemn act of
its legislature, passed the 6th of February, 1778. The people, therefore, of
this state were as much parties to the treaty of Paris, as if they had been
present in their proper persons, and individually affixed their signatures to
it. How then could its binding force upon them ever become a question? Has
Great Britain ever entertained a doubt on the subject? Can one party to a
contract annul it without the other's consent? Hence it follows, not only that
treaties made under the confederation, were supreme laws of the land, but that
they were so in a sense much more extensive and emphatical than could be
applied to an act of the legislature. While the latter could be repealed or
altered, the former could no wise be effected by a legislative act. Of little
force, therefore, is the observation of Camillus, that "in the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia, there were acts which had prevented, and might prevent
the recovery of debts, according to the treaty." The legislature of Virginia
may make, but cannot expound even its own laws, much less laws or compacts to
which that state was only one of many parties. Their exposition belongs solely
and exclusively to the judicial department. These (but perhaps it was unknown
to Camillus) are the sentiments of the legislature of that very state. In an
act of October, 1787, it is declared, "that it does not belong to the
legislature to decide particular questions, of which the judiciary have
cognizance, and that therefore it was unfit for them to determine on the
validity of certain payments." The opinion, therefore, of any legislature on
laws which already exist, is entitled to no attention; much less does such an
opinion diminish the obligation or efficacy of them. Even in passing laws, if
they exceed their authority (which may be the case) courts of justice will
disregard and refuse to carry them into effect. If a case had been cited, of
the supreme judicial tribunal of Virginia rendering a judgment conformable to
what is stared as the opinion of its legislature, it would have been in point,
and not easy to reconcile to the injunctions of the treaty.

After producing this opinion, Camillus demands, with an air of triumph and
satisfaction, as if he had detected mr. Jefferson in a misrepresentation; "with
what truth has it been asserted, that it was at all times perfectly understood,
that treaties controuled the laws of the states? I answer, because it could not
be otherwise, and that not only mr. Jefferson, but several professional and
other characters of eminence, whom he consulted, (for extensive as his own
experience was, he did not think it derogated from a minister of a free nation
to collect information from his fellow citizens) concurred in this opinion. It
may well be doubted, whether any lawyer has ever seriously advocated a contrary
proposition. "It resulted," says mr. Jefferson, "from the instrument of
confederation, among the states, that treaties made by congress, according to
the confederation, were superior to the laws of the states." He adds, "we may
safely affirm this to have been the general sense of those at least who were of
the profession of the law." Mr. Jefferson, we shall see, did not speak at
random, nor without authority, nor is he chargeable with the smallest
misrepresentation. It gives me pleasure, I confess, to rescue the character of
this gentleman, which has forced the admiration of America, from the aspersions
of an anonimous writer, whose lucubrations hitherto may be regarded rather as a
formal censure of his official conduct, than a vindication of the English
treaty. Does it excite surprise, that Camillus wishes to render him odious? In
his own writings the reason may be discovered. "Mr. Jefferson," says he, "is a
candidate for the presidential chair!"

Governor Collins, mr. Channing, district attorney for Rhode Island, governor
Huntington, mr. Lewis, district attorney for Pennsylvania, mr. Monroe, a
senator from Virginia, and now minister in France, and mr. Harrison, our
district attorney, and a gentleman of well learned legal reputation, have all
sanctioned an opinion, which Camillus would fain persuade us is a matter of
doubt. The name of Hamilton, whose legal acquirements, and other splendid
talents, have so often astonished his fellow citizens, and whose authority it
is presumed, will not be disputed by Camillus, may also be added to a list
already respectable. In the case of Waddington and Rutgers, which has been
oftener mentioned than its importance deserved, he was council for the
defendant, and advised his client to rely on the treaty of peace, which plea
was allowed by the court. It will not be impertinent here to notice a remark of
Camillus, not as a proof of candor, but of his solicitude to mislead:
"though," says he, "there may have been no formal decision of our courts,
enforcing the exceptionable principles of the trespass act, yet there never was
a decison of a supreme court against it." Did not Camillus know, that the
supreme court had decided against principles as exceptionable in other acts,
merely because they were at war with the treaty of peace? He knew it, and it
would have been no reflection on his candor to have stated the instances. Not
having done so, the following extract of a letter from mr. Harrison to mr.
Jefferson, will remind him of some cases in which he was probably concerned as
counsel for one of the parties. -- "^wor^ operation of this act," says he,
speaking of the act relative (...) debts due to persons within the enemy's
lines, "became so^ after the peace, a subject of much complaint, grounded upon
that article of the treaty which forbids any impediment to the recovery of the
full value in sterling money of all bona fide debts, and that which declares
that no person shall suffer any future loss in his person, liberty, or
property. With regard to British creditors, who were supposed to be the proper
object of the 4th article of the treaty, the superior courts of the (...) soon
restrained the operation of the act, and I do not know of a single instance
where they have been held to be affected by it." Here then we have not only
decisions of our superior courts in poi^^ but are told, by a gentleman of great
accuracy, that there i^ not one instance to the contrary. How powerful is
tru^^^ deception may continue f^r a day, but the veil will soon be (...) and
fallacy and error, however sophistically arrayed, wi^^ stripped of their
ornaments, and exposed to public view. (...) this be a caution to all who read
Camillus, to suspend (...) opinion until his assertions are examined. I
forbear, for (...) sake of brevity, to transcribe the opinions of the other
ge^^^^men who have been named, although they are equally stro^^ and more direct
in point than that of mr. Harrison. They (...) all as positive as language
could render them, and bear (...) norable testimony in favor of America. They
should be (...) sulted by those, who, like mr. Jefferson, "will be glad to
(...) an exculpation of our conduct," which is glanced at by (...) writer as a
disingenuous trait in his ministerial carcer. Go^^^nor Livingston also, in a
letter dated 15th June, 1789, to (...) same minister, declares, that "he does
not know a single (...) stance, in which the state of New Jersey had
contravened (...) treaty." It would be endless to cite proofs on this subject.

Treaties, then, from the very nature of our union, being (...) supreme laws of
the land, it results necessarily, that its provis^^^ could not be controuled by
the laws of any state, and that no (...) could reasonably complain of the
existence of such acts, whi^^ by the treaty, were rendered nugatory, until
obedience to th^^ was enforced by the courts to whom the exposition of (...)
acts and treaties was delegated. Let Camillus produce a (...) instance of the
supreme judiciary of any state rendering ju^^ment contrary to the plain sense
of the treaty -- until such (...) amples are produced, it becomes us to defend
our country (...) the unjust imputations of the British ministry and their
age^^ and not by subtle and sine-spun distinctions and doubts, (...) efficacy
to their calumnies. Among the subterfuges, calculated to fix a reproach upon
the United States, may be classed the remark of Camillus, that, "under the
confederation, they had no courts of their own to expound and enforce their
treaties as laws." We are at a loss which to censure most in this observation;
its want of candor, or the unqualified reflection it carries with it on the
state judiciaries. If treaties were laws of the land, which, perhaps, was never
seriously doubted, were not the state judges, then, as much as the federal
judges are now, sworn and bound to conform to, and make them the rule of their
decisions? He subjoins, with becoming delicacy, "it was believed that a
majority of our supreme court bench would overruled the plea of a military
order." How was this discovery made? did the judges favor him with an
extra-judicial opinion? or was he gifted with the spirit of divination? Thus,
belief, surmises, and suspicions must be resorted to, to fix upon our state,
the ignominious charge of breaking her solemn enga^^^ents with foreign powers.
To the credit of our bench, it ought to be mentioned, that it has, ever since
the peace, been filled with characters of the most unblemished reputation and
integrity, and that the confidence inspired by their decisions, has been so
great, that perhaps in no state in the union, is less business done in the
federal court, than in New York. It would hardly receive credit, was I to
mention how very few civil actions have been commenced in these courts, since
their organization in this state.

It cannot be necessary to follow Camillus through his invidious enumeration of
the other acts of this, and other states, which he considers as violations of
the treaty; the same answer applies to all. The treaty could not be controuled
by any state (...); but it is alleged, that in some cases, repealing acts were
deemed necessary by the legislatures of the different states. This does not
alter the case. It was done for the greater caution, and furnishes proofs of a
sincere spirit of accommodation. ^n some states, a repeal would probably not
have taken place, of their legislatures had not observed the laws in question
had already yielded to the superior mandates of the treaty.

But admitting, for a moment, that legal impediments once ^xisted to the
recovery of British debts, will it be contended that they continued to operate
at the time of the negotiation between mr. Jay and lord Grenville? if not, why
fear to meet ^he question, and discuss the respective claims of the two
countries? If America had done wrong, what could Great Britain ^sire more, than
a redress of the injury which had already taken place? mr. Jay could have
informed lord Grenville, (...) confidence, that for six years past, our courts
were open (...) British creditors, and that probably few, if any, remained
(...) satisfied. This would not have pleased his lordship. Kno^ing that
Great Britain had nothing at present to complain of, (...) that our demands
were of the most serious and extensive nature, he sedulously avoided a
discussion, which a mere (...) in diplomatic controversy, could have managed on
our part, (...) as to refute every possible objection of his lordship. Every
"enlightened American," therefore, cannot but regard the pretended
apprehensions of our envoy to meet so plain a question as a base dereliction of
his country's honor, as a mean sa^^^fice of her rights; as an ill-timed
delicacy, and as a (...) unwarrantable concession to Great Britain.

CINNA.
New York, August 9th, 1795. P. S. It has been thought best to subjoin the
opinions of (...) gentlemen above referred to; they harmonize, and are so (...)
in point, that we shall find it impossible to withhold our (...) from mr.
Jefferson's proposition in its greatest latitude, "(...) treaties made by
congress, according to the confede^^^^^^ were superior to the laws of any
state."

Governor Collins says, "the treaty, in all its obsolute (...) has been fully
complied with; and to those parts that (...) merely recommendatory, and depend
upon the legislative disc^^^^^^ the most candid attention has been paid;"
plainly implying says mr. Jefferson, that the absolute parts did not depend
(...) the legislative discretion.

Mr. Channing, speaking of an act passed before the (...) says, "this act was
considered by our court, as annulled (...) treaty of peace.

Governor Huntington says, "the courts of justice ado^^ the treaty as a
principle of the law."

Mr. Lewis -- "the judges have uniformly and without ^tation declared in favor
of the treaty, on the ground of its ^ing the supreme law of the land."

Mr. Monroe -- "both court and counsel, in Virginia, ^^^ed the opinion, that
the treaty would control any law of state opposed to it."

The senators and representatives in congress from Mary^^ in a note to mr.
Jefferson, inform him, "that the legi^ of Maryland, enacted a law declaring the
treaty the supreme (...) of the land, which was," they add, "but a compliance
in (...) with what had, in effect, taken place, immediately after the exchange
of the ratifications of the definitive treaty."

William Tilghman, a lawyer of Maryland, writes as follows: "we have recognized
the treaty as the law of the land, by a particular act of assembly; and our
judges have given one very striking proof of their impartiality in the
construction of it. I allude to the decision of the general court in favor of
British creditors, against a number of Maryland citizens, who, during the war,
deposited paper money in the treasury, under the sanction of a law, at that
time existing, in satisfaction of their debts: whether the treaty should have
such retrospect as to avoid these payments, was certainly a doubtful point."

If these instances, an enumeration of which would have occasioned no "tedious
research," (mr. Jefferson having been at the pains of collecting them) do not
dissipate the doubts of Camillus, if he really entertains any, neither will he
believe, if one rise from the dead. It affords matter for serious reflection,
that the talents of this gentleman, should be so strenuously exerted to traduce
his country, when ample materials were at hand, not only for exculpation, but
for eulogy and commendation.

CINNA.
August, 10th, 1795.


CINNA. -- No. III.
IF Camillus, instead of vindicating mr. Jay, at the expense of his country's
faith, had recurred to his official reports, while secretary for foreign
affairs, an apology would have presented itself, not quite so grateful perhaps
to the pride of his friend; but less constrained, and more agreeable to truth,
than the one which he has assigned. It is well known that mr. Jay, while at the
head of that department, either from want of information, or from taking a less
comprehensive view of the subject than his successor did, or from some other
less pardonable motive, in very unqualified language, not only excused
Great Britain for her infraction of the treaty, but threw the whole censure on
this country. It was easily foreseen that the negotiation in the hands of a
man, thus committed, must either prove abortive, or terminate, as it has done,
dishonorably to America. A virtuous minority in the Senate, remonstrated in
vain against an appointment which was not only a direct attack upon the
constitution, by destroying the independence of the judiciary, but which, from
the character of the envoy, augured nothing but disappointment and ignominy.
Mr. Jay's hostility to the French revolution was also well known. This enmity
betrayed itself, not only in his more private sentiments and conversation, but
was most conspicuously displayed in the libel, which he, in concert with one of
our senators, publishest against the minister of that republic. The manifest
object of that too-celebrated certificate was to discredit the French cause,
and to extinguish that enthusiastic ardour for its success, which had become
almost universal in the United States. The attack upon mr. Genet terminated
unfortunately and disreputably for the contrivers of it: it was not therefore
to be expected that a man (whose very friends impute to him, a temper bordering
on the vindictive) should over forgive the triumph of a minister, who not only
exonerated himself from the charge, but in a manner the most public and (...)
equivocal, convicted his antagonists of having propagated a deliberate
misrepresentation. It will be recollected, that mr. Jay's own witness proved
the innocence of mr. Genet. What could America look for from an envoy, whose
mind had been recently embittered against the French, by a personal defeat, but
as many marks of animosity toward that people as could decently be inserted in
a public treaty. These observations may at first appear impertinent, and no
wise connected with the merits of the treaty; but when Camillus, and every
other writer in favor of it, uniformly represent mr. Jay as the properest man
in America to have been entrusted with the negotiation, and hence infer that it
cannot be bad, it becomes useful to examine the position, and to show, as has
been done, that a more unfit character could not have been sent upon so
important an embassy.

It may be said, the documents afterward collected by the industry of mr.
Jefferson, and his masterly reasoning upon them, placed the questions, which
had been conceded by mr. Jay, in a light which dissipated all objections, and
carried conviction to every unprejudiced mind. That mr. Jay, therefore, would
have nothing to do but to bring forward the arguments which had already been
managed with so much success by the American secretary. But those who reason in
this way, forget how difficult it is for a man who stands committed on record,
to renounce his errors. From pride of opinion, and inordinate self-esteem, no
one is exempt; how then were we to hope that mr. Jay, after hazarding opinions
on this side of the Atlantic, which had already proved the bane of his country,
in all her subsequent negociations with Great Britain, should recede
immediately on his arrival at the court of St. James's, where every pains and
flattery would be practiced, to keep him in good humor? Besides, his
sentiments being in possession of the British minister, might be used to great
advantage, if he attempted to change his ground. Rather, therefore, than recede
at the expense of his reputation, and at a certainty of being self-convicted of
contradiction and inconsistency, every subtility and finesse would be put in
use, and in the last resort, the interests of America would be regarded as a
small sacrifice to personal honor. The envoy well knew, that however important
these sacrifices might be, men would not be wanting to applaud the wicked deed,
and to blazen to the world his past services and patriotism. The event has
corresponded with his expectations. Instead of declaring, which would have been
the language of sincerity and candor, that it was impossible for mr. Jay, who
was already committed, to invite a discussion with the British cabinet, every
deception is practiced to impose upon the public, a belief that such
discussion, in the hands of any one, must have been inauspicious to the United
States, and the efforts of mr. Jefferson, to rescue us from the base imputation
of his predecessor in office, are contemptuously styled "a mere essay of
polemical skill, or a convenient ingredient of negotiation."

Citizens of America! be on your guard. Since the epoch of your independence, a
more important crisis than the present, never presented itself. To entice you
into an approbation of a compact too degrading to be vindicated, arts, as base
as the instrument itself, are put in practice -- your confidence in a minister,
who never ceased to defend your rights, and who was forced from his high
station by the prevalence of a British faction, is attempted to be shaken. His
manly and energetic exposition of your violated rights is turned into ridicule
-- his candor is impeached, and his patriotic labors in your service are
branded as the offspring of "hollowness and fallacy." Men, like these, are, if
you follow the pernicious counsel of Camillus, to be "expelled from your
confidence." These are the men against whom you are cautioned, as laying
"artful snares for your peace!" Are unsupported suggestions, like these, the
effusions of patriotism and virtue? Do they not betray, notwithstanding a
thousand professions to the contrary, a mind hostile to your internal peace,
and tainted with the corruptions of a Bitish court! If you pursue such
intemperate advice, and expel from your confidence, men of the description
glanced at by Camillus, where will the expulsion end? a proscription more
dreadful than that of Robespierre will succeed. The first and best patriots of
America will fall victims, and all to gratify the insatiable ambition of a few
aspiring individuals, who can brook no opposition, and unless they can control
public affairs, are perpetually disseminating calumnies, and sowing the seeds
of civil dissension and discord. This is remarkably the case with the writer,
whose defense, as it is hitherto ludicrously termed, has occasioned these
remarks. His preliminary observations, and but little else has yet appeared in
his first six numbers, are calculated to impress a belief, that an opposition
to the treaty originated with the personal enemies of mr. Jay, or with those
who have been uniformly opposed to the general government. These remarks
partake more of intemperance and illiberality than of argument. As an address
to the passions, they may be overlooked, but if they are designed to convince
our reason, we turn from them with pity and contempt. What, sir, are the
personal enemies of mr. Jay dispersed from one end of the continent to the
other? Many respectable names, who stand foremost in the opposition, are, or
have been, his friends. They regret the wounds which his feelings must sustain
by their opposition to an association in which he has borne so conspicuous a
part; but the calls of patriotism have stifled those of friendship, and it is a
circumstance, certainly not favorable to the treaty, that many men, who had
been in the habits of intimacy, and of thinking well of mr. Jay, have been most
undisguised in their expressions against it. That mr. Jay has his personal
enemies, is not doubted; no man is without them; and perhaps it would be
difficult to assign any good reason why he should be exempt from this common
lot of humanity: but that these enemies have invariably arrayed themselves
under the banners of opposition, remains for Camillus to prove.

The other assertion is less excusable, because Camillus well knew, that among
those who opposed the treaty, were some of the best friends to the national
government; some who had not only signed, but had ever warmly supported the
constitution of the United States. The names of Langdon, Pinckney and Rutledge,
appear to the constitution of the United States. I should prove as tedious as
Camillus, were I to enumerate all the instances which occur of the most zealous
federalists, who have every where appeared among the opposers of this infamous
compact. Not only the political characters, but the measures pursued by those
who condemn the treaty, have fallen under the lash of his pen. No excuse can be
offered for his misrepresentations on this subject -- That the town meeting of
Boston denounced it the very day after its arrival, and, without a reading, is
an assertion directly opposed to all the testimony we have of their
proceedings. The account of our own town-meeting, and of the manner in which it
was obtained is too gross to impose on any of the citizens of New York. Who are
intended by the "leaders of the clubs" who were seen harranging at every
corner, to stir up the citizens of ^^imitate the example of Boston, I am at a
loss to ascertain. ^^me of the most active enemies of the treaty belong to no
club at all; and instead of taking pains to induce the citizens to assemble
such was the universal execration in which the ^^^ty was regarded in New York,
that it was with some dif^^^^ty the meeting was postponed to so late a day.
That a ^^ectable body of the merchants endeavored to moderate (...) violence,
and promote a spirit favorable to discussion, ^^^ports as little with the fact
as several of the assertions which have been already noticed. The truth is,
that two or ^^^ee zealous partisans, alarmed at the increasing opposition (...)
jealous of the effect which a legal and peaceable expres^^^^ of our sentiments
might have on the president, collected a great haste, and at a late hour of the
night, a few merchants, ^^^spectable neither for their numbers, their
patriotism, nor, ^^^lities. It is in the power of Camillus to give their names
(...) the public, who will then judge between him and me. These merchants lent
their names to an address prepared, probably their leader, and containing a
proposition as absurd as it, (...) insiduous. The citizens of New York had too
much ^ood sense to be the dupes of it; they discovered, in the pro^osal to
discuss, not only a reflection on their understandings, (...) late, a decision
on a subject too momentous to their in^^rests, to be longer delayed. When would
the discussion have ^^ded? A few days after this meeting, the defense of
Camillus ^^^eared, and he has not yet finished the first article! -- The
^^tizens, therefore, after having maturely considered the trea^^^ and attended
to a discussion which it had undergone for (...) than three weeks in the public
prints, assembled, it is (...) not to listen to a "respectable body of lawyers
or merchants," but to unite with their-fellow citizens of Boston in an address
to the president against its ratification. In ^bers, respectability, good
order, and decorum, no assembled this city ever exceeded the one which took
place on the when the resolutions were agreed to.

Before this meeting is dismissed, I must be permitted advert to certain
measures which have been pursued by a ^^ty in this city in consequence of it.
The resolutions (...) scarcely sent on to the president, before serious
attempts (...) made, not only to represent the meeting as illegal, turbu^^^^^^
and unconstitutional, but to incite our fellow-citizens belief, that measures
were adopting to overthrow the government, and to introduce anarchy and
confusion. With (...) view, invitations were secretly distributed among the
^ri^^ of order, to meet privately and in the night. The first ^^^ing was so
very thin, that it was thought prudent not to ^^^ceed to business -- a second
attempt was made, which ^^^^ed but little better. After sending away those who
were ^^^posed not to harmonise in sentiment with the lead^^^ business was
opened -- Philippic succeeded philippic (...) those who had exercised a right,
secured to them by the (...) ^^stitution of the United States, of "assembling
peace (...) petitioning government." Every art, seconded by all the ^^^ers of
eloquence, was practiced to infuse the most horri^^ ^^^picions into their minds
against their absent fellow-(...) The result was, as has been asserted, and not
contra^^ a determination to sign an instrument, pledging themse^^^ each other
to support the government and constitution (...) United States. -- To carry
into effect so laudable an (...) committees are to be appointed in each ward,
to call the citizens for their signature.

Citizens of New York! be not rash or precipitato -- association, which at
first view appears harmless and (...) praiseworthy, is big with consequences,
fatal to your i^^^^nal peace and happiness. Are we not already under the
^^^ties of an oath to support the constitution and laws (...) country? Is it
not our interest so to do? Notwithstanding the wicked calumnies of our enemies,
have we ever di^^^ed in our words or actions, a spirit hostile to the one (...)
other? Have we ever since the adoption of the consti^^^^^^ opposed any laws of
the United States? Have we not, (...) contrary, manifested a patriotic
jealousy, upon every occ^^ when attempts have been made to violate its sacred
injunction Because then, in this awful crisis, we came forward, and (...) our
warning voice with that of America, against a (...) fraught with destruction,
are we to be stigmatized as anarchists? -- are we to be separated from our
fellow-citizens, and pointed at as seditious enemies of our country? Can those
who advise you to so invidious a proceeding, be actuated by friendship for you,
or a zeal for the public good? Are not rather personal aggrandizement and
importance, their real objects? Unaccustomed to the smallest control, they had
rather arm citizen against citizen, than sink peaceably into obscurity, or
experience a disappointment in a single scheme of their projection. Let those,
therefore, who wish to increase the dissension which already unhappily prevails
in this city, and those only, countenance this association. To ask a
fellow-citizen to sign it, carries with it an insult, and will probably be
regarded and resented as such by the greater part of the community. Such a
request must proceed from suspicions of their patriotism or honesty. Good men
want no additional tie, bad men will disregard any. To the honor of mr.
Will^^ocks, it ought to be mentioned, that he vehemently opposed, ^^ut without
effect, nocturnal meetings of that nature, and ex^^tiated, at some length, on
their dangerous tendency.

After unwearied pains to prejudice his readers against the adversaries of the
proposed treaty -- Camillus proceeds to alarm our fears, and to compel us (to
use his own expression) (...) "surrender our reason to the empire of our
passions." The ^^o^rors of war are presented to the affrighted imagination, as
(...) certain consequences of a rejection of this treaty by America. What, sir!
is the treaty so fundamentally bad, that nothing but an apprehension of the
waste of war, and a display of torrents of human blood, can reconcile us to it?
but whence the probability of a war? will Great Britain, exhausted as she is by
her contest with France, be anxious to make new enemies? Will her subjects urge
her to the conflict? Will they not rather, as they have already done, take the
part of America, and endeavor to compel the ministry to reasonable terms of
accommodation? Is our commerce an object of no importance to Great Britain? Is
the aid we could furnish to the French in the reduction of the West India
islands, a matter of no moment? But if a war must take place, before our
differences can be adjusted, will it be an advantage to America to postpone it
until a general peace takes place in Europe? Will not Great Britain alone gain
by the delay? Nothing but our extreme pusillanimity will ever involve us in a
war with Great Britain. We shall permit her, by our tamenese and submission, to
proceed so far that she will hardly know how to recede with honor. It is a
fact, that at this moment, we experience (...) than one half of the evils of a
state of war, without deri^^ from it any one of its advantages; patience under
our accu^^lated insult and injuries, is magnified by Camillus into "dignified
moderation," and our "government," by mean submission to a licentious tyrant
(whose depred^^^^ on the ocean exceed those of the pirates of Barbary) has
^^quired," according to this writer, "a new elevation." (...) to heaven the
evils we have to complain of, were past (...) might then estimate the costs,
and it might be prude^^^ to hazard a war for the sake of compensation. But the
^^ries we have remonstrated against, are repeating and inc^^ing every day. Our
ships are daily captured, our seamen (...) pressed, our public dispatches
opened, and our very har^^^ afford no protection to the minister of an ally;
and yet (...) this despot we are to form an unequal treaty. Our (...) freezes
with horror, at a bare mention of the unnatural ^^^^^nection; and yet to bring
it about, our constitution (...) violated, our characters and rights prostrated
-- outrage (...) insult must be ignominiously submitted to -- American (...)
must receive a stain too foul ever to be effaced -- and (...) confidence a
wound which will baffle the healing (...) time. Rouse, then, citizens of
America! exercise, (...) be too late, an alienable right. Convey to the
president fair, but respectful language, your sentiments on the im^^^ing
danger. He will listen to the voice of his fellow (...) and pause before he
barters away their dear-bought (...) leges.

CINNA
August 11, 1795.
CINNA -- No. IV.
CAN there be a stronger proof of the demerits of the ^^ty, than the mode which
is pursued by Camillus is defense? Instead of proceeding directly to a
discussion of different articles, his readers are not permitted to form a
ju^ment until they are satisfied that Britain has been as in^^culate as she is
haughty and powerful -- That America, (...) been treacherous, ought to be as
humble and submissive (...) is weak and defenseless -- That the opponents, to a
man, (...) actuated by personal malignity toward mr. Jay, or a wicked desire
to overthrow the government, and introduce anarchy and civil discord -- and
that a war with Great Britain will be the inevitable consequence of a
rejection. These remarks have already been opposed by others, which, unless I
mistake, have not only detected their sophistry, but exposed their pernicious
tendency. Admitting all these matters to be exactly as stated by Camillus, how
do they justify an inference that the treaty is a good one? They may prove that
Great Britain cannot be expected to make an equal commercial connection with
this country; but will it thence follow, that we are bound to make a
disadvantageous one with her? No opinion is better founded, or prevails more
universally, than that the fewer European connections we form the better. We
possess the means of a growing and extensive commerce. The articles we export,
particularly provisions and raw materials, being of the first necessity toward
the support and manufactures of other countries, there is no danger of not
finding a market for them. To Britain, in particular, our commerce is of the
highest importance. In return for the manufactures which we take from her
European dominions, we send her provisions and raw materials, The balance,
which is generally against us, we pay in specie. It will, therefore, certainly
be her interest and policy to continue and extend a trade so lucrative and
important, without a treaty. If she chooses to keep all her West India ports
shut against us, we can obtain from the islands of other powers the same
articles which they produce; and, in times of scarcity, which very frequently
occur, they must have recourse to America for provisions and lumber. In every
respect they are more dependent upon us, than we are upon them; and we shall
soon force from them a much more advantageous trade than we can expect to
obtain by treaty.

Thus circumstanced, America should keep the staff of commerce in her own
hands. She ought not, except in very particular cases, to form treaties of
commerce. If she remains unfettered, she may avail herself of any advantage
which may offer from the imprudence or situation of other countries. Let her
make such regulations as are best calculated to promote a spirit of enterprise
-- to add to her riches, and to increase the industry of her inhabitants, and
let her have courage and constancy enough, never to depart from them in favor
of strangers. In her present defenseless and infant state, it is next to
madness to attempt forming a connection with this nation, without making
sacrifices, and consenting to restraints far beyond those which the laws of
nations impose, which ought perhaps to form the only rule between two
commercial powers. But if a treaty with Great Britain, under any circumstances,
be proper, why insert in it matters which have no relation to commerce, and
which properly form materials for a separate connection? I mean the respective
complaints of the two governments against each other. By inserting provisions
for an adjustment of these complaints in a treaty of commerce, Great Britain
has not only exacted unreasonable concessions for them on our part; but if a
ratification does not eventually take place, the whole ground must be again
traveled over, and probably at a time when Great Britain will be in a
situation to hold a tone still more haughty and imperious than she now does.
Perhaps, indeed, this was one reason which induced the advisers of the measure
to keep from the senate the real object of mr. Jay's mission; certain it is,
that from the president's message, they had as much reason to believe that an
alliance, offensive and defensive, was in agitation with Great Britain, as a
treaty of commerce; and yet by the constitution, all treaties are to be made
"by and with the advice and consent of the sena^^." The plain meaning of this
clause is, that no treaty shall be negociated without the advice, nor ratified
without the consent of the senate. This construction has been sanctioned on
other occasions, by the president himself. Even with Indian treaties, he has,
previous to negotiation, submitted to them the contents and taken their advice
on every part.

The term, advice refers naturally and obviously to negotiation. Would it not
be absurd to say, that advice was necessary after a thing was done? Consent
alone could then be required. There is, besides, a manifest propriety in the
president's consulting the senate before hand. The person employed to negociate
would then act with the greater confidence, knowing, that his instructions
proceeded not from the president alone, but were the result of the accumulated
wisdom of the senate: there would be less danger, also, of a refusal to ratify
on their part, which may sometimes be productive of national jealousies, wars
and other calamities, it being unusual not to ratify a treaty made with a
minister properly appointed and instructed. Thus, whether we consider the
policy of making any treaty with Great Britain, as an abstract question, or the
secret and clandestine manner in which the present one originated, we shall
find much room for doubt and censure. But it will be said, we have already
treaties of commerce with France and other nations; true, and the one with
France, though in every respect more favorable than the one under
consideration, has been the occasion of much perplexity and embarrassment to
our government in the present war. Let ever so much care be used to make them
explicit, and leave no room for construction, still doubts will arise, in the
solution of which, not only the parties immediately concerned, but other
nations, become deeply interested. This has been the case with the French
treaty. Mr. Genet, in behalf of his republic, contended that the right of
arming privateers in our ports, and other privileges, were secured to it by the
treaty; all the other belligerent nations became parties to, or were interested
in the controversy; and had not our government opposed a claim, which was
certainly ill-founded, a war with them might have been the consequence. But if
we had no treaty at all with France, we might, as a neutral nation, have opened
our ports to the privateers and prizes of all the powers at war, without giving
offense to any. Our other treaties, therefore, instead of militating in favor
of such conections, furnish very strong* and, if I may use the expression, very
feeling arguments against them.

While on this subject, I cannot forbear to remark, that a nation weak at sea,
as America now is, and must ever continue, unless a different system is
speedily adopted, can never promise herself any good from the strictest
commercial stipulations on the part of a nation which is emphatically become
mistress of the ocean. With such a power we had better have no connections,
except such as arise out of the laws of nations. We shall not only be inclined,
but compelled to observe our engagements, while Great Britain will regard them
only as long as she finds it her interest, and will laugh, if not insult us,
when we complain of her infractions.

I come now to the sixth number of Camillus, in which he accounts for no
provision appearing in the treaty against the pressing our seamen. The object
is admitted to be of the last importance to the United States; but Camillus is
at a loss to know how it could have been done. "A general stipulation against
it," says he, "would have been nugatory, if not deregatory." Could there be any
thing derogatory in Great Britain saying she would abstain from an infamous
practice, which perhaps no nation but America ever submitted to so long and so
patiently. If her existence and safety depend upon her maritime superiority, is
this superiority to be maintained at our expense? Is one of our most useful
classes of citizens to be forced into her service, and add to her
aggrandizement, to the ruin of our own commerce? and when we ask her to
stipulate against such outrages in future, is insult to be added to injury? Are
we to be told, that until the Americans change their language and looks, it is
impossible to discriminate between the seamen of the two nations? Methinks
every seaman found on board of an American vessel, and speaking English, should
be, prima facie, deemed a citizen of the United States, and should be protected
as such, until he was proved a deserter from, or a subject of Great Britain. If
the captain of an American frigate should take it into his head to press into
our service the crew of an English merchatman, merely because they spoke
English, and looked like Americans, would Great Britain submit to the
indignity? but if our flag is not to protect them, where is the difficulty of
each man being furnished with a certificate of his birth or citizenship,
authenticated according to a prescribed form? No, says Camillus, who has always
an answer ready, when Great Britain is to be exculpated, this mode is liable to
deception, and therefore cannot be relied on. Truly, sir! your ingenui^^
astonishes me. Because, now and then, an imposition may (...) practiced;
because a perjury may sometimes be committed all our mariners are to be at the
mercy of Great Britain. Why not be explicit, and tell the truth at once.
Great Britain finding it very convenient to man her navy with our seamen, and
her national safety being at stake, insists upon, and will exercise, the right
of taking them wherever she find^ them. She would not, therefore, consent to
abstain from a practice which she well knows we dare not to resent. Our
minister would have acted with becoming dignity, if he had broke off the
negotiation, until she had consented to an article of more importance to this
country than all the others put together, and which would have made some amends
for the innumerable advantages which Great Britain derives from the treaty. The
rights and security of these much-injured and useful men have been most
wantonly abandoned: nor do they alone feel the effects of this abominable
species of dep^^dations. The merchants, too, by the exorbitant rise of wages,
which must advance in proportion to the numbers of seamen (...) in this way,
suffers most severely -- and, in a little time, if (...) practice continues,
the United States will hardly be able to man a single frigate. Humanity pleads
as loudly as interest, in favor of the stipulation; but alas! we find few
articles (...) the whole instrument, which, as they affect America, have been
dictated by either of those sentiments.

Another part of the reasoning of Camillus must not be overlooked. "Our right
to an exemption," says he, "is perfect by the laws of nations; and a contrary
right is not even pretended by Great Britain." It were to be wished that
Great Britain would rest contented with a bare pretension to this right.
Unfortunately, she exercises it every day; and thousands of our
fellow-citizens, notwithstanding the exemption to which they are entitled, are
dragged from their own vessels into a service which they execrate. If the laws
of nations secure us an exemption, where could be the harm of a declaratory
article to that effect? Other parts of the treaty, when against America, have
been justified by some, and probably will be by Camillus, because of their
conformity to the laws of nations. Thus it has been said, and no doubt will be
repeated, that by those laws, free vessels do not make free goods, and that
therefore, mr. Jay yielded nothing, when he consented to an article of that
kind. Why then should not Great Britain humor us in our turn? If mr. Jay is
justifiable for doing us a greater injury with one stroke of his pen, than he
can repair if he lives to the age of Methusalem, because the law of nations was
on his side, why not expect, any, insist upon the same complaisance from
Great Britain? to what inconsistencies and shifts are sensible men driven, when
they vindicate a bad cause! to what an abject state, my countrymen, are you
reduced! Great Britain is become sole arbiter of your rights, and the men whom
you have loaded with honors and offices, and who for years have drawn all their
support from your coffers, and who ought in gratitude to defend you, not only
consent to surrender your persons and liberties, but insult your understandings
by an attempt to make you believe that they have studied your true interests in
so doing -- God forbid! that some dark and wicked project should lurk behind
all this mysterious conduct. Time alone can discover, why Americans are to be
dragooned just at this time, at the evident hazard of a rupture with France,
into this new and disgraceful connection. Events, yet in the wo^^^ of time,
must develope whether Great Britain has promised any, and what aid to a certain
party, in the attempts it may make, to strengthen the government, and give it,
as it is modestly called, a little more energy. In the mean while, let us be
vigilant, and we shall defeat every attempt upon our independence, and cover
with confusion those who dare to raise a sacrilegious hand against our free and
happy constitution.

We are now arrived with Camillus at the first article of the treaty. The way
has been tedious and disagreeable. He has told us, out of pure patriotism, many
unpalatable truths. Thank God, notwithstanding all his pains and eloquence (for
even his enemies must allow him to write well) my former good opinion of my
country is unshaken. Her conduct with respect to Great Britain will bear the
strictest scrutiny. She has, indeed, been more finned against than finning. If
I am mistaken, the delusion is pleasant, and I hope Camillus will not think me
obstinate, when he is assured, that hitherto I have not discovered the strength
of any ground he has thought proper to take.

In discussing the first article, Camillus encounters an objection, stated by
the Charleston committee. It must be confessed, there does not appear to be
much force in the objection, and yet, as some British subjects were proscribed
during the war, it may be a doubt whether those of that description will not be
permitted to return under the treaty. It was, at any rate, hardly worth while
to find fault with this article, and perhaps somewhat puerile in Camillus to
take so much trouble, seriously to combat, what the objectors themselves could
not have laid much stress on. The committee had, perhaps, discovered so many
faults in the other articles, they thought it impossible ^here should be an
innocent one in the whole treaty, whatever its appearance might be.

CINNA.
August 13, 1795.
[TO BE CONTINUED.]
SOUTH CAROLINA -- WASHINGTON DISTRICT. September 16, 1795.
THE Franklin, or Republican Society of Pendleton county, having, by the
watchful vigilance of their standing committee, on a most pressing occasion,
been called together to give their opinion on a public measure -- a right they
will not tamely relinquish, nor resign but with their lives! -- having taken
into consideration the ruinous treaty proposed and signed by John Jay, the
American ambassador, with his Britannic majesty -- a treaty a^ detestable in
its origin, as contemptible in its event! -- a treaty which can never be
enforced but by the bayonet! -- having fully weighed it in all its articles --
and taking into view, that when the complaints of a brave and powerful people
are observed to increase in proportion to the wrongs they have suffered! --
when, instead of sinking into submission, they are rouzed to resistance! the
time must come at which every inferior consideration will yield to their
security -- to the general safety of the empire!

There is a moment of difficulty and danger, at which British flattery and
falsehood can no longer deceive, and simplicity itself can be no longer misted!
-- that period has at length arrived.

When we see a man improperly appointed to negociate one of the most important
treaties, because not properly, not constitutionally advised -- that this man
was the most improper, because his attachment to Britain, and aversion to
France, were notorious! -- and that he was altogether an objectionable
character, because, (in admitting doubts to be started by Britain about our
line, and to which he acceded!) -- instead of showing a thorough knowledge of
this country -- appears to have been wretchedly ignorant, and consequently
either shamefully imposed on, or corruptly influenced! -- who, instead of using
that policy which should have "extorted from Britain, in her present state of
humiliation, (and which could not be hoped from her justice)" a reparation of
reiterated wrongs! -- was the first man to propose to submit to a treaty,
which, it adopted, must blast us in the opinion of Europe as the most
^^sillanimous nation that ever existed! -- a treaty which, in (...) its
hardened features, betrays insult and contempt! -- a treaty, not only thus made
odious, but which abridges, in every respect, our rights, and which sports with
our just claims and interests! -- we demand, when such glaring, ruinous ^onduct
appears, is permitted, is sanctioned! have not the people just grounds of
complaint -- would not silence be cri^inal?

Therefore resolved, That when a public measure dares not (...) arraigned,
"because it is the offspring of the highest public ^^aracter" -- then liberty
lies prostrate -- then despotism be^ins! -- and heartily adopting the
sentiments of our fellow-^itizens of Camden, (at the same time reprobating
denuncia^^ons against orderly associations) with them we do insist, that it
(...) both the duty and right of freemen, on all great, public occasions, in
which the honor and welfare of the republic is concerned, to come forward and
declare their sentiments with freedom and firmness -- that those who are
entrusted with power, may be admonished to use that power only for the good of
the people, who placed it, for that especial purpose, in their hands; and to
teach them to be cautious how they violate the precious, the sacred trust.

Resolved, That on the appointment of John Jay as an extraordinary ambassador
to Britain, we were led to believe (...) our rights would have been vindicated
with firmness, a rep^ration of our wrongs obtained! -- on the contrary, even
(...) the signing of a treaty of amity, our flag is the common sport (...)
Britain, and our sailor fellow-citizens and property at the mercy.

Resolved, That we were induced by profession to believe (...) administration
sympathized in the cause of an ally wres^^^ for liberty -- a great and
regenerated people, who cheris^^^ their utmost purity those sacred principles
which have laid (...) foundation of our freedom in the blood of our dearest
citizen^ but that ally has been treated with insincerity, even at the ^ment our
inveterate enemy, and the foe of human happi^^^^ been invited to our bosom! and
when British tyranny and (...) can leave not a doubt, on a single unprejudiced
mind, that (...) about to give that nation a footing in law among us which
(...) converted to our ruin!

Resolved, That by the constitution of the United States treaties are to be
made "by and with the advice and (...) the senate" -- that is, no treaty shall
be negociated without advice first taken, nor accepted without the consent of
the (...) -- But the senate, as such, were ignorant of the principl^^ basis of
the treaty itself. We admit they were made acqui^^^ with the appointment of
Jay, but did not instruct him, (...) informed of his instructions. He was
instructed, or he was (...) if he was! we will drop the curtain! if not, and
acted of and himself, we shall lament the want of a guillotine! For wh^^ it
ever conceived to be possible that America could entertain the surd and
dangerous idea of trusting any man, (but especi^^ Jay) to negociate with such a
government as Britain -- (...) explicit instructions! -- The obvious
construction of the (...) the constitution, which makes the advice of the
senate necc^^^^^ has been given by the President himself, when a treaty was
^^^posed by France. Mr. Genet was empowered to propose (...) "on liberal
principles, such as might strengthen the bonds of good which unite the two
nations," but on making his proposal (...) executive, he was informed "that the
participation in (...) of treaty, given by the constitution to that branch of
gover^^^^ world ^^^^^^arily delay any answer to his friendly proposition, the
senate (...) then in recess, and not to meet again until the fall." -- In the
negotiation with Great Britain, the senate was in cession, and yet were they
called on to advise? Did they give instructions? They did not! We allow this
most interesting business was taken up in the senate by our patriotic citizen
Butler -- but, from a want of formality, he was opposed -- and this important
matter died away, because it was not orderly! -- In the treaty also with the
C^eeks, the president required the advice of the senate before he began to
treat, and actually laid the outlines of a treaty before them previous to the
negotiation.

Resolved, That we consider it becoming in a high degree the duty of the house
of representatives of the general government, to enquire into so bold an attack
on the palladium of our rights -- it is impossible they can suffer so flagrant a
breach in the constitution to pass unnoticed! -- The president and senate will
certainly endeavor to reconcile their conduct to the wounded feelings of their
fellow-citizens.

Resolved, That so far as is depending on his own integrity and good wishes to
the United States, we are still willing to behold in Washington the same good
and great man! But is it not possible, at least respecting Jay's treaty, that
he may have been wrongly advised?

Resolved, That it is highly probable our generous and brave ally, however
well-disposed toward us, viewed, with some emotion of indignation, at the
least, the uncandid manner in which their proposition for a treaty was received
and rejected by our government; and now find themselves under the necessity of
calling on us to declare honestly and openly, our intentions toward them --
whether we will adopt the first supreme law of the land under the patronage of
France or of England? The period has at length arrived to know our ultimatum --
the mask has been strippen off by mr. Jay -- and the majority of twenty in the
senate, we conjecture, will be cautious how far they pledge themselves to their
constituents on the utility of an English treaty, provided France should show
her disapprobation, or consider herself neglected.

Resolved, That admitting (what is insinuated by a member of congress for this
state, the advocate and defender of British systems and British tyranny!) that
the treaty proposed by France, he suspects, could not be obtained on eligible
terms, bu^ at the price of joining with her in the war -- we do insist, tha^ at
the time alluded to, the honor, the interest of America earnestly called on us,
to enter heartily into measures opposed to the dreadful league formed against a
generous and natural ally, whose welfare should and must be inseparable from
our own! The moment Britain openly declared against France, should have been
our signal for action! -- The united voice of the continent proclaimed the
general, the generous sentiment! -- But the grateful feelings of a whole people
were sunk in the timidity of its government!

Resolved, That (reflecting on the present interesting moment, when an eventual
war with Britain may be reasonably expected from a further discussion of mr.
Jay's friendly treaty) we deprecate, with the strongest emotions of
apprehension, a difference between America and France! -- War with England,
will be war with Spain! Our government knows it! Even the neutrality of France,
under such circumstances, can be anticipated but with very unpleasing
sensations.

Resolved, That we view with surprise the industry used not to disclose the
articles of mr. Jay's treaty -- affecting and practicing all the secrecy of
monarchy, so opposite to open and republican principles. -- Will it, dare it be
contended, that the people have no right to ask, nay, to demand information on
the posture of their affairs? -- Secrecy robs them of this right, and makes
twenty greater than the whole. Is this republicanism? -- Is this liberty? --
Monarchs and conclaves make a trade of secrecy -- it suits their designs -- but
neither monarchs nor conclaves are, as yet, in unison with the sentiments, nor
the wishes of the American people. There is no authorized secrecy in our
government, and to infer such a right from the practices of other nations, is a
prostitution of republican principles. The constitution of the United States
gives to the president and senate the power of making treaties, but it
communicates no ability to hatch those things in darkness. A treaty! which is
to be the supreme-law-of-the-land! and yet the people not to be informed of the
terms of this law until binding upon them! until the opportunity for amendment
is past! -- Secrecy and mystery marked the conception, birth, and parentage of
this ^ump of abortion and deformity. -- The president received the treaty in
January, when congress were sitting, and did not submit it to the senate till
June! -- when it was impossible any one legislature in the union could be in
session to give the alarm! -- The press alone had the glory of the discovery
and reprobation of this horrid political monster! -- It is also worthy of note,
that on the 29th of said month (January) the president approved "an act of
congress, to establish an uniform rule of naturalization," and that a few
months afterward the senate (alone) approved a treaty which renders said act
null and void, in favor of "all settlers and traders (the rooted enemies of
America) within the precincts or jurisdiction (a large extent of country) of
the posts." -- Should this treaty be ratified, 'twill be out of the power of
congress to remedy its evils without hazarding a war -- And it may with safety
be presumed, that nine-tenths, at least, of the citizens of America, look with
indignation and abhorrence on the inglorious attempt made by mr. Jay, and his
advisers, to chain fifteen independent states as a dangling appendage to the
crown of Great Britain!

Resolved, That insurmountable objections lie against the treaty, were there no
others, while the value of the negroes and other property carried away contrary
to the seventh article of the treaty of 1783; and the loss and damage in blood
and treasure sustained by the United States, from the detention of posts,
remain unsatisfied for by the British government -- the amount of which should
have been ascertained by the commissioners to be appointed to liquidate the
claims of British creditors, and set off against the principal of their debt;
for, as to interest, during the war, they have not the shadow of a claim. -- No
man entertains a doubt, (even the British, nor the governor of Canada himself,
have been sufficiently hardy to deny it) that the Indians were excited to war
against us, -- and that the supplies for their warfare were derived from a
trade authorized by the British government, and protected by these posts which
of right were our's, and ought to have been used for our defense -- This war
has cost us, annually, calculating the loss of the fur trade depending on the
posts, above one million three hundred thousand dollars, more than would have
been sufficient for the defense of our frontiers if the posts had been in our
possession. Let this sum, and the amount of their piratical depredations, the
whole continent says, be made a set-off against British claims.

Resolved, That by the article regulating the West India trade, nothing can be
more evident than that Britain meditated to wrest from America the
carrying-trade, an immense share of which she has lately possessed, as appears
by the astonishing increase of our seamen and shipping; but we trust 'twill
never be forgotten that the protection of a free carrying-trade was one of the
primary objects for which the federal government was established. -- Let not,
then, our national government have the discredit of doing any thing by which
the limits of our navigation may be fettered. -- Let us not concur with the
British ministry, in eminently promoting the British commerce at the expense of
our own! -- Not satisfied with innumerable depredations on our shipping, the
British government wants their total destruction by this insidious article,
confining our vessels to seventy tons, mere boats, whilst they reserve to
themselves the right of navigating in any size vessels they please, in the same
pursuit of trade. By this deceptive article, we alone granted -- have been
prevented from exporting in our own bottoms any articles of West India produce,
and even of cotton, an article of our own growth, and becoming a very important
one in this and the sister state of Georgia (even in our own district) -- while
the vessels of Britain, and every other nation, would be at liberty to export
from American ports every article of West India, and some of our own produce,
to all parts of the world.

Resolved, That the adopters and warm advocates for this treaty must have
regarded a favorite policy, a close connection with Britain and British
systems, more than pecuniary benefit or (...) dignity; for, setting aside all
reciprocity, no one advantage can we gain by any regulation in the treaty,
distinct from a (...) greater to be obtained by the British nation.

Resolved, That the article restricting the subjects or citizens of either
party from accepting commissions in the army or navy (...) any foreign power,
is a gross violation of the natural rights of man -- and, as such, should have
been indignantly spurned at!

Resolved, That we join heartily in sentiment with that truly patriotic and
staunch republican, the chief justice Rutledge, that mr. Jay should have
demanded an unconditional relinquishment of the Western Posts as a right, until
which had been granted, and until the British minister had given orders to that
effect, mr. Jay should not have opened his lips about a treaty! What amity
could be expected from a government. at the instant of negotiation, forcing the
tomahawk and scalping-knife into the hands of savages, to the destruction of
great numbers of our immediate frontier fellow-citizens! It was, truly,
prostituting the dearest rights of freemen, and laying them prostrate at the
feet of royalty. In 1793, the executive pressed the demand of the Western
Posts, with a spirit becoming the representative of a nation of freemen, an
ultimatum was required on the subject, by December of that year, and how were
we treated? With a conteptuous silence, and fresh injuries heaped upon us
depredations on our property, as unwarrantable as the robberies of an Algerine,
or the plundering of a savage! And, we^^ it possible to sully the name of the
British government with an additional shade of infamy, the same would be
afforded by the circumstance of their treatment to this country, involving in
it the black design of starving a people, whose only crime has been the defense
of freedom. Such treatment, it was natural to imagine, would have roused us to
retaliate; and the immediate representatives of the people, according with the
sentiments of their constituents, made an attempt to extort redress by means of
a provisional retaliation. But, in one instance, the senate, in another the
supreme executive, checked them in their honorable career; and the energetic
portion of the government, with unparalleled weakness, humbly sued for the
friendship of a nation which ever treated us a foes; rejecting, at the same
time, (the better to secure her smiles) the proffered amity of another nation,
to which, in a great measure, we owe our existence, as a free people, and which
has also other strong claims to our gratitude and friendship!

Resolved. With that tried veteran and patriot, the venerable Gadsden, That we
consider all connections by treaties with Great Britain, equally impolitic and
dangerous. Dangerous, because (whilst her government is monarchical and
unregenerated) we shall insensibly give her such a footing among us, and
consequently so great an ascendancy over our councils and government, as may
eventually sap our independence, and subvert our constitution! And impolitic,
because it is our interest, by the utmost individual and national exertions,
(particularly our southern states) to arrive at an independent transportation
of our commodities -- to become the carriers of their own produce, for, it is an
alarming fact, established on the best authority, that by the almost constant
wars in which Britain is engaged (she having had in the last one hundred years,
forty-two of war, and fifty-seven years and nine months of peace, which is
three of war to every four of peace) and that by being so largely the exporters
of our produce, she carrying two-fifths of the whole exports of the United
States, the difference of freight, insurance and charges, amounts, on an
average of peace and war, to one million, three hundred and ninety-two
thousand, eight hundred and fifty-seven dollars, taxed annually on our
agriculture by British wars, during their continuance, and our dependence on
British bottoms, and so much more than we should pay did we but raise our own
shipping to be competent to the carriage of all our own productions, and that,
beside this, many of our bulky articles, not bearing a war freight, cannot be
exported. While Britain, then, is the carrier of two-fifths of our produce, our
independence is incomplete, and ever will be, if we tamely suffer such
negociators as mr. Jay, to form treaties with that nation, calculated to keep
up a servile and ruinous dependence, by the immoderate, the excessive use of
her manufactures. Let us wear nothing but what is American -- eat nothing,
drink nothing but what is American -- this would soon raise the head of
America. Let the people of Britain be driven to poverty and despair by acts of
their own government! and what would be the consequence? An acquisition of te^^
of thousands of really useful citizens to the United States, which form the
natural asylum to the people of the old world, to snatch them from a wretched
existence, from slavery -- to the enjoyment of plenty, happiness -- to liberty!

Resolved, That we ever considered the appointment of Jo^^ Jay, as
extraordinary as it was unconstitutional extraordinary because underrating the
abilities of our then ambassador: a man, in every respect justly possessing the
confidence of the union -- especially, as there is good ground for asserting,
that major Pinckney's energetic and firm representation had insured the in
mediate cession of our Western Posts -- and a treaty, at least (...) favorable
as any nation could have expected from England.

Resolved, That roused at length into a sense of our danger, we pronounce for
war, with all its horror^, rather than see our country approve of measures
which will effect her annihilation. A treaty! to be bought at the expense of
infamy! purchased at the loss of the affection of an ally, as generous is
friendship as glorious in arms! No! magnanimous nation truly worthy of liberty!
we will cherish, we will respect thy opinion! we will not suffer thy esteem to
be taken from us! we will prove to the world, and, above all, to the English
government, that we will not be the dupes of their insidious policy -- their
craft -- their ambition! -- Oh, ye Jays of America, who boast of wisdom so
exalted, penetration so profound -- how is it possible you have not yet listed
up the veil which hides from your eyes the low sinister politics of the English
government! How is it ye do not see to what a degree it abuses ye! and what a
trick it has put upon the "solemnity" of your solemn ambassador!

Resolved, That the much-esteemed names of Langdon, of New Hampshire; Robinson,
of Vermont; Burt, of New York; Brown, of Kentucke; Mason and Tazewell, of
Virginia; Bloodworth and Martin, of North Carolina; Butler, out fellow-citizen,
of South Carolina; and Jackson, of Georgia -- the patriotic senators -- be held
in our highest veneration and most marked esteem.

Resolved, That the public report, not contradicted, fixes on Jacob Read, our
unworthy senator -- corrupt motives for his acquiescence in a treaty which
would have made his country infamous! -- would have restored her back to
Britain! We therefore do not hesitate to declare him, (with his nineteen
quondam coadjutors) undeserving of any further public confidence: And, guided
by an opinion founded in a knowledge of human nature, we do insist, that if not
lost to all the sine feelings of the heart, 'twill be impossible they can
withstand that immense torrent of opprobrium which will rush upon them; they
must resign! they cannot, in future, transact any public business!

Resolved, That as the power of finally making and ratifying treaties by the
president and two-thirds of the senate alone, has, in the present case, been
proved to be of a most alarmingly dangerous nature; that our very existence as
a free people, had been put at stake; that had not a good providence influenced
even the twenty of the senate to reject one article, which, from necessity,
must arrest the hand of the president from signing it, we say, that had not the
providential care, which we have so often experienced, interposed, we had been
a lost, an undone people, without pity, and without friends!

Therefore, Resolved, That our members be earnestly called on, at the next
meeting of the assembly, to propose an amendment to the federal constitution,
so far as respects the power of making treaties. That a president, and twenty
senators, perhaps fourteen (for that number makes a quorum) shall have the sole
power of making treaties, which must be, necessarily, the supreme law; must be
binding on every individual, which swallow up the sovereignty and independence
of each state! No! the people now see the folly of giving such a power into the
hands of fourteen men, which, at all times, may supercede every existing law in
the union! it is too much! Without a disposition to judge uncharitably of men,
we say it is possible that twenty or fourteen men may be tempted, may be bribed
to betray the precious trust reposed, in them by their fellow-citizens! And we
repeat, that as it is notorious Britain carries all her points by corruption,
(look in lord North's estimate during the American war; you will there find one
million for contingents or secret service! Has not France, throughout her
struggle, complained she felt British corruption in her very vitals! and shall
America expect to escape her baneful influence!) then it is possible that twenty
or fourteen men may be led to sell even their country! We, therefore, again
urge it on our representatives, to bring forward an amendment, by which
congress at large, and congress alone, shall have the power of forming
treaties, at least of ratifying them. We venture to pronounce the people will
not be satisfied short of this: from one extreme of the continent to the other,
this will be the universal language. We know, in framing the federal
constitution, the objection to giving the house of representatives this power,
jointly with the senate and president, was, that negociations generally
required the greatest secrecy, and that was not to be expected from so large a
body. Curse on such secrecy! it has undone our country! An American assembly,
aloof from the combinations of Europe, should have no secrets! No government in
the known world, like our's, ever gave such an extensive latitude as we allow
to the president and senate; even the most arbitrary kings never possessed any
thing like it! In France, under the old government, appearances at least, were
kept up; the king's edicts were never of force until registered in parliament.
In England they proceed with diffidence in making treaties -- far from being
considered as legal without a parliamentary sanction, the preamble always
states that "his majesty would endeavor to obtain a law for ratifying the
treaty." Such is the language and conduct of monarchs, and what is our's? (...)
blush! we blush!

Resolved, That while we stigmatize the man, and execrate his conduct, (John
Jay) we rejoice he has been made an instrument to draw forth the whole united
voice of the people of Ameri^^ in detestation of his treaty! We congratulate
each other, that from this truly marked circumstance, our great, our generous
ally, will form proper, a true judgment of the disposition (...) the United
States! that she will distinguish between the people and a part of its
government! that they will see our hearts never ceased to beat in unison with
their's! -- of all possible temporal evils which could ever fall upon us, we
deprecate (...) difference with France!

Resolved, That we pledge ourselves to our brethren of the republican societies
throughout the union, as far as the ability and individual influence of a most
numerous society can be made to extend, that we will promote every
constitutional means to bring John Jay to a trial, and to justice. He shall not
escape, if guilty, that punishment, which at once will wipe of the temporary
stain laid on us, and be a warning to traitors, hereafter, how they sport with
the interest and feelings of their fellow-citizens!

Resolved, That every compliment is due to the watchful zeal of our
fellow-citizens of Charleston; to the great ability shown by their committee in
their elucidation of the treaty. We warmly embrace and adopt their report: it
demonstrates great moderation; but, with such provocation! we would not have
been quite so tender!

Resolved, That we heartily approbate the representation of our wrongs made by
our own district (Washington) it proves that we are neither defective in
knowledge, nor deficient in duty; that we know our interest as citizens, that
we feel a tender concern for the whole commonwealth of America: this we will
teach as the first of principles to our children; we will endeavor to impress
on them the nonsense and folly of involving themselves with the people of
Europe, eternally cutting each other's throats; we will urge to posterity, that
America need only lie still; that let her markets be but well supplied, all
Europe will be the buyers; that they cannot do without us; to have no
connection with the old governments by treaties, no written agreements; for the
omission of a comma may involve us in a war! In this happy, but envied
situation, had a gracious providence placed us; and, guided by these
principles, we should have had no wars. But, the demon of discord entered into
a Jay, and he flew to England to blast our rising hopes, to involve us with
compacts and treaties!

Resolved, That in the investigation of this business, not to have discovered
warmth -- a warmth resulting from the glowing picture of danger which our
country exhibits, by a tame submission in its government, to the most flagrant
and daring outrages! would have betrayed a stoicism unworthy of the subject,
unworthy of the sons of 1776! And should it be considered that unnecessary
asperity has discovered itself to a nation, of whom we ought and must be
jealous while the crown is upon its present head, we wish to make known to the
world, and to Britain and Ireland in particular, that we discriminate between
the honest and the slavish parts of their people, between the two nations and
their governments! Yes, congenial and generous souls! we know you always
longingly anticipated our welfare and rank among nations, and ever participated
in our distresses, and in our happiness. No! it is your government that we hold
in abhorrence! -- a government, with one exception, singularized from all the
nations of the world by the number and extravagance! by the foulness and
blackness of its crimes!

Resolved, finally, That the vice-moderator, the corresponding secretary, and
secretary of the society, do sign the foregoing resolutions; and that they be
generally printed, as expressive of our abhorrence and detestation of a treaty,
which gives to the English government more power over us as states, than it
ever claimed over us as colonies, and which, if Britain had been left to her
generosity, she would have been ashamed to propose! -- a treaty, involving in
it pusillanimity, stupidity, ingratitude, and treachery! to blast the rising
grandeur of our common country, of our infant empire!

SAMUEL LOFTON, sen. Vice-moderator. J. MILLER, Corresponding Secretary. Ed.
TATE M'CLURE, Secretary of the Society.


Some observations on a letter said to be written by a gentleman (...)
character and information in Vermont, and bearing date the 18th July last FROM
THE MINERVA. The following is an authentic extract of a letter from a gentleman
of character and information in Vermont; for the truth of which we pledge
ourselves. It comes from a man of seventy-six, and is dated July 18. 1795.

"The treaty of peace has now become a general subject of conversation, but is
not as yet enough known to form the public mind. It is impossible for the
madmen in politics to communicate their madness to the substantial and numerous
body of country farmers. They do not reverence the customs, manners, or violent
party, inflammatory writings of your zealous political ^^natics. And while
those kind of writers please themselves with the conceit that they are
enlightening the age and the world, they have no idea in what contempt their
productions are viewed in the country. In sentiment and information, they are
below the understanding of every country farmer; and the declamatory, violent
style sinks them still lower, in rural estimation. We are apprehensive that
some of the large cities will endeavor to set their mo^^ in motion, with a
view to dictate to the president and senate. Be assured we will reject the
federal union, before we will be governed in the country, by the mobs of
Philadelphia, New York, or Boston. Moderation, in such a case, would be an
error; -- and the moment your mobs are set agoing, you establish a distinction
between town and country, which you will not easily get rid of. The greatest
and worst of all political events that the country would suffer, would be to
have the government of it, under the direction of such tumultuous, outrageous,
lawless assemblies.

"The above is to carry to you some idea of the horror we entertain of a
mob-government. Be so good as to remember the articles of business."


.
I Will not venture to ascertain what was the real view of the letter writer;
he is, at all events, very wroth with the citizens of great cities,
principally, as it appears to me because he suspects they will dare to
intermeddle in politics, without obtaining his permissions or at least without
being on his side. It is impossible, however, to avoid observing that without
his knowing what had really happened in these cities, the obvious errors in the
treaty are so conspicuous, and, in contradiction to his will, obtrude
themselves so forcibly on his brain, as to compel on his mind a suspicion, that
mobs will be raised, while his with appears clearly to be, that no opposition
should be made against its obtaining the president's signature; should even its
commercial errors be ruinous to the trade, and its political errors destructive
to the liberties and peace of this country.

I know the people of Vermont well -- they are quite good citizens; but they
are likewise firm and inflexible patriots.

They know the value of their rights, and they will, if necessary, maintain
them at every risque.

I will first, therefore, make a few observations on such parts of this
extraordinary instrument, as appears to me most evidently wrong, and most
pointedly demonstrative, that either the head or the heart of the man who
framed it, was ill calculated for executing the high trust reposed in him.

And secondly, assign some reasons why the people of Vermont, as well as of
other parts of this extended country, will pursue every constitutional method
in then power, to prevent its becoming the supreme law of the land.

The second article is, in my opinion, an indelible stain upon the honor and
dignity of the nation; for, by agreeing that the posts shall not be delivered
up till the first of June 1796, without any stronger obligation on the part of
the British for the surrender of them at that period, than we had at the treaty
of peace, it is tacitly agreed, that the unjust retention of them was no
infraction of that treaty.

Where was that genius of America, which governed its councils at the
termination of the war? who, in a firm and manly tone, told this haughty and
imperious government of Great Britain, that, "we will not speak on the subject
of peace till you have first acknowledged our independence."

Or are our present claims to these posts, after being absolutely ceded to us
by a former treaty, made with that very government, less valid or less
conclusive, than a claim to that independence which we then, in such
unqualified terms, declared, should actually form the basis of the treaty? No,
but our then ministers were different men, and had very different views from
what some of them have at present.

If the third article is construed literally, it certainly does not provide for
a free trade between Vermont and Canada, by the way of Lake Champlain. The
words are, "but it is understood that this article does not extend to the
admission of vessels of the United States, into the seaports, harbors, bays
or creeks of his majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers
in his majesty's said territories, as are between the mouth thereof and the
highest port of entry from the sea, except in small vessels, trading bona fide
between Montreal and Quebec."

St. John's, at the bottom of Lake Champlain, is, strictly speaking, a British
port of entry, where the American vessels, as well as all craft from Canada,
for any part of that Lake, have entered and cleared out, ever since the peace;
the Vermont trade, therefore, by this useful lake, must, on a rigorous
construction of that article, stop at that port.

How far the people of that state may esteem themselves obliged to mr. Jay, for
leaving so beneficial a branch of their trade, subject to such an indefinite,
uncertain construction, I will not say.

The actual evil which may arise from the ninth article, depends in a great
degree, upon the quantity of land now held by British subjects. If, as is said
by many, they at this moment hold several millions of acres, the present
proprietors may, either on their lease or sale thereof, to actual settlers,
make it a condition, that they shall remain British subjects; in this case, a
short time would probably discover the benefits which would accrue from having
one or two millions of British subjects actual settlers on our frontiers, who,
the treaty declares, "shall not, as far as may respect the said lands, and the
legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded as aliens;" a due attention to the
twenty-sixth article of the treaty, will possibly enable many good republicans
to discover mr. Jay's real intentions; for even in case of war, though they
shall remain British subjects, they cannot be compelled to quit the country as
long "as they behave peaceably, and commit no offense against the laws." Many
of us remember the distresses suffered by the patriots of this country last
war, by only a few of such men being amongst us. It was best, perhaps, not to
have these two articles of the treaty too near each other.

But I would ask "the gentleman of character and information in Vermont," by
what part of the constitution of the United States, congress at large, much
less the senate and president, have the power of declaring that aliens shall,
in any instance, have a right to hold lands within any one state?

I am safe in averring, that each state has hitherto claime^ the exclusive
privilege of granting or prohibiting that right.

And the third section of the fourth article of the constitution, after
granting to congress, "power to dispose of and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States," explicitly declares, that "nothing in this constitution shall be so
construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or of any particular
state."

Does the letter writer imagine, that the people of Vermont, because they are
known to be truly federal, will tamely submit to see their state deprived of a
privilege so important and extensive, and so pointedly guarded to them by the
constitution of the United States, without ever remonstrating against it?

I wish to heavens that the letter writer was the only man in America, who
would sacrifice the rights of his state, to the predominancy of his party.

The tenth article, which declares, that "neither the debts due from
individuals of the one nation to the individuals of another, nor shares, nor
moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the public or private
banks, shall ever, in any event of war, or national differences, be sequestered
or confiscated," carries, I readily acknowledge, the appearance of honor and
honesty, on the very face of it; but unfortunately in making the distribution
of the consequences of that stipulation, entered into between the contracting
parties, all the benefits arising therefrom go to the side of the British only,
and all the disadvantages to the side of this country; we having scarce any
money in their funds, or any debts due by them to us; while they have immense
sums under our control, which ought to have been maintained in that situation,
for the express purpose of being a preventative against such a predatory,
disgraceful warfare, as they have waged against us, with impunity, for upwards
of two years.

Fat am I from thinking, that either a sequestration or confiscation ought to
take place on any slight or frivolous occasion. May the honor and integrity of
the United States become proverbial throughout the habitable world.

To explain myself by a homely, but I think, striking simile, I will suppose
that our friend, mr. --, who is a man twice as strong as I am, had frequently
met me in the highway, and had sometimes severely drubbed me, at other times,
had thrown me in the mud, and ruined my clothes; that I had made frequent
remonstrances against this ill treatment, but in vain, having, to all my mild
remonstrances, and humiliating petitions, received from him, nothing but
vindictive, and supercilious replies; that at last I loaded a pistol of his,
which happened to be in my house, put it into my pocket, and threatened to blow
his brains out the next time he ever attacked me on the highway; that I then
sent a friend, on whose good sense and integrity I strongly relied, for the
purpose of adopting some mode for terminating all our disputes.

That this friend, after having settled on terms in many respects very
favorable to mr. --, stipulated, in the most positive manner, that, though it
was profitable and convenient for him still to leave his pistol with me, I
should never attempt to use it in my own defense against him, even to save my
own life, notwithstanding a future attack, on his part, should be equally
violent, virulent, and unprovoked, as those which he had formerly made on me,
my friend obtaining at the same time, a promise from mr. --, equally obligatory
on him, that he would never use against me, a little popgun, which my friend
very well knew could not possibly injure me more than by taking a button off my
coat.

In this state of the case, ought I to retain a good opinion of either my
friend or of any other person who advised him (...) the measure? I hesitate not
to answer that I never would (...) the least considence in him again, but
should ever look upon him, and them, with a jealous eye, as men, who, from some
sinister and wicked motives, were meditating my destruction especially as they
were perfectly sensible, that both my inte^^^^ and inclination would prevent me
from ever beginning an attack upon him, or even from intentionally giving him
offense.

The 17th article declares, that the goods of an enemy to Great Britain, found
on board any of our vessels, shall be made prize of.

This, it is admitted, is agreeable to the common law of nations, as that law
formerly stood; for Vatel says, page 507, that "effects, belonging to an enemy,
found on board a neu^^^ ship, are seizable by the rights of war; but, by the
law of nature, the master is to be paid his freight, and not to suffer by the
seizure."

Mr. Jay carefully adhered to the first part of this maxim. It is certainly
very favorable to the British. The second part, which respects the payment of
the freight, is neglected: it certainly would have been very favorable to the
people of the United States.

But, when our worthy president issued his proclamation of neutrality, he
predicated it upon the modern law of nations: an adherence to which would have
prevented our minister from entering into a positive stipulation for such an
ignominious concession.

The twenty-third article of our treaty with France, the tenth with Holland,
the seventh with Sweden, the twelfth with Prussia, and the third with the
emperor of Morocco, all respectively stipulate, in the most express terms, that
free ships shall make free goods, though these goods should belong to the enemy
of either of those nations. Though I am not a merchant, common sense points out
to me, on the first blush, the extensive advantages which must have accrued to
our carrying-trade, by an adherence to the same plan in our present treaty with
Great Britain. Did the recollection of the innumerable favors which
Great Britain has heaped on us from the nineteenth April, 1775, to the very
moment at which he signed the treaty, overwhelm our ambassador with neck-loads
of gratitude, that he forgot that this article was diametrically opposite to
our stipulation with every other nation with whom we had a treaty?

I do not mean, that our other treaties precluded him from the right of
entering into this stipulation. I only wish to show, that, while France and
other friendly nations had voluntarily granted to us this inestimable privilege
in our very indigent days, our ambassador, though to the highest prejudice of
that nation, meanly and cringingly ceded it to Great Britain, in the height of
our prosperity! Or did he imagine it would please his countrymen, to proclaim
to the world, that, like true spaniels, they fawned most on those from whom
they had the severest whippings?

I feel for the honor of my country, and pray to my God, that, though she is
fallen, it may not be for ever.

But perhaps this part of the treaty, as well as several other parts, were
entered into for the express purpose of distressing the French nation, and
thereby occasioning a rupture between them and us. If this was really mr. Jay's
policy, I think it is far from being improbable, that we may soon reap the
fruits of his labor, by fully experiencing the good or bad effects thereof.

The eighteenth article, regulating what is in future to be deemed contraband,
is so superlatively humiliating and degrading to ourselves; so plainly and
unequivocally levelled against the success of our ally, that even Camillus
finds himself compelled to make a wayward apology for it.

Poor Camillus, thou wast then driven to thy last shift indeed, and heaven
knows that thou art possessed of more of them in the defense of a bad cause, than
any man of thy country was ever before.

In this, as in the former article, our extraordinary ambassador has
stipulated, that naval stores, etc. shall be deemed contraband, and liable to
capture; though it will appear by the twenty-fourth article of our treaty with
France, the twenty-fourth with Holland, the tenth with Sweden, the thirteenth
with Prussia, and the third with the emperor of Morocco, that we have
contracted, that they shall not be contraband. Nay, what as far as is possible,
adds to the disgrace of this part of the treaty, even Great Britain herself, in
her commercial treaty, with France, declares that they shall not be contraband.

What opinion our ally will entertain of our friendship for her -- what opinion
the world at large will entertain of our magnanimity, good faith, and gratitude
as a nation, and in what degree of estimation our minister will be held by his
fellow citizens at some future period, time only can fully unravel.

If even the extacy of joy, upon being permitted the honor of kissing the
queen's hand, was so excessive, as to obliterate from his mind, that cotton was
a branch of the produce of his country, it is scarcely possible to suppose,
that the pleasure continued so extremely ravishing during the whole
negotiation, as to make him forget that there were two such states as Virgi^^^
and North Carolina, a great proportion of whose trade, by this shameful
concession, he was sacrificing at the shrine of them bitterest enemy.

The twenty-first article defines what piracy is, and determines what the
punishment thereof shall be, by saying, "that if any subject or citizen of the
said parties respectively, shall accept any foreign commission or letters of
marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party, to treat and punish the said subject or citizen, having such
commission, or letters of marque, as a pirate."

The eighth section of the constitution of the United States, declares, that
"congress shall have the power to define and punish piracies and felonies
committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of nations."

The curse of oblivion seems to have pervaded our minister's brain in every
part of this treaty, which did not embrace some point favorable to the
British; for here again, he has forgot that the house of representatives are an
absolute (though in his opinion, probably a very trifling) part of congress;
and as they were not to be consulted about the propriety or impropriety of this
treaty, he ought to have seen that he was entering into an agreement which the
senate could not approve of, nor the president ratify, without a palpable
breach of the constitution.

But for argument's sake, I will for a moment suppose it constitutional, and I
will likewise acknowledge, that by the twenty-first article of our treaty with
France, the nineteenth with Holland, and the twenty-third with Sweden, the same
crime was by our then congress (not by a part of it) deemed a piracy; but must,
at the same time, insist, that the manner of punishment is described in a very
different way. In each of these treaties the words are these, "and if any
person of either nation shall take such commissions or letters of marque, he
shall be punished at a pirate."

In our treaties with Prussia and the emperor of Morocco, it is stipulated,
that "subjects, nor citizens of either party, shall take commissions from any
power with whom either of the contracting parties may be at war;" but no
punishment whatever is affixed to the breach of that article.

By our treaty, then, on this head, with the first three nations above
mentioned, the offender against the article was. I conceive, upon complaint
made, or information lodged, to be tried, as the constitution directs, by a
jury of his countrymen conspicuous for their moderation, lenity and justice;
and, if strong extenuating circumstances appeared in his favor, should even
the jury esteem themselves obliged to condemn him, agreeable to the letter of
the law, they might, nevertheless, forcibly recommend him to that branch of the
government, in whose hands the pleasing power of showing mercy is so wisely
placed.

As no punishment is annexed to the crime by our treaty with the other two
powers, the offender must have been trie^ upon common principles.

Mr. Jay has the honor of being the first American minister, who ever had the
courage by public act, to declare, in express terms, that his fellow-citizens
are liable to be condemned as pirates, by a British court of admiralty, for an
act of which the law of nations renders even the criminality doubtful.

What does he really say on this head of the treaty? Exercising his most
inventive talents to enrage his fellow-citizens to some improper
unconstitutional act, he virtually tells them, I see that you still remain
equally attached to, equally enamoured with the principles of liberty, as you
did when I was a pacific bellower in that cause, and therefore, that your
attachment to the French nation, in her present contest, may lead some of you
to engage as volunteers in her service, depending upon that principle in the
laws of nations, declared by Vatel, (...) 594, in the following words,
"volunteers taken by the (...) are treated as if part of the army in which they
fight." Nothing can be more reasonable. They, in fact, unite themselves this
army. They support the same cause, no matter whether it be from obligation or
free will.

But, continues Mr. Jay, I will risk deviating materially from the words of
every treaty hitherto entered into by the United States, should my act even be
an unconstitutional one, and declare that, if fighting in this cause you are
taken by the English, it shall be in their power to hang you as pirates.

Gracious God! ye heroes who were the glorious copartne^ of the brave little
French army at the siege of York-Town, and shared with them the honor of
fighting, bleeding and conq^^^ing in the cause of freedom! can you believe,
that your (...) commander in chief will ever give his sanction to such as all
as this? The question, I acknowledge, is unnecessary; for ((...) few who wish
to embroil us with that nation excepted) you (...) universally exclaim -- he
never -- never will do it.

Permit me only to add, that it is an insult even to ask him.

No. II.
I WILL now beg leave to recapitulate the parts of (...) treaty, which I have
deemed reproachable: let my ob^^^vations thereon speak for themselves.

1st. The surrender of the posts ought to have been made the basis of the
treaty; instead of which they are to be (...) until the first of July, 1796.

2d. The third article, amonst other objections to it, is so worded, as to
afford at least strong pretensions for preventing the people of Vermont from
any inland trade with Ca^^^^, further than St. John's at the bottom of the Lake
Champla^^^.

3d. The ninth article allowing British subjects to hold (...), is not only
unconstitutional, but, as by the 26th article, they may, even in case of a war,
remain still as British subjects, provided they behave peaceably, we may have
within our very, bowels one or two millions of British subjects, whom we
cannot, without a breach or says, expel from this, during the that we are
engaged in a war with their country.

4th. The tenth article yields up the only shield of protection we are
possessed of against such a predatory war as Great Britain has carried on
against us for these two years past; while our minister (as shall hereafter be
showed) has neglected to stipulate in return for many of these advantages
granted to us in our other treaties.

5th. The seventeenth article shamefully surrenders to the wanton plunder of
the British robbes, the right of capturing the property of our ally when found
in our vessels, though our treaty with every other nation, particularly with
that very ally, for the purpose of softening the rigours of war, declares that
"free ships shall make free goods."

Surely our minister might at least have permitted this part of the treaty to
have stood on the existing principles of the law of nations, without
sanctifying a British right in the plunder of our ally's property, and the
destruction of almost beneficial part of our own trade.

6th. The eighteenth article, which permits naval stores, etc. to be deemed
contraband, though all our other treaties expressly stipulate that they shall
NOT be deemed contraband, meets with a much more severe chastisement, than it
could possibly receive from any observation of mine, through the pen of the
partial, and; probably well-paid Camillus, who admits, "that it is the most
indefensible part of the treaty."

7th. The twenty-first article, which substantially delivers to the fangs of a
British tyrant to be punished by him as a pirate, every citizen of the United
States, whose heart, throbbing for an opportunity of discourting his love of
freedom, may lead him to risque his life in the defense of "the rights of man,"
merits, and must meet with the execration of every man who loves this country,
and the rational liberty hitherto enjoyed therein.

Having now pointed out, from the army, a few of the most glaring execptionable
features of the treaty, the well known children of our minister, by the actual
sin of commission, I will next endeavor to exhibit some of those, which art
equally distinguishable, but have arose from the sin of omission.

In the sixth article of the treaty, a circumspect core is taken "that full and
complete compensation is to be made, to British merchants, and others his
majesty's subjects, who had debts due from citizens of the United States, and
who, by the operations of various lawful impediments since the peace, etc.
have, not received full and adequate compensation for their losses and
damages." But how much greater have the losses and damages been to the United
States by the detention of the posts! When we take into view all the
consequences of the Indian war and the loss of the for trade, how are we (...)
prized to find, that not a word is lisped about "a frill (...) complete
compensation" to be made on that account!

If, agreeable to mr. Jay's opinion, both parties have b^^^^ the treaty, is it
reasonable, or just, that the one should be pa^l for the demages arising
therefrom, and the other should not I especially as mr. Jefferson has proved
the breach did not e^^mence with us.

Our minister, too, hod forgot to obtain payment for the negroes which
Great Britain promised, in the treaty of po^^e, should not be "carried away,"
and yet were carried away (...) the amount of many thousands!

The British Camillus, it is true, endeavors to show, that they ought not to
be paid for; but I well remember to (...) seen in the journals of congress, a
pointed motion of the American mr. Hamilton's (soon after the peace)
remonstration against their being carried away; and most then believe, (...)
mr. Hamilton was then a man of equal good sense, and (...) more friendly to the
interests of the United States, that (...) mil^^^ is now.

As Great Britain is admitted, by all parties, to be the greatest maritime
nation in the world, it must likewise be ad^^^^ that our minister should have
been equally guarded in p^^^^ing for us, as far as he possibly could, the same
favorable ^^pulations, in case of a rupture with her, or any other power as we
have entered into with other nations.

Mr. Jay's friends say, that he is a man of firmness; I ^^^sure that, as an
ambassador, he has proved himself a cons^^^^ man; for it will appear, that he
has been equally ne^^^^ in this part of his duty as in others already pointed
out.

By the sixth article of our treaty with France, the fifth (...) Holland; the
twenty-second with Prussia, and the t^^^ist (...) nato article with Sweden,
each of these powers respecti^^ agree, in case of their having a common enemy
with us, that they will (...) our vessels, wherever demanded, and defend that
in the some manner or they would their own.

Has Great Britain made any such provision? -- No.

By the fourteenth article of our treaty with France, (...) belonging to us,
loaded on board their enemy's vessels, at (...) time previous to two months
after the declaration of war, (...) when by them, shall be restored to us; and
by the fifth article (...) our treaty with Holland, and the fourteenth with
Swe^^^ our goods taken by them in the same situation, shall be refuted,
provided they were loaded at any time previous to six months after the
declaration of war, and the owner of the goods did not know of the war being
declared. Has Great Britain made any such promise? -- No.

The twenty-fourth article of our treaty with Prussia makes provision for the
kind and hospitable treatment of prisoners, in a manner which does honor to
human nature, and stands as an eulogium on that philanthropy of disposition,
which has so conspicuously shined in all the acts of a Franklin and a Jefferson.

Is there any such stipulation with Great Britain? -- No.

Was it necessary?

Let the history of the sugar-house at New York and Jersey prison ship, during
the last war, determine this question.

I will at the same time confess, that if mr. Jay is equally careful of the
person of the present governor of this state, [New-York] as he was of his own
at the time Esopus was burnt, by the marauding army of his favorite nation,
there is no risk that his excellency will suffer from this neglect, as he will
not become a prisoner till the British reach the mountains of Kent. A desire to
obey his excellency's orders will produce an explanation of this, whenever he
is pleased to require it.

I am aware, that it will be observed, that as there were two parties to the
treaty, it was impossible for mr. Jay to obtain all he wished -- Granted --
But, does it follow from thence, that in the humiliating manner he has done, we
were to yield up to the ambitious and supercilious arrogance of the other
party, whatever she, in the agonizing frenzy of departing greatness, might
think proper to require.

What opinion must the other nations entertain of either our honor or
independence, whose treaties with us are demonstrated to be so much more in our
favor, than the one mr. Jay has thought proper to submit to?

We boast of our increase in wealth, in numbers, in respectability as a nation,
all arising from the good management of the political machine, by those who
have the present direction thereof: and yet this treaty must give the lie
direct to that assertion in the opinion of every man, not intimately acquainted
with our true situation; because it abjectly crouches beneath the galling yoke
of Great Britain, and servilely grants to her what no other nation, in the hour
of our greatest distress, before we had even thrown off our swaddling bands,
ever attempted to demand of us.

I will quit this first part of my promise, and proceed to my second, by
showing some reasons, why the people in Vermont, as well as in other parts of
this extended country, will pursue every legal method in their power, to
prevent its becoming the supreme law of the land.

It is well known, that there has been, for many (...) throughout the yeomanry
of this country, a settled spirit of enmity against the British government,
arising, amongst other causes, from the remembrance of their savage and active
cruelties, during the last war, the hatred displayed to us during the peace,
and their unparalleled depredations on our trade, since the commencement of
their war with France.

And as this treaty entitles the people of that nation to rights and liberties
within each state, which cannot be constitutionally granted but by the state
itself; that part of the yeomanry who wish not to see the constitution
infringed on, or the power of their respective states fritter'd down to that of
small ^^porations, will universally oppose it.

It is intended to disunite us from our ally, to whom (...) yeomanry of this
country get every day more and more (...) tached; and they will therefore
oppose it.

It subjects them to unconstitutioal punishment, for esp^^ing the cause of
freedom, by granting their assistance to (...) very ally; and they will
therefore oppose it.

It was formed in contradiction to the expressed wishes of their immediate
representatives in congress; and they will therefore oppose it.

They will reflect, that the British West Indies are dependa^^ on us for their
very existence, as is fully demonstrated by the ^^quent petitions of their
inhabitants to the British parliament. That we consume upwards of two-fifths of
all the ma^^factures exported from Great Britain -- that the balance of (...)
with us is about twelve millions of dollars yearly in her favor. That had she
compelled us to war, our privateers would (...) distressed her trade in a
degree exceeding the bounds of ^^^^lation; of which opinion, the number of
British prizes brought into our ports last war, affords undeniable proof -- and
that is a very short time she must have lost all her possessions on the
continent of North America -- That, under these considerations a wise, a firm,
an honest minister could not have failed it procuring us terms at least
reciprocally beneficial. And therefore, they will oppose this heterogenous
treaty, begot in the dark; and ushered forth to public view, against the
exp^^^^ will of its legitimate parents, who, conscious of its deformity, wished
to conceal it from the penetrating eye of their countrymen as long as possible.

But it will be objected, that twenty senators having gives their sanction to
its adoption, is prima facie evidence that it must be a most excellent treaty
-- Granted.

And it will be answered, that ten senators being warmly opposed to it, and
every tory in the country extolling it as the greatest proof that heaven ever
furnished, of its watchful attention over the honor, liberty, peace,
prosperity, welfare, and independence of the United States, is likewise prima
facie evidence that it is a most d -- n -- able treaty. And the sensible
yeomanry of this country, after subtracting the one evidence from the other,
and finding the balance greatly against the treaty, will therefore more firmly
oppose it.

Many other arguments might be produced; but I shall stop here, and assign some
additional reasons, why I am of opinion, that the yeomanry of Vermont will, in
a particular manner, oppose it.

Their connection with Canada has given them frequent opportunities of viewing
the supercilious, haughty deportment of many of the British officers, to whom
the etiquette of that government led them to make application; and they have
observed their deep-rooted contempt of republicanism and republican manners.
They will, therefore, oppose an intimacy of national connection.

That state has been superior to most, and inferior to none, in point of
federalism; and they will, therefore, be delicately careful in preventing their
darling constitution from being, in the smallest degree, impaired or infringed
on.

The citizens of that state, even their professional men of all descriptions,
are (speaking generally) warm admirers of the French cause, though they do not
attempt to justify all their actions: and as many of the leading features of
this treaty have a strong tendency to distress that cause, they will oppose it
with an energy, proportionate to their love of rational liberty, and of the
rights of man.

But taking for granted, what the editor of the Minerva asserts, that the
unknown letter-writer in Vermont, is, "A gentleman of character and
information," I will oppose his sentiments by those of another citizen of that
state, known by his writings and his pleadings to be really "a gentleman of
character and information." -- I mean judge Chipman, who, in the year 1793,
previous to this bustle about French and English politics, wrote "sketches on
the principles of government," in which he exhibits maxims, perfectly consonant
with those maintained by the present opposers to the treaty, and equally
repugnant to those displayed by the learned letter writer, whose principal aim,
as far as he chooses (...) explain himself, appears to be a strong desire of
proving, (...) it is improper for the people to investigate the treaty, but to
trust to the well-known abilities and integrity of the constituted authorities
-- and in attempting this, his language is extremely indecorous, and even
indecent; indeed, he seem^ to have borrowed much of his style from the editor
of the Minerva.

The letter-writer says, in great heat, "we are apprehensive that some of the
large cities will endeavor to set their mobs in motion, with a view to dictate
to the president and senate. Be assured we will reject the federal government,
before we will be governed in the country by the mobs of Philadelphia,
New York, or ^^ston."

And does it comport with thy opinion of the people of these cities, mr. letter
writer, that they cannot meet quietly and form resolutions on a subject, not
only of the utmost importance to themselves, but their posterity, without
becoming rioters? Has your vanity, on being permitted to correspond with the
editor of the Minerva, so misled your understanding, as to make you suppose the
citizens of Vermont could be so far duped as to believe, that a riotous mob,
and a Boston to^^ meeting, were synonimous terms?

Are you so extremely credulous, my little lord pomposity, (...) to imagine,
that this, thy pigmy threat, "of separation from the federal government," will
intimidate the freemen of Vermont, from searching into the cause of the present
agitation of the public mind, which has taken place from the one end of this
extensive continent to the other, or that it will deter them from giving their
opinion thereon, in a firm, manly and decent manner?

Or do you believe, my little disappointed snipper-snapper, that the additional
yelping of a half a dozen more such whi^^^^ as thyself, would meet the same
attention and respect, as the solid, serious and patriotic advice given by your
fellow-citizen, the judge?

Let us see then what he says: --

In page 77, he observes, "that when we find an infringement on the liberties
of the people, admitted in the administration, we ought not to excuse ourselves
from searching the cause."

The same worthy patriot, in showing the advantages which arise from the
dissemination of useful knowledge, in page 152, makes use of this remarkable
expression: "let there be no restraint on the liberty of the press, no check
upon PUBLIC or private discussion, but what is imposed by the manners, morals,
taste, and good sense of the age."

These two are the express sentiments of those who oppose the treaty; -- but,
possibly, my little wild politician, you will insist that the judge meant to
confine "public discussion" to the country only; and yet I suspect, that it
would bring a blush even into thy face, to be called on for a good argument to
show cause why the citizens of great mercantile cities should be prevented from
"discussing publicly," an instrument, christened under the title of treaty of
commerce and navigation.

Our letter writer is for trusting every thing to the constituted authorities.

The worthy judge on the other hand, in page 159, makes an observation which we
can have no reason to doubt is strongly impressed on the president's mind, in
the present business -- "In the making of laws, a great regard must be had to
the circumstances, manners, and sentiments of the people, as well as to the
principles of the constitution -- the laws must be the best which the people
can bear."

To suppose, therefore, after admitting this principle, that the president
would ratify the present treaty, in contradiction to the sentiments of so
respectable and so decided a majority of the people, is supposing that he would
gratify his own inclination, at the hazard of commotions, which would not only
be extremely dangerous to the community, but would probably be attended with
his own political destruction. And, how could the president have known, that
the people were so universally opposed to this treaty, provided, as our letter
writer seems to wish, they had been perfectly silent on the subject.

Was this treaty to be ratified, I am well convinced that the citizens of
Vermont would almost universally oppose it, from a hearty concurrence with
their worthy judge, in the following sentiment, for they cannot be ignorant,
that this treaty is in direct opposition to the expressed will of the house of
representatives, who wished to obtain justice from Great Britain, not by the
fawning slattery and cringing submission of a grovelling, prostituted mind, but
by that calm, deliberate, but stern firmness, in support of our natural rights,
necessary for maintaining that respect and attention which our situation, our
growing greatness, and the extensive advantages of our trade and commerce gave
us a right to claim from the nations of the world. Was, then, the president to
give his sanction to this treaty, we should have the senate in favor of, and
the house of representatives, our best guardians, opposed to, the instrument,
which (if it is not unconstitutional) would become the supreme law of the land.

The citizens of Vermont, in that case, would draw many of their arguments from
the pure republican fountain which the judge has laid open to them, in page
140, where he says, "Public discussion, and mature deliberation, in the making
of laws, are indispensibly necessary. -- The senate and house of
representatives should have equal powers. No law should (...) without the
concurrence of both."

Are we to suppose, then, that the president will join the senate in
sanctioning a law, supposing it even constitutional, which he knows to be
repugnant to the wishes of the house of representatives, and nine-tenths of the
people? Cursed be he who entertains such an opinion of him. Such an act would
not be an error, it would be a crime.

I may, however, be possibly asked -- Should the president think himself
justifiable in ratifying the treaty, ought not the people to rest contented,
and view it as the supreme law of the land? I hesitate not to answer, They
ought not.

It will then be their duty to convoke town-meetings, and petition their
immediate representatives in congress to declare, whether the privileges of
that house have not been gros^ly infringed on? Whether, in certain parts of
that treaty, the senate have not exceeded their constitutional powers?

For I perfectly agree with the learned judge, whom I have so often quoted, in
his opinion, page 117, "That the government, that is, those organized bodies
who are entrusted with the powers of government, are bound by the constitution,
but have no power in themselves, to make, alter or control any of its laws."

And it appears to me very clear, that the power granted to the president, by
and with the advice and consent of two-thirds of the senate present, to make
treaties, could never, by the framers of the constitution, have been intended
to control those important and extensive rights, entrusted to congress at
large, in two precedent clauses of that same constitution, viz. "The powers of
regulating commerce with foreign ^^tions," and "of defining and punishing
piracies," which powers are granted in the most express terms, and not,
therefore, to yield to mere implication, especially when the admission of that
implication would be contradictory to the gen^^^ of the whole constitution.

Is it possible to suppose, that it was intended to authorize eleven members of
the senate, with the president, legally to regulate the commerce of such an
extensive mereantile country as this, and that their regulation was to be
binding on the people, without a possibility of constitutional redress, however
disagreeable it might be to them, to the majority of the senate, and to the
whole house of representatives? And yet this might happen, if the power of
making treaties embraces all the objects our present treaty makers wish. For
the power is granted to the president, and two-thirds of the senators present.
As the senate consists of only thirty members, and as it is provided by the
constitution, that a majority of them shall form a quorum, it is in the power
of sixteen members to conclude a treaty; and as eleven members make more than
two-thirds of those sixteen, they, with the president, would fully be
empowered, by the constitution, to have formed the present pending treaty,
momentous as it is, in contradiction to the wishes, informally declared, though
in the most decided terms, of nineteen senators, the whole house of
representatives, and the whole of the people.

I again ask, is it possible our constitution could have intended to clothe any
twelve men with such immense, such uncontrollable, such irrevocable powers?

But I hear some people say -- Should the president ratify this treaty, and
should the house of representatives, regardless of the petition of the people,
permit it to rest on its present footing, unnoticed by them, what are the
people to do in that case?

It must be acknowledged, that, in such a case, we should be placed, not only
in a difficult, but a very dismal situation: It would be the crisis for
determining, whether the term, majesty of the people, was, like the children's
rattle, used merely to keep them from murmuring and complaining; or whether, in
this land of liberty, it had an absolute and real existence, calculated for
much more important purposes.

But it is improper even to suppose, what there is so little probability of
ever experiencing; for I again repeat, that the president never will give his
sanction to an irrevocable act, which he has the most convincing proofs of the
great body of his fellow citizens viewing with hatred, horror, and contempt.

I shall conclude with calling heaven to witness, that no man more fervently
wishes than I do, to see the citizens of the United States unanimous in their
obedience to the laws of the land, as long as those laws are founded on the
immutable principles of justice, good says, and national honor.

American Appeals.
The following important case of the Brigantine (...) Betsey, W. Furlong,
master, was heard and determined in London, by the lords commissioners of
appeals, on the twenty-fifth July, 1795.
FROM the ship's papers and depositions of the captain and crew, produced in
evidence on this cause, it appears that the brigantine Betsey, belonging wholly
to mr. George Patterson, of Baltimore, cleared out from that port on the
nineteenth December, 1793, for the island of St. Bartholomew's and a market.
That inquest of a market she went directly to Guadaloupe, where she arrived on
the eighth of January following. Here she discharged her cargo of provisions,
and took in one of West India produce. With this cargo she was proceeding to
Baltimore, when she was met, and captured by the privateer sloop of war,
Agenoria, Willis Morgan, commander and taken into Bermuda.

Her cargo consisted of sugar, coffee, and other goods, belonging, in certain
specified proportions, to the captain William Furlong, and to messrs. George
and William Patterson.

On the fourth of April, 1794, proceedings on behalf of the captors were
commenced. On the twenty-third of April following, the vessel was claimed by
captain Furlong, on behalf of mr. George Patterson, and the cargo on behalf of
himself, a citizen of the United States, and of messrs. George and William
Patterson, both also lawful citizens of the United States, and who had been for
many years before resident in Baltimore, in the state of Maryland, where their
families and houses of trade were. Mr. George Patterson has been alleged to be
a native of Ireland -- there is some doubt as to this fact -- it is not
contended, however, but that he was actually a citizen of the United States. It
appears that he went over to Guadaloupe for a special purpose, as the agent of
his brother, and not with the view of residing there -- on the contrary, that
(...) proposed returning without delay to Baltimore, as his place of residence.

On the twenty-first of May, 1794, the cause was brought on for a hearing,
before John Green, esquire judge of the vice admiralty court of Bermuda; and on the
twenty-third of said month, the vessel with her "boat, tackle, apparel and
furniture, and all and singular her cargo and lading, were adjudged and
condemned as lawful prize to the captors by the said judge: and the claimant,
captain Furlong, ordered and directed to pay the taxed costs of suit."

The true ground of judge Green's decree appears to have been, according to his
own words, because "she had come immediately from a French port, declared by
authority to have been blockaded by his Britannic majesty's fleets and armies."
It seems the "authority" that "declared" the French islands in a state of
blockade, was admiral sir J. Jervis; and the evidence of this act before the
court was a copy of a letter from this officer, to Thomas Griffith, esquire of
Barbados, of which the following is an exact transcript:

Boyne, in Fort-Royal Bay, Martinico, 18th March, 1794 SIR,
THE several French West India islands and to be considered as under blockade
from the arrival of the armament at Barbados, the sixth of January: therefore
all neutral vessels, trading with these islands within that period, are clearly
intended to come within the king's order in council, dated the sixth November,
1793.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, J. JERVIS.

Thomas Griffith, esquire.

THE vessel and cargo condemned, on the twenty-third of April, were delivered
to the captors by order of the judge, at an appraisement of four thousand six
hundred and ninety-eight pounds, six shillings and seven-pence, Bermuda
currency; which is stated to have been far below the actual value of the said
vessel and cargo.

An appeal was immediately entered from this sentence, and the claimants prayed
the restitution of their property, for the following reason, assigned by their
counsel, sir William and sir John Scott.

"Because the ship and cargo were clearly and indubitably the property of
American subjects, engaged in a fair and licit trade."

On the part of the captors, the reasons assigned by their counsel, mr. Erskine
and dr. Nicholle, for the affirmance of the sentence passed by the judge of the
vice-admiralty court, (...) Bermuda, were as follows:

"Because the proprietors of ship and cargo are natural or British subjects,
supplying the enemy with provisions.

"Because the vessel, under a pretended destination (...) neutral port, had
gone directly to an enemy's port, then is a state of blockade, and was
returning from thence at the time of the capture, with a cargo the produce of
such blockaded port which she had taken in barter for the cargo of provisions
^^e had carried thither.

"Because the sole owner of the ship and cargo, was at the time of the capture,
an inhabitant of the enemy's territory."

On Saturday, the twenty-fifth of July last, the lords commissioners of
appeals, heard counsel in behalf of the appellant and respondent.

Sir William Scott, on the part of the claimant and apellant stated, that
American ships in the time of peace, wer^^^ the constant practice of carrying
flour and provisions to (...) French West India islands. It is true, that an
order of co^^^ was made on the sixth of November, 1793, and an instruction on
it, directing all ships carrying supplies to, or bringing ^^^duce from the
French West-Indian islands, to be brought i^^^^ adjudication. But this order
was never considered to extend (...) a condemnation, and it was revoked, and
another instruction issued on the eighth of January, 1794.

Sir William Scott here referred to the cases of the Fair Lady, the Hetty, the
Liberty, and the Essex, as tending to e^^^blish the free trade of the Americans
to the French West India islands.

Lord Manefield expressed (...) doubts as to this broad affection of sir
William Scott. And.

Sir W. Wyn^^ called the attention of the board, to the ^^clamation made by
general Rochambeau, the government Martimique, that he should, under the
circumstances (...) island, permit the importation of provisions for a limited
(...) but otherwise would adhere to the French colonial laws.

Mr. Erskime, the respondent's counsel, agreed to argue (...) case on its
particular circumstances.

Sir W. Scott in continuation contended, that as to (...) blockade, the British
arms had not invested the island, (...) way to show their intention to make it
the primary object (...) their attack, at the time of the capture of this
vessel.

Sir John Jervis's letter, introduced into the cause, furnish no sufficient
suggestion to induce the court to concede the ^^^sertion peated of blockade to
be well founded.

As to mr. George Patterson, the owner of the ship, and (...) a moiety of the
cargo, it is contended that he is a native of Ireland, and the doctrine of
inalienable allegiance, as it formerly stood, is set up as a bar to his claim.

The independence of the American states has done away that doctrine, as to all
persons settled there at the time of such independence; and the great number of
persons who have emigrated to America since the independence, will require a
most serious consideration before the doctrine will be applied to them.

Lord president Mansfield asked sir William Scott, if he meant to contend that
an Englishman could get rid of his allegiance by going to America more than he
could by going to Russia, or any other country in Europe?

Sir William Scott declined the enquiry, but repeated his affection that the
magnitude of the question from the number of persons gone to America from this
country, would requi^^ the most serious deliberation of this board, before the
doctrine ^^^ded to, was enforced to their prejudice.

The master of the rolls observed, that the question would probably require
some understanding between the two countries.

Sir William Scott proceeded; he remarked, that as to are George Patterson's
birth and residence, the third witness contradicts the other two, and says, he
believes mr. Patterson was born in America; so that the fact is not proved; and
as to his residence, he appears to have gone to Guadaloupe on the present
occasion only, and to have had no residence there; and as to the clearing out
for St. Bartholomew, upon which much stress is laid, the fact is, the ship was
cleared out for that island, (which is Danish) and for a market.

Mr. Erskine in reply, declared he was more convinced than our that he was
founded in asking for confirmation of the sentence of condemnation, as it is
evident that the urgent, want of provisions was the sole inducement to let the
ship take back the cargo of sugar and coffee, without which she could only have
taken melasses.

He contended that the voyage may strictly be considered as masked, the island
of St. Bartholomew being a kind of emporium, and the words "for a market," a
mere cover; and as to the seizure of the cargo by the French, it is evident
that the owner was so well reconciled as to talk of sending a further cargo. He
did not ask for condemnation on the letter of sir John Jervis; he admitted the
assertion of sir William Scott, as to its want of logical accuracy.
Self-preservation, however, was essential, and as much a principle with nations
as with individuals, and the political existence of this country justified his
expectation of condemnation.

Martinique was then reduced; and mr. Patterson must have known it, and been
well assured that Guadaloupe was an immediate object of the British arms.

America, he contended, was entitled to no more and no less than other nations;
and he had no doubt but that if mr. Patterson should, on further enquiry (if it
should be thought necessary to make it) appear to be a British subject by
birth, his property would be liable to condemnation.

The counsel having closed their arguments, the lords, viz. the earl of
Mansfield, lord president of the council; sir R. P. Arden, knight, master of
the rolls; sir W. Win, knight; Silvester Douglas, esquire took the same into
consideration, and made and declared their decree in the following words:

The lords having heard the proofs read, and advocates and proctors on both
sides, under all the special circumstances of the case, by their interlocutory
decree, pronounced against the appeal, affirmed the sentence appealed from, and
remitted the cause.

(Signed) ARDEN, Register of his majesty's high court of appeals for prizes.

From the above statement and decision, it appears that the prospect of an
indemnification by appeal, is delusive. The circumstances attending this
capture, are as favorable as any that can be brought before "his majesty's
high court of appeal for prizes." To look for indemnification from this
quarter, is nothing more not less, than exposing ourselves to have insult added
to outrage.

At this early period of the business, we find the operation of the treaty. The
property of the American merchant is become the mere sport of the lords of the
admiralty. If this is the effect in this instance even before the complete
ratification of the treaty, what may we not expect when it become in full
force? Does this decision express the temper and feelings of the citizens of
the United States, which mr. Jay was expressly commissioned to represent? Are
those captures the amount of claims to be set off against the "legal
impeci^^^^s" of the British? If they are, what balance will be on the side of
the Americans? Not a shilling -- but the amount of millions will become a clear
debt against the United Staten. Thus, by mr. Jay's treaty, we have submitted
our claims to the decision of the lords of the admiralty, who, no doubt, will
decide in every case as they have in the preceding; while the claims of the
British are admitted to be settled by commissioners, who, no doubt. will draw
an immense balance in favor of the English. Who then is to discharge this debt?
The American citizens. The merchant who has already lost his property must be
further taxed to pay British subjects. The farmer who has had nothing to do in
contracting it, must be called on by a land tax. The fact is, we had better
have waved our claims for indemnification, and quietly, passively, and
submissively, like good subjects of Britain, have acquieseed in their
depredations. By mr. Jay's negotiation, we not only lose our property by
Bermudian piracy, but have brought on ourselves British claims -- which were
never contemplated by the ministry, till they found that mr. Jay was disposed
to admit them.

The insults offered to this country, are without parallel. We must be held in
abhorrence by all European nations, and despised for our pusillanimity even by
the British themselves. Our friends in England pity us, and our enemies laugh
at us. The former pity us, that we have not maintained our national character,
by those weapons of commerce and sequestration, which we so fully possess, and
which would have made Britain more cautions in her conduct toward us. The
latter laugh at us, that we have so soon become the dupes of the British nation
by negotiation. God only knows what will be the event; but this is certain,
that the strides of Britain to again possess themselves of this country, are
too alarming not to awaken the fears of every patriot. Their connections in
America, the residents already among us, and those we may expect within a few
years, it is to be ^^^red will become too strong a phalanx to be baffled by the
exertions of the honest yeomanry of the United States. The freedom, sovereignty
and independence of our country are prostrated to Britain. Not a trait of them
remains, and the fourth of July (unless prevented by the vigilance of the
citizens) will be obliterated as a day of festival, in America. [Baltimore
Telegraphe.]

Observations on the fourteenth article of mr. Jay's Treaty.
BY the fourteenth article of the treaty concluded between our government and
that of Great Britain, the subject of the king of Great Britain may be brought
to America when they are sucking babies, and remain in the country till they
are grey-headed, and still be British subjects; as it is being born in the
king's dominion, which constitutes them British subjects, and that they cannot
alienate their allegiance, is a point fully established in the twenty-first
article of the treaty, where it is agreed, "That if any subject or citizen of
the said parties respectively, shall accept any commission, or letters of
marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party, to treat and punish the said subject, or citizen, having such
commission, or letter of marque, as a pirate." By the principle lately
established, those who are born in the dominions of the king (...)
Great Britain, and those born within the limits of the United States, cannot
alienate their allegiance. For if a man born in the United States, may go to
France, alienate his allgiance, become a French citizen, engage in their navy,
and he taken by the English, by what law of nature or nations, does our
executive pronounce it lawful to treat and pubish a French citizen as a pirate?
If it be acknowledgd, that the intention of the framers of the treaty, was to
prevent the citizens of the United States form entering into the service of
foreigner, would it not have been sufficient to habe declared them alien, as
they expatriated themselves by their own volutary act? but if they are still to
be deemed American citizens, it only remain to enquire by what constitutional
or legal authority did the a^^thors of the late treaty, presume to pass
sentence upon, and give up an American citizen to foreigners, to suffer an
ignontinious death by their hands; when it is declared, in the seventh article
of the amendments to the federal constution, "That no person shall be held to
answer for a capital, or otherwise in famous crime, unless on a presentment or
indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land and naval
forces, or in the militia, when in actual service, in time of war or public
danger. Nor shall be compelled in any crimaind case to be a witness against
himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty or property, without due process of
law, etc."

Article eighth. "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and
district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and cause
of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the
assistance of council for his defense."

There ar^ clear and pointed stipulations, in favor of the constitutional
privileges of every American citizen, of which they cannot be divested, even by
an act of congress, who alone have the exclusive authority to desine and punish
piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the laws
of nations; see the eighth section of the first article of the constitution.

This being a fair state of facts, it only remains to enquire, First, Whether
congress have ever presumed to make a law to sentence an American citizen to
suffer death as a pirate for attempting to alienate his allegiance by entering
into the service, of another nation, and acting against any other foreign
nation, being enemies of the nation of which he became a member? Secondly, If
congress have never make such a law, and it be granted that those which affect
the life of a citizen, are the most important and solemn parts of legislation
-- can it be rationally supposed, that the senate and executive of the United
States, can have a right to legislate, in this most important case, paramount
to the whole legislative body? Thirdly, Has it ever been constituted felony, by
the law of nations, for a subject or citizen, to emigrate in time of peace, to
another country, swear allegiance to such state, and become a subject or
citizen, provided the person so emigrating, never acts inimically against his
parent state? Fourthly, When the doctrine of inalienable allegiance, as agreed
upon in the late treaty, comes to be fairly established, and acted upon, will
not many thousands who migrated to the United States from Great-Britan since
our treaty of peace, who have been naturalized, and taken the oath of
allegiance, be disfranchised? For if their first allegiance be indissoluble,
the last of course must be nagatory; as they cannot be bona fide British
subjects, and American citizens at the same time. So that messrs George and
William Patterson, of Baltimore, in Maryland, may yet fall into the hands of
the incensed Briton, and be tried, convicted, and executed for high treason;
for that they, the said George and William, being both British subjects by
birth, and not having the fear of God before their eyes, had attempted to
alienate their allegiance, by emigrating to Maryland, in the United States of
America, and then and there, did feloniously, with malice aforethought, said
and abet the enemies of their most gracious lawful sovereign, by furnishing
them with provisions, notwithstanding all the French West India island were
under sentence of starvation, and were closely blockaded, by a proclamation of
sir John Jervis, for more than two months before said proclamation was issued,
and while he was yet a great distance from them; so that his majesty's British
American subjects, might have timely notice of his gracious intention toward
the inhabitants of the French West India islands, and not involve themselves in
the crime of high treason, by seeding those whom his most humane and gracious
majesty intended to starve.

A. Z.
N. B. The proclamation was issued on the eighth of March, and the farcical
paper blockade, commenced on the 6th of January preceding.



FROM THE ARGUS. Camillus refuted by Alexander Hamilton.
CAMILLUS.
"IT is true, as suggested, that our government has constantly charged as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain, the two particulars that have been
stated; but it is believed to be not true, that it has uniformly charged them
as first breaches of the treaty -- individuals may have entertained this idea
-- the state of Virginia seems to have proceeded upon it, in some public acts;
but, as far as it is recollected, that ground was never formally or explicitly
taken by the government of the United States, till in the abovementioned letter
from mr. Jefferson to mr. Hammond, when for the first time an attempt was made
to vindicate or excuse the whole conduct of this country in regard to the
treaty of peace, contrary, I will venture to say, to the general sense of well
informed men."

ALEXANDER HAMILTON.
In Congress, Monday, May 26, 1783. On motion of mr. Hamilton, seconded by mr
Izard.
Whereas, by the articles agreed upon on the 30th of November last, by and
between the commissioners of the United States of America for making peace, and
commissioners on the part of his Britannic majesty, it is stipulated, that his
Britannic majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets, from the said
United States, and from every port, place, and harbor within the same: -- and
whereas, a considerable number of negroes belonging to citizens of these states
have been carried off therefrom, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the
said articles:

Resolved, that the copies of the letters between the commander in chief, sir
Guy Carleton, and other papers on this subject, be transmitted to the ministers
plenipotentiary of these states for negociating peace in Europe; and that they
be directed to remonstrate thereon to the court of Great Britain, and take
proper measures for obtaining such reparation, as the nature of the case will
admit.

Ordered, that a copy of the foregoing resolve be transmitted to the commander
in chief; and that he be directed to continue his remonstrances to sir Guy
Carleton, respecting the permitting negroes belonging to the citizens of these
states to leave New York, and to insist on the discontinuance of that measure.

Remarks on the above.
If, then, congress, as early as May 1783, complained of this infraction, they
must have regarded it as the first breach; for Great Britain had not yet had
time to hear of what was passing in this country on the subject of the treaty,
much less to complain of any violation on our part. It will be recollected,
that the treaty had been received by congress early is the preceding month.

By this resolve, it also appears, that colonel Hamilton thought the treaty
binding from the signature of the provis^^^^ articles; but Camillus contends,
that it was not so until the exchange of the ratification of the definitive
articles which took place more than one year later.

Nor is this the only instance in which our government formally and expi^^tly
took this ground, although one would be led to con^^inde from Camillus, that to
mr. Jefferson alone belonged the credit of discovering it.

On the 11th April, 1783, congress agreed to a proclamation, declaring a
cestation of ho^^^^es; and only four days after,

Resolved, that the commander in chief be instructed to make the proper
arrangements with the commander in chief of the British forces, for receiving
possession of the posts is the United States occupied by the troops of his
Britannic majesty, and for obtaining the delivery of all negroes and other
property of the inhabitants of the United States in possession of the British
forces, or any subject of, or adherent to his said Britannic majesty.

Again, on the 9th August, 1786, congress resolved, that the secretary for
foreign affairs cause to be made out separate lists of the numbers, names, and
owners of the negroes belonging to the citizens of each state, and carried away
by the British, in contravention of the treaty, and that he transmit the said
lists to the executives of the states to which they respectively belong.

Will not Camillus have the candor, after these concurring proofs, to
retra^^so much of his assertion as is opposed to them Such conduct is the only
amends he can make for the misapprehension he has excited on a subject which
may still prove of great importance to America, the negociations between her
and Great Britain not being yet finished.

The above resolves, and particularly the first, prove unequivocally, that col.
It. cannot be the author of Camillus, an imputation which his enemies are
indefatigable in fixing on him -- No man who knows that gentleman can believe,
that he should so soon forget an act of which he himself was the mover, and to
which, as a public character, he must frequently have recurred. This is not the
only instance in which the opp^^nents of the treaty have attempted to asperse
his character.

PHILO-CINNA.

ADDRESS Of the Citizens of Charlestown to the President.
To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United-States.
Commowealth of Massachusetts. Charlestown (near Boston) July 22, 1795. SIR,
THE treaty now pending between the United States of America and Great Britain,
having much engaged the attention of this part of the country; the inhabitants
of this town have been led legally to convene in their corporate capacity,
agreeable to the constitution of the commonwealth, for the purpose of taking
the same into consideration -- and have

Voted, That this town do disapprove of the treaty now pending between the
United States, and Great Britain, as it has been read.

Voted, That this town do disapprove of the treaty as modified by the senate of
the United States.

Voted, That the selectmen be requested to transmit the doings of this meeting
to the president of the United States.

In compliance with the last mentioned vote, we have the honor to transmit said
votes, and to submit them to your consideration; fully persuaded, that every
sentiment of your heart, with every action of your life, are directed toward
the public good. We are,

With the profoundest esteem and respect, etc.

Signed by the respectable the selectmen (...) Charlestown.

PRESIDENT's ANSWER.
To Richard Devens, David Gordwin, Joseph Adams, Richard Frothingham. John
Carter, and Eliphalet Newell, Selectmen of Charlestown.
GENTLEMEN,
I Received your letter of the 22d of July, containing the votes of the
inhabitants of the town of Charlestown, who were convened to take into
consideration the treaty pending between the United States and Great Britain.

My assent to the treaty, as advised and consented to by the senate, and the
principles which governed my determination, are now publicly known. In this, as
in every other exercise of the powers committed to me by the constitution, I
have aimed to promote the public good, and to merit those sentiments of
personal confidence which are expressed in your communication.

With due respect, I am, gentlemen, your obedient, G. WASHINGTON.
United States, August 31st, 1795.
PROCEEDINGS Of the Citizens of Frederic Conniy, Virginia.
At a numerous and respectable meeting of the citizens (...) Frederic county,
held agreeably to notice given in the publi^^ papers, at the courthouse of
said county, on Tuesday, the 1st of December, 1795.

General Daniel Morgan being appointed chairman, and having taken his seat, the
citizens present, with one dissenting voice only, after mature deliberation,
and hearing the subject fully discussed; came to the following resolutions, to
wit:

1st. Resolved, that the conduct of the president of the United States, in
ratifying, agreeably to the advice of two thirds of the senate of the United
States, the treaty of amity commerce, and navigation, between the United States
of America and Great Britain, negociated by John Jay, esquire is entitled to, and
meets with, the entire approbation of this meeting. 2d. Resolved, that Daniel
Morgan, Charles Minn Thruster, Robert White, jun. Charles Magill and Joseph
Caldwell, be^ appointed a committee, for the purpose of transmitting to the
president the sentiments and proceedings of this meeting.
(Signed.) DANIEL MORGAN, Chairman.

[No. XI.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- DECEMBER 28, 1795. --

CONTENTS.
1. ATTICUS, No. VIII. Page 147 2. -- No. IX. Page 150 3. Camillus, No. XXVI.
Page 153 4. -- No. XXVII. Page 162 5. -- No. XXVIII. Page 170 6. -- No. XXIX.
Page 180 7. -- No. XXX. Page 188 8. -- No. XXXI. Page 195 9. -- No. XXXII. Page
204 10. -- No. XXXIII. Page 211
American Remembrancer, etc.
ATTICUS -- No. VIII.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 72.] To the Freemen of the United States.
Fellow Citizens,
IT was my intention when I began these letters, to consider the treaty in all
its relations; but as the merchants and traders of Philadelphia, and the
chambers of commerce of New York and Boston have held up the idea of
unimportance to our commerce, have deemed it a thing unworthy the attention of
any other people than merchants, and not worth the risk of displeasing Great
Britain, I will not differ with them, more especially as the president has
given them an exclusive privilege to think on this subject; but I will proceed
to examine the constitutional and political features of this monster of "horrid
mien, that to be hated needs but to be seen." Not being in the habit of
weighing my rights and my happiness in a gold scales, I can the more readily
dismiss the commercial consideration of the treaty; and as a few merchants and
traders have insolently and presumptuously monopolized the right to judge of
things relating to commerce, they certainly will not deny others the exclusive
privilege of deciding upon the constitutional and political parts, of which
they seem to be wholly ignorant. This is a quid pro quo, and has more
reciprocity in it than the wifest and most profound of the addressers can point
out in the treaty.

The unconstitutional origin of the treaty, has been already shown in the
"letters of Franklin," to which I take the liberty to refer you, my fellow
citizens, while I proceed to show the unconstitutionality of the instrument
itself. The treaty has established a rule of naturalization, within the
precincts or jurisdiction of the western posts, by which British subjects can
become American citizens within any term of one year. The constitution
expressly declares, that congress shall have power "(...) establish an uniform
rule of naturalization, throughout the United States." Here then the president
and senate have not only usurped the power of congress, to establish a rule of
naturalization, but they have been guilty of a twofold breach of the
constitution, by making that rule not "uniform." During the last session of the
federal legislature, an uniform law of naturalization was passed, by which a
five years residence is made necessary to obtain citizenship; but this law has
been superseded by treaty; and a British subject may become an American citizen
in one week after the surrender of the posts! The most desperate
"Antifederalist" could not have aimed a more deadly blow at the constitution
than the treaty has done; and if rendering the constitution a nose of wax, can
be called disorganization, Jacobinism, or anarchy, the president and senate are
the greatest disorganizers, the most furious Jacobins, and most violent
anarchists, in the United States. If a compact, which ought to be held sacred,
and which ought to be construed and executed strictly, can be interpreted to
mean any thing that floats in the mind, or flutters in the heart of the
president, the security which we promised ourselves is at an end, and we are
literally in the situation of our new allies, Great Britain; we have a
constitution in the clouds.

The constitution declares, that "Congress shall have power to dispose of, and
make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other
property belonging to the United States, or of any particular state." By the
treaty, the president and senate, instead of "congress," have made rules and
regulations respecting the territory of the United States, and have prejudiced
their claims, as well as the claims of individual states. The 2d article of the
treaty guarantees to "all settlers and traders, within the precincts or
jurisdiction of the posts, all their property of every kind." Part of this
property belongs to the United States, and part to individual states; and,
notwithstanding, the president and senate have made rules and regulations
respecting it. The constitution is solemnly prohibitory upon every department
of the government, with respect to the claims of the United States, or of
individual states, when it declares, that "nothing in this constitution shall
be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or of any
particular state;" and in defiance of this solemn prohibition, this article was
formed and ratified! The treaty of peace stipulated, that the posts should be
surrendered with all convenient speed; and from the date of the ratification of
that treaty, all real property, not actually held by Britist subjects there,
became vested in the United States, and of individual states; now, as a
considerable part of the territory comprehended in the precincts or
jurisdiction of the posts (...) taken possession of by the British subjects
since the treaty of peace, no department in the government could guarantee such
possession; as the claims of the United States, and of individual states,
became prejudiced thereby. Admitting a right to make rules and regulations
respecting the territory of the United States, that right appertains
exclusively to congress.

The constitution declares that " congress shall have power to regulate
commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with the
Indian tribes." By the 3d article of the treaty this power is assumed by the
president and senate; for it declares, that "no duty of entry shall ever be
levied by either party on peltries brought by land or inland navigation into
the said territories respectively, nor shall the Indians, possing or repassing
with their own proper goods and effects, of whatever nature, pay for the same
any impost or duty whatever." The power of congress to regulate commerce with
the Indian tribes, is thus destroyed by a single coup of the presidential and
senatorial hands.

By the constitution "the judical power of the United States shall be vested in
one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to
time ordain and establish." By the 6th article of the treaty, a judicial power
is given to five commissioners, two of which are to be appointed by Great
Britain, and "the award of the said commissioners is to be final and
conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim, and the amount of the sum to
be paid to the creditor, or claimant." Here is a judicial power given by the
president and senate to five commissioners, two of whom are to be foreigners,
and a third may also be a foreigner; and these commissioners are to have a
final decision upon the property of the people of the United States. To
congress alone is given the establishment of a judicial power; but even
congress would hardly adventure so to profane the constitution, as to establish
a mongrel tribunal of foreigners and citizens. The president and senate, in the
name of the United States, undertake "to cause the sum awarded by the
commissioners to be paid in specie to such creditor or claimant without
deduction, and at such time or times, and at such place or places as shall be
awarded by the said commissioners." The constitution declares, that "all bills
for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representatives," and that
"no money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law." The situation in which the president and senate
ha^^ placed the United States by this article, give them the power of raising
revenue, and of making appropriations of money according to their whim; for as
a treaty is a solemn stipulation between nation and nation, every infraction of
that treaty is a ground of war. If then the house of representatives refuses to
originate a revenue to carry this stipulation in the treaty, into effect, it
may be considered as an infraction of the tr^^ty, and a war may be the
consequence. Was the constitut^^^ the president's guide when he formed such an
article? Did he mean by it to brow-beat the house of representatives into his
Anglican measures? Did he flatter himself that the freemen of America would
consent to any thing, to a prostitution of their constitution, to a derediction
of every thing valuable to them, rather than unsheath the sword against his
"great, good, and dear friend?" But the commissioners are to six the time when,
and the place where, the moneys awarded are to be paid. Do not the president
and senate undertake to raise a revenue, when they agree to pay the award of
the commissioners at the time they shall agree upon? Is this leaving the
raising of revenue to congress, as pointed out by the constitution? The
president and senate have agreed to appropriate the moneys of the United States
without any law but their own will!

Fellow citizens, these are not imaginary things, conjured (...) by a
distempered or discontented mind -- they are plain fa^^, which are
comprehensible to every capacity, and merit the ^^rious attention of every man
who feels an interest in the ^^^fare of his country. If the president can
torture the consti^^^on into a justification of such conduct, it lives but in
name, is an ideal existence, which can be fashioned according to (...) whim or
caprice of the man who administers it. Such a m^^^ery of republicanism must
rouse the indignation of every (...) corrupt citizen, and animate him to an
endeavor to fix (...) rights upon a more certain and permanent basis. If a
sub^^^sion can be had to such a state of things as the president (...) created,
at this moment, when our constitution has scar^^ risen from its cradle, we may
bid adieu to liberty, and (...) philosopher and the patriot may bemoan the
degraded state (...) human nature, that has suffered the fairest prospects of
happiness to be overshadowed by a pretended man of the people.

ATTICUS.
August 28, 1795.
No. IX.
A MISTAKE has happened in the vocabulary of o^^ country, and instead of
Jacobinism, Jacobitism has reared its snaky crest among us. Passive-obedience
and non-resistance are now the order of the day, and he who will not subscribe
to the divine attributes of the president is excommunicated, and the dire
interdict of Anarchist, Antifederalist and Traitor is fulminated against him
with all the fury which characterized the vatican of Hildebrand. But if such
appellations are bestowed, and with such liberality, on the friends of the
constitution, on those who wish its chastity preserved, and with a vestal
purity secured from the rude attacks of the ravisher; by what characters shall
we designate those, who with unseeling heart make their barbarous assaults, as
if liberty's goddess had turned harlot? Can language be too strong, or acumen
too poignant to describe or to punish the incendiaries of virtue?

The Knights of the funding system, the Janissaries of government, the Jacobites
and their PRETENDER, are in alarm -- ^ey have sounded the tocsin, and have
pronounced a woe upon those who do not fall down and worship the golden image
which Nebuchadnezzar has set up. Pompey's entrance into the sanctum sanctorum
did not excite more horror and dismay in the Israelites, than lifting the mask
from the president, and displaying his natural visage, have raised in the noble
orders or our country. To touch the hem of the garment of this fabled high
priest of liberty would beget distress in such interested bigots; but to strip
him of his pontifical robes, and show him unworthy of them, would be in their
estimation, to dress nature in mourning, and extinguish the lamp of liberty for
ever. When men have purposes to answer, nothing can be too absurd for them to
practice; and hence the Egyptian priest, to savor his own views, had conferred
divinity upon an ox. It is high time that a superstitions veneration for a man,
and a frail one o^, should be exiled from the mansion of liberty. It is high
time the temple of freedom should no longer be profaned by idolatrous worship,
and be usurped by usurers, brokers, stockjobbers, and speculators. When men are
substituted for principles, liberty is as much outraged, as when the Deity is
supplanted by a priest. No longer the dupe of the artifice which has been
practiced but too successfully upon the honest and unsuspecting American, he
has at length shaken off the lethargy of confidence that made him slumber over
his wrongs, and he now carries his crimination to the source of all his ^^^s
and all his disgraces. There is justice in this, there is manliness, and he who
shrinks from such a task, or feels terror at its performance, is unworthy the
name of freeman. What! Shall the cal's paw of Hamilton deter freemen from
speaking their sentiments by the cry of "treason?" Is the Jacobite language of
the ^^esident's new ally already legitimised among us, that it has become
treason to publish our sentiments? Alas! what a dearth (...) nerve among the
Jacobites, when a whiffett is deputed to (...) the duty of a sturdy mastiff!
Let such animals bark, my fellow citizens, while we proceed to the
consideration of the unconstitutionality of the treaty, and trace in it the
real "traiturs" of our country.

The 8th article of the treaty is a further interference with the
constitutional power of Congress to raise money, and make appropriations; for
it declares, that "the commissioners shall be respectively paid in such manner
as shall be agreed upon between the parties; and all other expenses attending
the said commission shall be defrayed jointly by the two parties, the same
being p^^^ously ascertained and allowed by a majority of the commiss^^^^" Who
are "the parties" in this case? The king of Great Britain the president and the
senate. Who agree to pay the exp^^^ of this commission? The king and the
president and the ^e^^^. Do not the president and senate pledge themselves by
this ^^icle to raise and appropriate money to satisfy the expenses of (...)
commission? Does the constitution recognize a right in them to make monied
contracts? From whence did they derive this ^^rogative? Did they receive a new
commission of powers (...) the president's new ally? If the president and
senate can ^^^tract debts for one dollar, they can do it for a million, the
right is the same in extent that it is in degree; and by treaty (...) may
mortgage the United States. Is this presidential and ^^^torial contract the
constitutional mode of "raising and app^^^ating money according to law?" The
conduct of the president it this case, in point of usurpation, is not unlike
that the pursued in 1776, when he was only the officer of congress, in raising
(...) and increasing their pay without any authority from that po^^ under whom
he acted, and from whom he held his commission. The necessity of this case
cannot be pleaded in extenuation of breach of a solemn contract.

In the amendments to the constitution we find the following article: "The
powers not delegoted to the United States by the ^^^stitution, nor prohibited
by it to the states, are reserved to the s^^^^ respectively, or to the people."
The 9th article of the treaty o^^tains the following extraordinary stipulation;
"It is agreed that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of
the United States, and American citizens who now hold (...) in the dominions of
his majesty, shall continue to hold th^^ according to the nature and tenure of
their respective est^^^ and titles therein: and may grant, sell and devise the
same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were natives; (...) that
neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall, as far as (...) respect the said
lands, and the legal remedies incident ther^^^, be regarded as aliens." By what
part of the constitution have the president and senate the power of regulating
the tenure of real estates? We look in vain for such a grant in the
constitution, even to congress itself; this right then, not being delegated to
the United States, nor "prohibited" by the constitution to the states, is
"reserved to the states respectively, or to the people." Shall the president
dare to invade the chartered rights of the states? Shall he not only expunge
the letter and the spirit of the constitution, but shall he add to it such
parts as are in coincidence with his arbitrary views? Shall the constitution be
converted into wax by him, ready to receive the impression of a Caesar or a
Cromwell?

This article has a reciprocity in words; but let me ask, what number of
American citizens hold real property in his Britannic majesty's dominions? Can
figures calculate the number of acres which British subjects hold in the United
States? Their patents swarm over our country like the locusts of Egypt, and in
a little time not a shrub or a plant will be seen in republicanism or morals
that shall have escaped their ravages.

Fellow citizens, when we consider these things, on whom does the charge of
ingratitude rest? On the people who have idolized the president, and have
advanced him to the greatest honors and the utmost powers which can be
communicated by freemen, or on the president, who has abandoned the people, and
has considered the voice and the interest of a faction, instead of the voice
and the interest of his country?

ATTICUS.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 63.

No. XXVI.
THE British trade to their possessions in their East Indies, as well as to
China, is a monopoly vested by the legislature in a company of merchants. No
other persons in Great Britain, nor in any of her dominions or colonies, can
send a vessel to, or prosecute trade independent of the company, with any part
of Asia. The right to trade with their possessions in India is not only refused
to all British subjects, the India company excepted, but is one, that Great
Britain has never before yielded by treaty to any foreign nation. By the terms
of the charter to the India company, among a variety of limitations, they are
restrained and confined to a direct trade between As^^ and the port of London;
they are prohibited from bringing any of the productions of India or China
directly to any part of America, as well to the British colonies as to our
territories; and moreover they are restrained from carrying any of the
productions of Asia, directly to any part of Europe, or to any port in Great
Britain, Scotland, or Ireland, except the single port of London.

The 13th article stipulates, that our vessels shall be admitted in all the sea
ports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies, and that our
citizens may freely carry on a trade between said territories and the United
States, in all such articles, of which the importation or exportation shall not
be entirely prohibited; provided only, that when Great Britain is (...) war, we
may not export from their terriories in India, without the permission of their
local government there is, military stores, naval stores, or rice. Our vessels
shall pay in this trade, the same tonnage duty as is paid by British vessels in
our ports; and our cargoes on their importation and exportation shall pay no
other or higher charges or duties than shall be payable on the same articles
when imported or exported in British bottoms; but it is agreed that this trade
shall be direct between the United States and the said territories; that the
article shall not be deemed to allow the vessels of the United States to carry
on any part of the coasting trade of the British territories in India, nor to
allow our citizens to settle or reside within the said territories, or to go
into the interior parts thereof, without the permission of the British local
government there.

The British trade to their territories in the East Indies is carried on by a
corporation, who have a monopoly against the great body of British mechants.
Our trade to the same territories will be open to the skill and enter prize of
every American citizen. The British trade to these territories is direct, but
confined to the port of London; our trade to the same must likewise be direct,
but may be carried on from and to all our principal ports.

The article gives us a right in common with the India company to carry to
these territories, and to purchase and bring from thence, all articles which
may be carried to or purchased and brought from the same, in British vessels:
our cargoes paying native duties, and our ships the same alien tonnage as
British ships pay in our ports. This trade is equally open to both nations;
except when Great Britain is engaged in war, when the consent of the British
local government is required in order to enable us to export naval stores,
military stores, and rice; a limitation of small consequence: none of the
articles except nitre being likely to form any part of our return cargoes.
Though this article is one against which the objection of a want of reciprocity
(so often, and so uncandidly urged against other parts of the treaty) has not
been preferred, it has not however escaped censure.

It is said that we are already in the enjoyment of a less restrained commerce
with the British territories in India, and that the treaty will alter it for
the worse: in as much as we thereby incapacitate ourselves to carry on any part
of the coasting trade of the British territories in India, and as we relinquish
the profitable freights to be made between Bombay and Canton, and likewise
those sometimes obtained from the English territories in Bengal to Ostend.

It would seem a sufficient answer to say, that this trade has heretofore
existed by the mere indulgence of those who permitted it, that it was liable to
variations, that a total exclusion, especially had it been of us in common with
other foreign nations, could have afforded no just ground of complaint: That
the relaxation which has hitherto given us admission to the British India
territories, was not a permanent, but a mere temporary and occasional
regulation, liable to alteration, and by no means to be demanded as the basis
of an intercourse to be adjusted by compact, with a foreign nation, which would
no longer leave the power of alteration in either of the parties.

But in respect to the first objection, the article amounts to this, that the
rights which it does grant, shall not by implication be construed to give a
right to carry on any part of the British coasting trade in India.

If we have before shared in this trade by permission, nothing in the article
will preclude us from enjoying the same in future. If we did not participate in
it, nothing in the article impairs either the authority of the British local
government to permit our participation or our capacity to profit by such
permission -- This objection, therefore, falls to the ground, since the
coasting trade remains as it was before the treaty was formed. The terms used
clearly denote this and nothing more; they are -- "It is also understood that
the permission granted by this article is not to extend to allow." This does
not negative any pre-existing indulgence, but merely provides that the main
grant shall not convert the revocable indulgence, if any there was in this
particular, into an irrevocable right by treaty.


Further, according to my information -- It is not the tr^^^ between the East
Indies and China, as has been erroneou^^ supposed by some persons, but the
exportation of rice and oth^^ articles, which are exchanged between the British
territo^^^ in the hither and further Indies, that is denominated the co^^^ing
trade of the British territories in India. The importa^^^ of this trade is not
well understood; nor am I able to say whether we have heretofore been allowed
to carry it on. If (...) have, the little that we have heard of it, leads to an
opini^^ that it is not an object of much consequence. Let it, however be
granted that hereafter we shall not be allowed to engage i^ it. Shall we have
more reason to complain of this exclusi^^ than we have that we are refused a
share in the coasting (...) of the European dominions of Great Britain? or that
we (...) excluded from the coasting trade between their islands in (...) West
Indies? Or than the British themselves have, that by (...) prohibiting tonnage
duty (being fifty cents per ton on entry (...) a foreign vessel, when our own
coasting vessels pay only (...) cents per ton, for a year's license) they are
excluded from sha^^ in our coasting trade; a branch of business that already
employs a large proportion of our whole navigation, and it (...) increasing.

In respect to the second and third objections, it may be (...) marked, that so
far as the trade has been heretofore enjoy (...) it has been in consequence of
an exception from, and relaxa^^on in, the system by which the European commerce
has (...) regulated; that having depended on the mere occasional p^^mission of
the local government, we may safely infer (thou^^^ it may have been supposed
incompatible with the discretion^^ powers, vested in that government, to confer
by treaty a p^^^tive right to carry on the trade in question) that so lo^^^ and
as often as the interest that has heretofore induced the ga^^^ of this
permission shall continue or exist, the permission will (...) continued or
renewed. The stipulation, restraining the tra^^^ may, if the parties see fit,
be dispensed with, and the tr^^^ may be enlarged, or made free: -- It being a
contract only between them and us, the parties are free to remodify it; (...)
without a formal alteration, if those in whose favor the restra^^^ is made,
consent to remove it, the other party is released from the obligation to
observe it. This has been affected to be questioned on account of what is
called (...) peremptoriness of the expressions (to wit) "It is expressly agreed
that the (...) of the United States shall not carry, etc." But there is no real
room for (...) question -- In a contract between two parties, whether
individuals or nations. where a restraint is imposed upon one for the benefit
of another, it is always an implied condition of the restraint that it shall
continue, unless dispensed with by the party for whole benefit it is imposed --
Thus the British government in India may remove the restraint, by continuing
the indulgence in this respect heretofore granted -- And it seems to me clear
that the laws which the United States are to pass, for enforcing the
prohibition, may, with good faith, be qualified with this provision, " unless
by permission of the British government in India."


Again -- Surat, which is in the neighborhood of Bombay, is the emporium of
the Guzeat, and of the northern portion of the Malabar coast; the cottons
shipped from Bombay to Canton, are frequently first sent from Surat to Bombay.
Surat belongs to the native powers to which we have free access. If the
transportation of cotton and some few other commodities from the coast of
Malabar to Canton is an important branch of our commerce, what will prevent our
prosecuting it from Surat or any other free port in the hither Indies?

That it may be undertaken from the ports of the native powers is rendered
probable, by the circumstance, that these freights are supplied principally or
alone by the native or black merchants, whose residence would naturally be in
the ports under native jurisdiction more frequently than in those under the
jurisdiction of any of the foreign powers.

But is it not true (and will not candor admit it) that the trade to the
Asiatic dominions of the European powers has usually been confined to the
nation to whom such territories belong? In our treaty with Holland, have we not
even stipulated to respect their monopoly of this trade? And by our treaty with
France, a nation whose liberal policy is said to have laid us under eternal
obligations of gratitude, have we acquired the sligh^^st pretentious, much less
a right, to resort to, or trade with any part of their Asiatic territories?

A late decree of the convention which opened to us the ports in their West
Indies, likewise laid open their remaining territories in Asia -- But this
measure proceeding from the necessities of the war and their inability to carry
on their foreign commerce, will change hereafter, as heretofore it has done,
with the establishment of peace -- Did this opinion require to be strengthened,
it is abundantly confirmed by the navigation act, decreed by the convention:
The operation whereof is suspended for the same reason that induced the opening
to foreigners that trade to their colonies and territories in the West and East
Indies.

The British for more than a hundred years excluded foreigners from a share in
their East India trade; for a few years past they relaxed in the rigor of this
system. We have availed ourselves of this circumstance, and shared with them in
their India commerce. But this permission can be viewed only as an occasional
departure from a general law; which may be affected by a change of
circumstances, the duration of which, therefore, is uncertain. The loss and
inconvenience to which our merchants may be exposed from the prosecution of a
trade, depending on regulations arising from inconstant circumstances, and
which frequently vary, may, in some measure, be guarded against, where the
scene is not remote, and the alterations in the laws can be known soon after
they are made. But in the Astatic and our other distant commerce, it is of
importance that the laws under which an adventure is begun, should be
permanent. Losses to a considerable amount have been experienced by some of our
merchants, who have undertaken distant voyages in the expectation of the
continuation of these temporary regulations. The trade, for example, to the
Cape of Good Hope which the Dutch government ordinarily monopolize to their own
people) was some time since opened to foreigners, and some of our citizens
profited by it; but others who had engaged in large adventures to that market,
suffered no small disappointment and loss in finding themselves excluded, upon
their arrival by a repeal of the permission to foreigners to trade there. It
must then be considered as an important object secured, in respect to the
principal proportion of our India trade, that alone which is capable of being
pursued as a branch of our commerce, that the treaty turns a favor into a
right, and that our direct intercourse with the British territories in the East
Indies, in all respects as broad as that of Great Britain herself (except in
the articles of rice, naval and military stores, when Great Britain is engaged
in war) instead of being an uncertain and hazardous trade, as heretofore, from
its precarious nature, it has been, will, hereafter, be as certain as any in
which our merchants shall engage.

It is further alleged, by way of objection to this article, that it does not
secure to our citizens a right to reside and settle in the British territories
in India, without the consent of the British local government. The ^^servation
that has been made on a similar objection, in respect to the coasting trade in
India, is equally applicable to this. The article leaves subjects precisely in
the situation in which it found them. But let it be remembered that the
disproportion between the numbers of the native Indians and the foreigners
inhabiting their country, is more than one thousand of the former to one of the
latter -- that the most exact discipline and subordination among the foreigners
are therefore essential to the preservation of the British authority over that
country -- that no foreigner, or even a British subject, is allowed to reside
there, except in the character of a servant of the company, or of a licensed
inhabitant -- that it has long been held as a sound opinion, that unrestrained
liberty to the Europeans to emigrate to, and settle among the Indians, would,
in a short time, overturn and destroy the British empire in India -- This
danger would by no means be diminished by conferring a right upon the
Americans, freely to reside and settle in India -- that we shall be allowed to
reside and settle there by permission of the local British government, is
fairly to be inferred from the article. But an absolute right to an entire
liberty on these points, might evidently be dangerous to the British government
over India -- and in prudence could not have been stipulated.

The advantageous footing, on which the trade is placed, is so evident, that
those who had no reliance on the objections urged against it, but who,
nevertheless, have been unwilling to allow the treaty any merit on the score of
this article, have endeavored to show that our India trade is of little
importance, and of small value.

Whatever article can be supplied by the India company, may likewise be
supplied by us, and some of them on better terms by us, than by them: The
reports of the committee of the directors of the East India company, published
in 1793, when their charter was renewed, afford useful information on this
subject, and disclose facts which show the advantages that we shall possess in
this trade over the company. They admit, that in the articles of iron, wines,
canvas, cordage, arms, and naval and military stores, foreigners can enter into
a ben^^cial competition with them, and that canvas and cordage, and we may add,
all naval stores and several other articles, can always be furnished in India
by foreigners, cheaper than by the company.

If we appreciate the advantage we have over them, in such particles of supply
as are of our own growth or production, as well as in the wines not unusually
procured by touching at Madeira on the outward voyage to India, and compare it
with the advantage that they have over us in the few articles of choice, which
they purchase at the first hands, and which we must import in order to
re-export to India, it is probable that our cargoes to India, will, on the
whole, be laid in as advantageously, ^f not more so, th^^ those of the India
company. If we consider the vast ex^ent of territory, the numerous population,
and the established manufactures of India, so far from supposing that a free
trade to that country will be of little value to a young and enterprising
nation, whose manufactures are still in their infancy, we ought rather to
conclude that it is a country with which we should be solicitous to establish a
free trade (...) intercourse.

Every one who has bestowed the slightest attention upon (...) foreign
manufactures consumed in our country, must have (...) served the general and
increasing use of those of India, (...) to the better terms on which they can
be procured from (...) than from Europe. Though no document is at hand that
(...) show the value of the annual importations from India, it is stated by Mr.
Coxe, in his View of the United States, (...) the amount in value of our
importations from Asia is (...) than one fifth of the value of our whole annual
consu^^^^ of foreign commodities. It is true that the porcelai^, (...)
nankeens, and teas of China, form a large portion of this ^^^^nual importation.
But, after a full deduction on this acc^^^^ a great and profitable branch of
our commerce will be (...) in our trade to the East Indies. It should be
remembered, (...) that it is not the consumption of our own country that
reg^^^^ the quantity of India goods that we import; other cou^^^ have been
supplied through us with the fabrics and produ^^^^ of both India and China. The
treaty will enlarge this de^^^^^.

Several circumstances calculated to give our trade with^^^^ an advantage
against foreign competition, and a prefere^^^ our trade with Europe, are
deserving of attention.

First. The direct trade between us and Asia, including^^^ East Indies as well
as China, cannot be prosecuted by th^iish rish East India company, their ships
being obliged to rem^^^ the port of London, and there to discharge.

Second. The difference between the duties on Asiatic (...) imported in
American bottoms direct from Asia, and the (...) imposed on the same goods in
foreign bottoms from A^^^^ from Europe; being on all articles a favorable
discrimi^^^ and in the articles of teas, the duties on those imported i^^^
reign bottoms being fifty per cent. higher than on those i^^^ed in American
bottoms.

The particular difference of duties on Asiatic goods im^^^ed in American and
in foreign bottoms, so favorable to our (...) navigation, will not be affected
by the right reserved by (...) Britain to impose countervailing duties in
certain cases; Perhaps from the certainly of the rights which it confers, it
may be foreign capital to extensive enterprises, in which the United States
will be (...) trepot between India an a great part of Europe
right being relative to the intercourse between the United States and the
British territories in Europe.

Third. The European intercourse with Asia is, in most cases, conducted by
corporation or exclusive companies -- and all experience has proved that in
every species of business (that of banking and a few analagous employments
excepted) in conducting of which, a competition shall exist between individuals
and corporations, the superior economy, enterprise, zeal, and perseverance of
the former, will make them an overmarch for the latter; and that while
individuals acquire riches, corporations, engaged in the same business, often
sink their capital and become bankrupt. The British East India company are more
overburdened with various terms and conditions, which they are required to
observe in their Asiatic trade, and which operate as so many advantages in
favor of their rivals in the supply of foreign markets. The company, for
example, are obliged annually to invest a large capital in the purchase of
British manufactures to be exported and sold by them in India; the loss on
these investments is considerable every year, as few of the manufactures which
they are obliged to purchase, will sell in India for their cost and charges --
Besides, from the policy of protecting the home manufactures, the company are,
in a great measure, shut out from supplying India goods for the home
consumption of Great Britain. Most of the goods which they import from India,
are re-exported with additional charges, incurred by the regulations of the
company, to foreign markets, in supplying of which we shall be their rivals, as
from the information of intelligent merchants, it is a fact that Asiatic goods,
including the teas of China, are on average, cheaper within the United States
than in Great Britain.

Fourth. The manufactures of Asia are not only cheaper here than in Europe, but
in general they are cheaper than goods of equal quality of European manufacture
-- So long as from the cheapness of subsistence and the immense population of
India (the inhabitants of the British territories only being estimated at forty
millions) the labor of a manufacturer can be procured from two to three pence
sterling per day, the similar manufactures of Europe, aided with all their
ingenious machinery, is likely, on a fair competition, in almost every
instance, to be excluded by those of India. So apprehensive have the British
government been of endangering their home manufactures by the permission of
Asiatic goods to be consumed in Great Britain, that they have imposed eighteen
per cent, duties on the gross sales of all India muslins, which is equal to
twenty-two percent, on their prime cost: The duties on courser India goods are
still higher, and a long catalogue of Asiatic articles, including all stained
and printed goods, is prohibited from being consumed in Great Britain.

The British manufacturers were not satisfied even with this prohibitory system
-- And on the late renewal of the company's charter, they urged the total
exclusion from British consumption of all India goods, and moreover proposed
that the company should be held to import annually from India a large amount of
raw materials, and particularly cotton, for the supply of the British
manufacturers.

Those facts are noticed to show the advantages to be derived from a free
access to the India market, from whence we may obtain those goods which would
be extensively consumed even in the first manufacturing nations of Europe, did
not the security of their manufactories require their exclusion. Great Britain
has made it a s^rious point, in which she has in more than one ins^^^nce sure
(...) powers (the emperor was one) to reno^^ce (...) with India, from that own
te^^^ (...) this (...) to us. And yet it is not ^^ly d^nied merit, but
eliminated, in the very particular.


CAMILLUS.

No. XXVII.
THE third article contains the terms and conditions of the trade and
intercourse that it authorizes between us and the British colonies on the
American continent. The twelsth article was intended to adjust the trade
between us and the British islands in the West Indies. The thirteenth article
secures to us a direct trade with the British territories in the East Indies;
and it is the office of the fourteenth and the fifteenth articles, to ascertain
and establish the terms of the intercourse and trade between the territories of
the United States and the British dominions in Europe.

The fourteenth article establishes a perfect and reciprocal liberty of
commerce and navigation between the territories of the United States and of the
British domini^ns in Europe; stipulates that the people and inhabitants of the
two countries respectively, namely, of the Unit^^ States, and of the British
dominions in Europe, shall (...) liberty to come with their ships and car^oes
to the p^^^ (...), and places of each other, within the territories and
dominions aforesaid, to resort and reside there, without limitation of time, to
hire houses and stores for the purpose of commerce; and that the merchants and
traders on each side shall enjoy, for their commerce, the fullest protection
and security, subject, notwithstanding, in respect to the stipulations of this
article, to the laws of the two nations respectively.

As this article, in the customary language, employed in the introductory
articles of commercial treaties, speaks of a perfect liberty of commerce and
navigation, without excepting any commodity, or specifying any impost or duty,
it was possible that a latitude or freedom of trade, inconsistent with the
revenue laws, and policy of the two nations, might have been claimed under it;
hence the propriety of the provision with which the article concludes, and
which reserves to the parties respectively, the power of avoiding this
inconvenience, by continuing and enacting such laws as may be proper for the
purpose.

But as under this power again, partial duties, and even partial exclusions,
might have been established, whereby ships and merchandises, as well as the
articles of the growth, produce, or manufacture of one of the parties, might
have been made liable to higher duties and imposts in the territories of the
other, than the ships and similar merchandises, and articles of the growth,
produce, or manufacture of other nations; or whereby one of the parties might
prohibit the importation or exportation, by the other, of any article to and
from his territories, the importation or exportation whereof was at the same
time free to some other nation: In order to prevent such inequalities, and to
secure effectually to the parties, a right to carry on their trade with each
other on terms equally advantageous and extensive, with those established by
either, with any other nation: The fifteenth article stipulates --

1. That no other or higher duty shall be exacted or paid, on the ships and
merchandises, nor on the articles of the growth, produce, or manufacture of one
of the parties, on their entry or importation into the territories of the
other, than shall be payable on the like ships, and merchandises, and on
similar articles of the growth, produce, or manufacture of any other nation.

2. That no article, the importation or exportation of which by either party,
to or from the territories of the other, is prohibited, shall be imported or
exported, to or from the same by any other foreign nation; and that every
article allowed to be imported or exported to or from the territories of either
party, by any foreign nation, may be imported or exported to or from the same,
by the parties respectively.

By these stipulations it is agreed, that the people and inhabitants of the
United States and of the British dominions in Europe, shall have the right to
carry on trade between the said territories in all articles and commodities in
which any other foreign nation may trade with either of the parties; that the
impost or duties on any article in the course of such trade, shall be no other
or higher than the lowest imposts or duties paid by any other foreign nation on
the like article; that both parties shall remain free, totally to prohibit the
importation or exportation, to or from their respective territories, of any
species of goods or merchandise, or to increase the existing duties, or to
impose new ones on the importation of any species of goods or merchandises,
into their respective territories; such prohibitions and duties operating
equally against all foreign nations. So far as respects the interchange of
commodities between the parties, these stipulations breathe the spirit of
reciprocity: the residue of the fifteenth article principally relates to the
navigation which the parties shall employ in this trade.

The first clause of the 15th article, in the spirit of those treaties which
mutually confer the right of the most favored nations, stipulates that no other
or higher duties shall be paid by the ships of the one party in the ports of
the other, than such as are paid by the like vessels of all other nations.

By our laws, a difference exists between the tonnage d^ty paid by an American
vessel, and that paid by a foreign vessel in our ports -- the American vessel
pays only six cents per ton on her entry -- the foreign vessel, on her entry,
pays fifty cents per ton, and about twenty per cent. more duties on all teas
imported from Europe, and ten per cent. more duties on the importation of other
goods, than are payable on the importation of the same goods, in an American
vessel.

By the British laws, the differences between the duties paid by British and
foreign vessels in the British ports in Europe, is less than that which exists
in our ports: -- the consequence is that a British vessel, of a given burden,
pays considerably mo^tonnage duties in the trade between our territories and
the British ports in Europe, than is paid by an American vessel of the same
burden, engaged in the same trade.

The trade being laid open to both parties, the principle o^ equalization of
duties was very naturally deemed an equitable basis of treaty. This could be
effected by lowering the American alien duties to the British standard, or by
raising those of Great Britain to the American standard. The former might have
been inconvenient to our revenue, especially since, if it was not general, it
would have formed, in respect to foreign nations, an unpleasant discrimination
in our laws.

The American tonnage duty, therefore, was left to operate; and by the 15th
article is is agreed, that the British government shall reserve a right to
raise the tonnage duty on our vessels entering their ports in Europe, so as to
make it equal to the tonnage duty payable by their vessels entering our ports:
And in order to balance the difference of duties on goods imported into our
ports by American or by British vessels, the effect whereof is the same as that
which proceeds from an alien tonnage duty, the article further agrees, that the
British government shall reserve a right to impose such duty as may be adequate
to effect this end. The preceding clause of this article stipulates, that the
vessels and cargoes of each shall pay no higher, or other duties, than those
imposed on the like vessels and cargoes of all other nations; it was,
therefore, necessary to reserve a right to increase against us, their alien
tonnage duty, and to impose the countervailing duty in question; as, without
such reservation, the same could not have been done, unless by laws equally
operating against all other nations -- which would have been unjust in
reference to such of them as might not, like us, have discriminated in their
duties between their own and foreign vessels.

Two methods have been suggested, by which this countervailing power might be
executed.

One by imposing a pro rota duty on the importation of goods into the British
ports in Europe by American vessels, equal to the difference between the duties
payable in our ports on the importation of goods by American or British vessels.

The other, by imposing the identical duty on the exportation of goods from the
British ports in Europe, by American vessels, which forms the difference
between the duties payable on the importation of the same goods into our ports
by American or British vessels.

As the articles imported by our vessels into the British ports in Europe, are
dissimilar from those imported from the same into our ports, one rule of
difference would not effect the equalization sought for; and as our difference
of duties is not the same on all articles, being higher on some than on others
-- and as, moreover, the quantities and amount of different articles differ
widely, and are liable to continual proportional variations, no uniform average
rule of countervailing these differences can be devised; the correct execution,
therefore, of this power, in the method first suggested, is impracticable, and,
it is presumed, must be discarded.

The power, then, it would seem, can only be equitably exercised by imposing on
the articles which we shall export in American vessels from the British ports
in Europe, a duty identically the same as that which constitutes, in any case,
the difference of duty payable in our ports, on the same articles imported from
the British ports in Europe, by a British or American vessel. Thus they may
impose on tea and other Asiatic goods, as well as on the European goods, which
we shall export from the British ports in Europe, the identical duty or the
same sum which constitutes the difference of duties payable in our ports on the
importation from thence of the same articles by an American or a British vessel.

The right to countervail our alien tonnage duty by imposing an alien tonnage
duty on our vessels entering the British ports in Europe, equal to that which
shall be payable on their vessels entering our ports, will continue so long as
the commercial treaty shall endure, and will apply to any future increase of
the tonnage duty on foreign vessels that we may establish; it is however
stipulated in the conclusion of the fifteenth article, that we shall abstain
from increasing the tonnage duty on British vessels, and also from increasing
the difference that now exists between the duties payable on the importation of
any articles into our ports in British or in American vessels, until the
expiration of two years after the termination of the war between France and
Great Britain. But we are free to increase the one or the other, after the
expiration of that period; and though the British government will have a right
to countervail, by additional tonnage duties, on our vessels, any increase of
that duty on their vessels; yet they will have no right to countervail any
increase of the difference between the duties payable on the importation of any
articles into our ports, in British or in American vessels, unless by a duty
common to all foreign nations; the right reserved on this subject, being
confined to the difference that now exists, will not reach such future
increase. How r^diculous, then, the argument, if the basis of it were otherwise
true, that the treaty, by tying up the government from future discrimination,
has prostrated our navigation be^^re Great Britain? can a restraint which is
only to operate the short term of two years after the termination of the
present war, have the mighty effect of ^acr^^^ing our navigation?


From this analysis of the 14th and 15th articles, we are the better enabled to
perceive the truth of the following propositions.

1. As, for the purpose of encouraging or protecting the agriculture and
manufactures of Great Britain, several of our productions, in common with
similar productions of the other nations, are prohibited from being imported
into the British ports in Europe; we are free, whenever our interest shall
require it, also to exclude any of the productions of the British dominions
from being imported into our ports, extending such exclusions, as they do, to
the like manufactures and productions of foreign nations.

Should that part of the twelfth article, which has not been ratified, in its
modification retain the stipulation relative to the importation of coffee,
sugar, and the other productions of the West Indies, it would constitute an
exception to this proposition. But as the West India productions are dissimilar
to those of our own country, they would not fall within the reason of these
prohibitions, and, therefore, the exception would be of no consequence.

2. As, for the like reasons, some of our productions are subject, in common
with the like productions of other nations, to high, or prohibitory duties in
the British ports in Europe, we are free, likewise, to impose similar duties on
any of the productions or manufactures of the British dominions, extending such
duties, as they do, to the like productions and manufactures of other foreign
nations.

3. As the navigation act of Great Britain, in order to extend their own
shipping, has heretofore confined the importation of foreign productions into
the British ports, to British ships, and to the ships of the country producing
the same; the 15th article appears to contain an important innovation on this
celebrated act; inasmuch as, by the most obvious construction of the terms, it
gives us a right to import from our own territories into the British ports in
Europe every article and description of goods and merchandises, which any
nation in their own ships is allowed to import -- In consequence whereof, while
all other foreign nations are prohibited and restrained from importing in their
own vessels into Great Britain any goods or merchandises, except those of their
own particular growth, produce, or manufacture, we, by the treaty, have a right
to carry from our ports to the British ports in Europe, not only goods and
merchandises of our own growth, produce, or manufacture, but also all such
goods and merchandises, the growth, produce; or manufacture of any foreign
nation, as a nation producing or manufacturing the same, would import in their
vessels into Great Britain.

4. Should it ever be politic to exclude all foreign vessels from importing, or
exporting, any species of goods, wares, or merchandises, by confining their
importation or exportation to our own vessels; we are perfectly free to do so;
with the exception, relative to the West India productions, referred (...)
under the first proposition; thus, for example, we may prohibit the importation
of all Asiatic goods, except in American bottoms.

That these articles of the treaty leave our navigation and commerce as free,
and secure to us as extensive advantages as have before been procured by our
commercial treaties with foreign nations, will be seen by the following
comparison:

1. By the articles before us, the parties restrain themselves from imposing
any other or higher duties on the vessels and cargoes of each other, than they
impose on the vessels and cargoes of all other nations; and also from imposing
a prohibition of the importation or exportation of any article to or from the
territories of each other, which shall not extend to all other nations. By the
third and fourth articles of our treaty with France, and by the 2d and 3d
articles of our treaty with Pr^ssia, it is stipulated, that the subjects and
citizens of the respective parties, shall pay, in the ports, havens, and places
of each other, no other or greater duties or imposts, of whatsoever nature they
may be, than those which the nations most favored shall be obliged to pay: and
moreover, that they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges and
exemptions is trade, navigation, and commerce, which the said nations do, or
shall enjoy: and by the 2d article of the former, and the 26th article of the
latter treaty, the parties agree mutually, not to grant any particular favor,
in respect to navigation (...) commerce, which shall not immediately become
common to the other party, who shall enjoy the same favor, if freely granted,
or on allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

The stipulations in the three treaties are, on these points, equivalent.

The 2d and 3d articles of our treaty with Holland, and the 3d and 4th of our
treaty with Sweden, likewise contain mutual stipulations, that the subjects and
citizens of the several parties shall pay in the ports, havens, and places of
their respective countries, no other or higher duties or imposts than those
which the nations most favored shall pay; and that they shall enjoy all the
rights, liberties, privileges, and exemptions in trade and navigation, which
the said nations shall enjoy.

2. The articles before us, after stipulating that there shall be between our
territories and the British dominions in Europe, a reciprocal and perfect
liberty of commerce, declare, that the same shall be subject always to the laws
of the respective countries. The introductory articles of our treaties with
France, Holland, and Sweden, after asserting the intentions of the parties to
take equality and reciprocity as their basis, likewise leave each party at
liberty to form such regulations respecting commerce and navigation as it shall
find convenient to itself -- and the 2d and 3d articles of our treaty with
Prussia, after stipulating the rights of the parties, respecting the duties and
imposts, and the freedom of their navigation and trade, likewise require their
submission to the laws and usages established in the two countries.

3. The articles before us, in their provisions relative to navigation,
stipulate, as has been already observed, in common with our other treaties,
that the ships of the parties shall not be subject to higher or other duties,
than those paid by all other nations. They go farther, and agree to vary this
rule, so far as shall be necessary to equalize the tonnage duty imposed by the
parties on the ships of each other. Our treaty with France is the only one in
which we discover a similar stipulation. -- France had a high alien tonnage
duty on all foreign vessels transporting the merchandise of France from one
port to another port in her dominions. We had a less alien tonnage duty on
foreign ships employed in a similar trade: though not equally extensive; the
case is parallel to that which exists between us and Great Britain. We have a
high alien tonnage duty on all foreign vessels entering our ports; Great
Britain has a less alien tonnage duty on foreign vessels entering her ports. In
our treaty with France we reserve a right to countervail the alien tonnage duty
imposed by France; and in like manner, in our treaty with Great Britain, she
reserves a right to countervail the alien tonnage duty imposed by us. The
object, in both instances, has been to place the navigation of the parties on
the footing of exact equality.

The preceding exposition of these articles, illustrated by the comparison of
their provisions, with the analagous articles of our other treaties, would be
sufficient to vindicate them against the objections to which they have been
exposed. -- It is, however, thought advisable to take notice of such of these
objections as are likely to have any influence on the public opinion -- This
will be done in a subsequent number.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXVIII.
AN extraordinary construction of the last clause of the fourteenth article has
been assumed by the writer of Cato; his mistake in this instance has been the
foundation of many of the errors with which that performance abounds. The
article stipulates that there shall be a perfect and reciprocal liberty of
navigation and commerce between our territories and those of Great Britain in
Europe, subject always to the laws and statutes of the two countries,
respectively. This navigation and commerce, says Cato, must be subject to, and
de^i^ed and regulated by the laws and statutes of the two countries, which
existed at the time of making the treaty, all future laws, that either party
might be disposed to make, relative to the same, being excluded.

The reason assigned, in support of this interpretation, is, that the article
would be nugatory, did not the laws and statutes alluded to, mean only those in
existence at the making of the treaty; since future laws might impair or
destroy wh^^ the article confers.

Nothing in the expressions themselves requires this ^^^^pretation.

The customary and established meaning of them in o^^^ treaties would lead to a
rejection of it. -- The object of (...) clause is not the limitation of the
legislative power of the parties, but the subjection of their mutual navigation
and commerce to their respective laws. -- This end is most fully atta^^ed by
understanding the parties to mean their future as well (...) their existing
laws. Besides, the interpretation must be (...) as will not destroy the use and
meaning of other parts of (...) treaty. If this construction is just, some of
the most imp^^^ant stipulations of the fifteenth article would really be^^^^^
useless. For instance, if the laws, existing at the time of making the treaty,
are alone to prevail, the articles of commerce, ^^^mitted or excluded by those
laws, must remain entitled to a^^mission or liable to exclusion. Why then say
in the fifteen article, "that no prohibition shall be imposed on the
exporta^^on or importation of any articles to or from the territories (...) the
parties respectively, which shall not extend to all other ^^^tions." If a
prohibition, applying to all foreign nations, (...) be imposed (as the clause
allows) this would be a new or ^^^sequent law, varying the law existing at the
time of making the treaty, and consequently defeating the construction in
question.

The reason adduced by Cato to support his construction is equally defective
with his interpretation itself. The fourteenth article is in general terms, and
similar, as has been shown, to the introductory articles of other treaties; so
far from the last clause thereof being capable of destroying the preceding
stipulations; it is the peculiar province of the next article to ascertain the
points which the parties mutually agree to except from their legislative power.
In all cases not thus excepted, the navigation and commerce of the parties is
subject to their existing or future laws.

It is not necessary to remark on the several objections which have proceeded
from the opinion that the treaty restrains us from imposing prohibitory duties
and exclusions: they are but subdivisions of the error that has been just
combatted.

Another objection which has been stated by several writers, and much labored
by Cato, is, that under the right reserved to the British government to
countervail an alien tonnage duty, by the imposition of an equivalent one on
our vessels entering their ports, they would gain and we should lose.

Several methods are adopted to prove this opinion. The observation that we
have a tonnage duty on our own vessels, and that Great Britain has none, is
repeated by way of objection against this as well as against the proposed
adjustment contained in the 12th article. The same reply already given might be
sufficient in this place.

But is it true that British ships entering their own ports in Europe are
wholly free from a tonnage duty? the contrary is the fact; since it is
understood, that they pay a tonnage duty for the support of light houses, and
some other institutions, connected with their navigation, which, in all their
ports, exceeds the tonnage duty of six cents per ton, that we levy on the entry
of our own vessels employed in foreign trade. But Great Britain (it is alleged)
will not only impose in virtue of this reserved right, fifty cents per ton on
our vessels entering her ports, but in every port except that of London, she
will furthermore exact one shilling and nine pence sterling, or thirty nine
cents per ton, for light money and Trinity-dues more than is paid by her own
vessels; this, added to the difference before stated, would have, it is said, a
very discouraging effect upon our navigation. Our tonnage duty is a tax not
divided and appropriated, like the light money, or Trinity-dues, in Great
Britain, to specific, and particular objects -- but when levied, goes into the
treasury with the duty of impost, and stands appropriated to the various
objects to which that duty is appropriated -- among those objects is the
support of light-houses -- it is not the object to which the tax is applied
that gives a denomination; whether it goes to support the civil list, or to pay
annuities, or to maintain light houses, or to support hospitals, it is equally
a tonnage duty. A tonnage duty then of a certain amount, is now paid by
American vessels entering the ports of Great Britain. This duty is not uniform,
being less in London than in the other ports, and, in some instances, less than
the tonnage duty paid by British ships entering our ports -- The object of this
clause (8th of the 15th article) is (...) equalize the alien tonnage duties of
the parties. Hence the reservation of a right to the British government, to
impose on our vessels entering their ports in Europe, a tonnage duty equal to
that which shall be payable by British vessels in our ports. It would be
against the manifest views of the parties as well as against the explicit terms
of the article, to impose a tonnage duty (whether for light money, Trinity
dues, or any other purpose) which should exceed that which shall be payable by
British vessels in our ports.

The right reserved is expressly to impose on our vessels as equal, not a
greater tonnage duty than we shall impose on their vessels. This objection,
therefore, must be abandoned.

But again, it is urged, that our navigation, should it (...) Scylla, must
perish on Charybdis: for we are gravely told by Cato, that under the right
reserved to the British government to impose such duty as may be sufficient to
countervail, (...) which is equivalent, to balance the difference of duty
payable on the importation into our ports of Asiatic or European goals by
American or by British vessels, our ships will be thrown (...) of the trade
with the British European dominions; because under this right, the British
government will impose a duty on (...) productions carried to their ports in
our own ships, equal (...) the whole duty payable on the goods and merchandises
impor^ed into our ports by British ships; and as the goods (...) merchandises
which we receive from them exceed in value th^^^ that they receive from us by
one-third, and as the duty to (...) countervailed is at least ten per cent. ad
valorem on the go^^^ received from them, the consequence will be, that the
coun^^^ vailing duty must amount to fifteen per cent. on the value (...) all
our productions carried in our own ships to the British po^^ in Europe, while
the same will be free in British ships. A m^^^ extravagant construction, If I
mistake not, the assertion (...) ^s-to the whole duty, has been ret^^ed; but
the residue of his error (...) his point remains unrecalled.
or an argument more inaccurately formed can scarcely be imagined.

The countervailing right is not applicable to the whole duty payable on goods
and merchandises imported into our ports in British ships, but expressly
confined to the difference of duty now payable on the same when imported by
American or by British vessels -- This difference is one-tenth part of the duty
upon all European goods, that is to say, these goods pay one-tenth part more
duty when imported in British vessels than is paid on the same when imported in
an American vessel; in all cases, therefore, where our impost is ten per cent.
ad valorem, the difference of duty to be countervailed amounts to only one per
cent. on the value of the goods, instead of ten percent. as is alleged by Cato;
in the instance of teas imported from Europe the difference is greater: again
it is not an aggregate sum, that is to be apportioned under this countervailing
right, for this sum would be liable to constant variation according to the
quantity and species of goods imported into our ports from time to time by
British vessels; and besides, the British government possess no means whereby
the amount thereof could be ascertained.

Cato feels and admits the force of these remarks as decisive against an
average duty, without perceiving that they possess equal strength against his
project of countervailing the whole duty paid on the importation of goods and
merchandises into our ports by British vessels; for the same variation in the
amount, and the same want of the means to ascertain it, will operate in both
cases. The reasons which he himself employs to prove that an average duty
cannot be ascertained, equally show the impracticability of the method which he
considers as the one that will be employed in the execution of the
countervailing right reserved to the British government. It has before been
stated, that the natural as well as the equitable mode of executing this power
will be to impose a duty on the goods imported by us from their European ports
exactly the same as makes the difference of duty on the importation thereof
into our ports by American or by British vessels.

Admitting that the execution of the countervailing right reserved to Great
Britain will do no more than place the navigation of the parties on an equal
footing in their mutual intercourse, still we are told that for this, likewise,
the treaty is blameable, because even equality will be such an advantage to our
rival, that we shall be unable to maintain the competition.

This objection brings with it a quality rarely to be discovered in the
opinions of the cavillers against the treaty. Their usual error is a false and
magnified estimate of the comparative resources, strength and importance of our
country; in this instance, shifting their ground, they fall into the opposite
extreme, and contend for our inferiority in a branch of business in the
p^osecution of which, we are unquestionably able to meet a fair competition
with any nation.

With what propriety could we have proposed or expected an adjustment of our
intercourse by which our vessels should have been placed on a better footing
than those of the other party? As the trade was mutually beneficial, why could
we, more than Great Britain, ask for an arrangement that should subject our
rival to comparatively heavier burdens? Does any considerate man believe, that
it would have been proper for us to ask, (...) that there is the least
probability that Great Britain would have acceded to, an arrangement on the
subject of our mutual navigation, that should have secured to us advantages
denied to them? To place the navigation of the parties on an equal fo^^ing, was
all that could be rationally expected by either -- and (...) far from such a
settlement being injurious to us, the contrary has long been the opinion both
here and in Great Britain. -- If it is true, that we are unable to maintain a
competition with the British navigation, how are we to account for the jealousy
that is understood to have shown itself on their part on (...) subject?

But the fact is otherwise -- British ships cannot be built (...) equipped as
cheap as American ships, nor are they victualling and manned In the comparison
in this particular, we must combine the number of ha^^ with the terms of
compensation according to which the vessels of the two ^^^tries are navigated.
on as good terms. Our country abounds (...) excellent materials for
ship-building. Great Britain is in a g^^^^ measure dependent upon other
countries for a supply of th^^^ The materials for the construction of ships are
much che^^^ in America than in Great Britain; and intelligent character in
Great Britain as well as in America have affirmed, that (...) American merchant
ship of any given burden, can be built a^^^ equipped for sea one-third cheaper
than a British, Dutch, (...) French ship of equal goodness. Mr. Coxe informs
us, that (...) cost of an American ship, built of our live oak and cedar, i^
from 36 to 38 dollars per ton, completely finished; while (...) oak ship in the
cheapest part of England, France, or Holland fitted in the same manner, will
cost from 55 to 60 dollars per ton. The capital employed on the American
merchantme^ i^ therefore one-third less on any given amount of tonnage th^^^
that employed in the same amount of British tonnage; (...) the money requisite
to build and equip for sea two British merchant ships, will be sufficient to
build and equip for sea three American merchant ships of the same burden and of
equal goodness. It is not only the difference in the first cost, but to this
should be added the difference of interest and insurance, the annual amount
whereof is ascertained by the value of the ships.

If we add to this, the comparative advantages that we possess in victualling
and manning our vessels, independent of the acknowledged and distinguished
skill and enterprise of our seamen, it may be safely affirmed, that no American
who knows the character of his countrymen, and who is not ignorant of our
peculiar resources for ship-building, will doubt our superiority in an equal
and fair competition with any other nation.

It is further alleged, that the treaty wants reciprocity, inasmuch as the
whole territory of the United States is laid open to the British navigation and
commerce, while, in return, the British territories, in Europe only, are opened
to us. The short answer to this allegation is, that it is not true. -- All the
British territories in Europe are laid open to us; all their territories in
Asia are also opened to us; the treaty likewise opened all their territories in
the West Indies. The article relative to this branch of trade, as has already
been observed, is excepted from the ratification of the treaty, and made the
subject of future negotiation. The British territories on our continent, that
of the Hudson's Bay company excepted, are also opened to us in like manner as
ours are opened to them. The intercourse is confined on both sides to the
interior communications, the inhabitants of those colonies being equally
destitute of a right to resort, by sea, with their ships to our ports and
harbors as we are of the right to resort, by sea, with our ships to their
ports and harbors.

The territory of the Hudson's Bay company, the island of Newfoundland and the
establishments on the coast of Africa, are the only British dominions to which
the treaty, in its original form does not give a right of intercourse and trade.

The settlement in the Bay of Honduras is on Spanish lands, and the right of
precedence is conceded for specified objects, beyond which the Spanish
government are vigilant to restrain the settlers.

Spain may possibly be induced to allow us a right in common with Great
Britain, to cut mahogany and die woods in this region; but Great Britain
cannot, consistently with her convention with Spain, share with us the
privilege that she enjoys,

Newfoundland is a mere establishment for the British fisheries. The African
trade has been, and might hereafter be pursued, if our humanity and the force
of public opinion did not impede it, without procuring a right to resort to the
British ports in that quarter; and in respect to the unsettled territory of the
Hudson's Bay company, about which so much has been noti^^^ and written, it is
of no sort of importance, except in a small Indian trade that employs two or
three annual ships which arrive there in August, and escape in September;
besides, that this trade belongs to a company who possess a right to the
exclusive enjoyment of it even against their fellow citizens. It is finally
alleged that the treaty will bind up and restrain our gogernment from making
more specific and beneficial treaties of commerce with other nations.

Those who urge this objection, have generally placed great reliance on another
objection, which asserts that the treaty with Great Britain violates the
constitution, because it amounts to a regulation of commerce, the power to
regulate which is vested in congress and not in the executive. -- Yet these
very characters, in the next breath, maintain that the treaty is bad, because
it precludes our executive government, (for no other power can make treaties)
from making more minute and beneficial commercial treaties with other nations.
-- If these observations can be reconciled, it must be thus -- The constitution
(...) not authorize the executive, with the aid of the senate, (...) make a
commercial treaty with Great Britain, having ve^^^^ in congress the power to
regulate the trade between us and (...) nation; but it allows the executive to
make commercial trea^^^^ with any other nation, which may establish the most
mat^^^^ and minute commercial and revenue laws, without affecti^^, the power
vested in congress to regulate trade. -- That we (...) have characters among us
sufficiently intemperate to wish (...) such was the constitution, I am not
prepared to deny; -- b^^ that such a construction can be made out, yet remains
to be proved.

The objection, as usual, is made in a loose and inaccu^^^^ manner; literally
interpreted, we should infer that the treaty contained an article, hereby we
had agreed with Great Britain, that we would not form any future treaties of
commerc^^^ with any nation: But no such stipulation exists.

Is it meant by the objection to be alleged, that we can (...) no commercial
treaty, whereby for an advantage yielded (...) our part, we may acquire a
privilege in return, unless we (...) the same advantage to Great Britain
gratuitously and without receiving from her the equivalent?

Admitting the truth of this objection, it might be replied: So on the other
hand, Great Britain can form no commercial treaty, whereby, for an advantage
yielded on her part, she may acquire some privilege in return, unless she
yields the same advantage to us gratuitously and without receiving from (...)
equivalent; and as Great Britain, whose commercial rela^^^^s are equally
extensive with ours, and whose capital far exceeds ours, is equally restrained
on this point, our chance of gain would be fully equal to our chance of loss.

But the allegation is not generally true, and the objection, when examined,
will be found to be of little weight, even with those who may imagine that
nations do sometimes make good bargains by the purchase of privileges and
exemptions in their foreign trade. The case that has been chosen to enforce the
objection, shall be employed to invalidate it.

Admit that the treaty with Great Britain is in operation -- that the oil and
provision merchants of the United States, and the wine and brandy merchants of
France are desirous of a treaty between the two countries, whereby those
commodities shall be received from each other on low duties or freely -- admit
farther, that the governments of the two nations are disposed to make such a
treaty (this is the case again put by the opposers of the treaty as
impracticable) what will restrain the conclusion of this treaty? The
disadvantage that will arise from our treaty with Great Britain? No, for
Britain produces neither wines, nor brandy made from wines, with which she
could supply us; she therefore could gain nothing, nor should we lose any thing
by the conclusion of such a treaty. All that will be requisite, therefore, in
the formation of such treaties, will be to choose for the purpose such articles
of the growth, manufacture, or produce of any country with whom we desire to
treat as are not common to it and the British dominions, and any skilful
merchant will quickly make the selection -- Hence it appears that the objection
is not well founded in point of fact.

But though it may be practicable, will it be politic in us to conclude no
commercial treaties of this character with any nation? If we resort to
precedents as guides, we shall discover few, the history of which would
encourage us. Indeed they are a description of conventions not often formed
between nations.

They are of difficult adjustment, and necessarily increase the provisions of
the commercial code, sufficiently intricate, when only one rule prevails in
respect to all nations. Besides, however perfect may be the right of nations in
this respect, yet when the productions of one nation are received at lower
duties, than the like productions of another, the discrimination will scarcely
fail to awaken desires and to produce dissatisfaction from their disappointment.

Again, unless we are prepared, at the expense of the whole to procure
advantages or privileges for a part of the community, we shall doubt the policy
of such stipulations. Between two manufacturing nations, in each of which the
manufactures have attained to great perfection -- a tariff of duties may be
established by treaties, in the payment of which the manufactures of the two
countries might be freely exchanged and mutually confirmed; such was the
commercial treaty between France and Great Britain in the year 1786. But the
subject was so intricate and involved such a variety of apparently independent
circumstances, such as the price of provisions, the amount and the manner of
levying of the taxes, and the price of the (...) materials employed in their
respective manufactures, that ^^ther part felt entire confidence in the equity
and reciprocity of the treaty: and with all the skill (...) n^^^ciation, that
France in a superior degree has been supposed to have possessed, the opinion of
that nation has finally been, that the treaty was b^^densome and
disadvantageous to them.

We have another specimen of this species of treaty in a sh^^^ convention
between England and Portugal, concluded in 1703 -- the object was to procure a
favorable market for dissimilar commodities, and such as were not the common
production of the two countries. But this treaty, which has been so much
appla^ded, is essentially defective in point of reciprocity. England ag^^^^ to
admit the wine of Portugal on payment of two-thirds of the duty that shall be
payable on French wines -- and in return, Portugal agrees not to prohibit the
English woollens. She does (...) agree to receive them exclusively of the
woollens of other countries, nor to admit them on payment of lower duties. The
advantage therefore is manifestly on the side of Portugal. By the treaty of
commerce between France and Great Britain, concluded in 1786, it was agreed,
that the wines of France imported into Great Britain should pay no higher
duties than (...) which the wines of Portugal then paid: The consequence m^st
have been a reduction, without compensation or equivalent from Portugal, of the
existing duties on the wines of that country brought into Great Britain, equal
to one-third of the amount of such duties. This is an instance of inconvenience
and loss, resulting from the species of treaties, which it is alleged as an
objection to the treaty concluded between us and Great Britain, that we are
prevented by it from making with other nations.

A small compact nation, likewise, who excel in some one species of
manufacture, that is established throughout their territory, and in the
conducting and success whereof there is a common interest, may find it useful
to procure the exclusive supply of some foreign market: provided, in this as in
all other bargains, the compensation shall not be too high. But in a nation
like ours, composed of different states, varying in climate, productions,
manufactures, and commercial pursuits, it will be more difficult to enter into
treaties of this kind. Should Great Britain, for example, be inclined to admit
our fish oils freely, or on payment of low duties on condition that we would
receive their woollens or hardware freely or on payment of low duties -- would
the middle and southern states be satisfied with such a treaty? -- would they
agree to a tax on their estates sufficient to supply the deficiency in the
revenue arising from the relinquishment of the impost on British woollens or
hardware? Would it not be said, that such a tax was a bounty out of the common
treasury, on a particular branch of business pursued alone by a portion of the
citizens of a single state in the union? Instances might be multiplied in the
illustration of this subject; but they will readily occur to every man who will
pursue a little detail in his reflections. We have once made an experiment of
this kind -- its fate should serve as a caution to us in future. By the
eleventh and twelfth articles of our treaty with France, it was agreed, that
France should never impose any duty on the melasses that we should export from
the French West Indies; and in compensation of this exemption, that we should
never impose any duty on the exportation of any kind of merchandise by
Frenchmen, from our territories, for the use of the French West Indies. These
articles produced much dissatisfaction in congress: It was said to be a benefit
that would enure to the use and advantage of only a part, but which must be
compensated by the whole. Those arguments which will show themselves in future,
should similar conventions be formed, were displayed on this occasion. The
treaty was ratified, congress applied to the king of France to consent to annul
these articles -- this request was granted -- and the articles were, by the
several acts of the parties, annulled.

Not only the few instances of the existence of these treaties among the
nations, added to the peculiar difficulties which we must meet in their
formation, should lead us to doubt their utility, but also the opinion of our
own country, which, if explicit on any point, has been repeatedly so in the
condemnation of this species of national compact.

The introductory article of our commercial treaty with France, asserts, that
the parties willing to fix on an equitable and permanent manner, the rules
which ought to be followed relative to their correspondence and commerce "have
judged that the said end could not be better obtained, than by taking for the
basis of their agreement the most perfect equality and reciprocity, and by
carefully avoiding all those burden some preferences which are usually sources
of debate, embarrassment and discontent."

The same language is employed in our subsequent treati^^ with Holland and with
Sweden; the public voice is unequivocal on this subject.

On the whole, the more closely this question is examined, the more doubtful
will the policy appear of our entering into treaties of this description. We
shall have to encounter not only the intrinsic difficulties that always attend
a fair and prec^^^ adjustment of the equivalents, together with the national
^^^contents that proceed from errors on this point; but moreover a still
greater embarrassment from the circumstance that (...) great staple exports are
not the common productions of the whole union, but different articles are
peculiar to different pa^^^ thereof. If, notwithstanding, our government shall
discover (...) instance in which, consistent with the common interest and
so^^^^ policy, such a treaty might be desirable, we have scope sufficient to
form it without incurring loss or disadvantage by the operation of our treaty
with Great Britain.

CAMILLUS

No. XXIX.
THE sixteenth article is entirely conformable to the usage and custom of
nations. The exchange of consuls had already taken place between us and Great
Britain; and their functions and privileges being left to the definition of the
law of nations, we shall be exempt from those unpleasant controversies that too
often arise from special conventions, which enlarge the consular privileges,
power, and jurisdiction.

The agreement that either party may punish, dismiss, or send back a consul for
illegal or improper conduct, is calculated to prevent national
misunderstandings, and to secure a respectful deportment in the consular corpse.
I have not observed that this article has been disapproved of from any quarter.

The seventeenth article which respects the capture and detention of the
vessels of the parties on just suspicion of having on board enemy's property,
or contraband of war, has been the object of intemperate censure -- with how
much justice it shall be the business of this paper to examine.

The principal complaint, is not, that the article exposed our own property to
loss by capture, for this is not the case, but that it does not protect enemy's
property on board our vessels. The defense of the article will rest upon the
proofs which shall be exhibited, that it is in conformity with, and supported
by, the clear and acknowledged law of nations -- that law which pronounces that
enemy's goods on the high seas are liable to capture, and as a necessary mean
to this end, that neutral ships are there liable to examination or search.

The law of nature (as heretofore observed) applicable to individuals in their
independent or unsocial state, is what, when applied to collections of
individuals in society, constitutes the natural or necessary law of nations. An
individual in a state of nature, for reparation of injuries, or in defense of
his person and property, has a right to seize the property of his enemy, and to
destroy his person.

Nations always succeed to the rights that the individuals who composed them
enjoyed in a state of nature: and hence it is that by the law of nations, from
the earliest annals of society, the goods or property of one enemy has been
considered as liable to be seized and applied to the use of another. This right
must be so used as not to injure the rights of others: Subject to this
limitation, it is perfect, and an interruption of it by another is an injury.
As in a contest between two individuals in a state of nature, no third has a
right, without becoming a party in the controversy, to protect the property, or
defend the person of either of the parties: So in a war between two nations no
third nation can act out of its own jurisdiction, consistent with the duties of
neutrality; or, without becoming a party in the war, protect the property of,
or defend either of the parties. Though nations are, in respect to each other,
like individuals in a state of nature, the resemblance is not in every
particular perfect -- Individuals in a state of nature have not only the
inferior dominion or private ownership of property, but the entire and perfect
dominion over it. In society the latter right belongs exclusively to the
nation, while the former belongs to the several members that compose it.
Immovable things, such as lands, which are denominated the territory of a
nation, are the immediate and special objects of this perfect dominion or
paramount property. Moveable things are (...) proper obje^^ of inserior
dominion or private ownership, and are no otherwise the objects of the national
or paramount ^^^perty than as they happen to be within its territorial limits.
T^^ perfect dominion, or jurisdiction of a nation, in respect to ^^^perty,
extends over, and is bounded by, the lands thereof and the waters appurtenant
to the same.

As soon, therefore, as moveable things pass out of those limits, they cease to
be under the dominion or jurisdiction of the nation, the private property of
whose members they may (...).

This private property, in moveable things, may be enjoyed within the territory
of a nation, by those who are not members thereof. Hence in a war between two
nations, a mem^^^ of one of which owns movables within the territory of a
(...) or neutral nation, such movables or property are not liable^^ seizure by
reason of the war; because, being within and (...) the exclusive jurisdiction
of a third nation, it would (...) injury to the right of such nation to go
there and seize the (...) So long as such movables remain within a foreign
terr^^^ they are objects of its dominion and protection; but as (...) they are
carried out of the same, they cease to be any (...) under its jurisdiction or
protection.

In a war between two nations, all the members of (...) are enemies to the
other, and all the property of the (...) members, as well as the strictly
national property, is lia^^^ seizure. In general the character of the owner,
whether^^^ my or friend, decides whether property is liable to captu^^^ reason
of war; but the validity of the capture depends not (...) on the goods being
enemy's property, but likewise on the (...) that the place of capture is one in
which the right may be ^^ercifed without injury to the rights of a neutral
nation. (...) the property of an enemy is liable to capture only within (...)
respective territories or jurisdiction of the belligerent nation, (...) in a
place not within the territory or jurisdiction of any nati^^^. In either of
these places the right may be exercised with^^ injury to the rights of neutral
nations -- The limitation of (...) right, so far as respects enemy's property
found within (...) territory of one of the parties on the breaking out of war,
(...) before been discussed and placed, I flatter myself, on solid principles.

The main ocean not being within the territory, or subject to the exclusive
dominion or any nation, is a place, where enemy goods may lawfully be captured.
An impediment by any third nation to the exercise of the right of capture on
the ocean by either of the belligerent parties, would be an injury.

As the goods of an enemy, within the territory of a neutral state, are under
the protection thereof, the law of nations, for the reasons that have been
stated, will not permit us to take them: in like manner, we have no right to
take them if they are on board a ship, whilst the ship is in a neutral port,
whether the ship itself is a neutral one, or belongs to an enemy, because the
port is a part of the territory. -- When the goods of an enemy are on board the
ship of an enemy, and the ship is in the main ocean, there is no doubt of our
right to capture both the goods and the ship, because they are then in a place
which is not the territory of any nation. But when the goods of an enemy are on
board a neutral ship, and the ship is in the main ocean, though we have a right
to take the goods, we have no right to take the ship, or to detain her any
longer, than is necessary to obtain possession of the goods -- for the ocean
itself is no territory -- and neutral ships, as they are moveable goods, can
not be parts of the neutral territory; and consequently are no more under the
protection of the neutral state, than the same goods would be, if they were
passing through an unoccupied country in neutral carriages, or on neutral
horses.

A neutral ship (says Rutherford in his institutes, whose reasoning on this
question I adopt) may indeed be called a neutral place; but when we call it so,
the word place does not mean territory, it only means the thing in which the
goods are contained. Though the goods of the enemy had been on board a ship
belonging to the enemy, we might have said, in the same sense, that they were
in a neutral place, if they had been locked up there in a neutral chest. But no
one would imagine, that such a neutral place, as a chest, can be considered as
a part of the territory of the neutral state, or that it would protect the
goods. Notwithstanding, a neutral chest is as much a neutral place as a neutral
ship.

A ship, though a moveable thing, is under the jurisdiction of a nation whilst
it continues in one of its ports -- but as soon as it is out at sea, only the
private ownership, or inferior dominion, of the ship remains, and it ceases to
be under the dominion or jurisdiction of the nation. The case will be the same,
if, instead of supposing the ship to be the property of a merchant, we suppose
it to be the property of the nation.

For though we cannot well call the property which the nation has in such a
ship, by the name of private ownership: yet, when the ship comes into the main
ocean, the jurisdiction or paramount property ceases, and the right that
remains is (...) inferior kind of property, which has the nature of private
ownership. If the jurisdiction, which a neutral state has over the ships of its
members, or even over its own ships, cea^^^ when the ships are out at sea; the
goods of an enemy, th^^ are on board such ships, cannot be under the protection
of th^^ nation, in the same manner as if the ships had been in one of its
ports, or as if the goods had been on its land. The jurisdiction here spoken of
is relative to property, and altogether distinct from what is termed personal
jurisdiction, which respects the relation between the society and its members
-- This latter species of jurisdiction is (...) confined to the territorial
limits of a nation.
.

Notwithstanding a neutral nation, when its ship is in the main ocean, has no
jurisdiction over the ship itself, as if it was a part of its territory, yet
the nation, or some of its member, which is the same thing, will continue to
have the inferior ^or^ of property, or ownership in it. This species of
property will protect the ship from capture, though the enemy's goods o^ board
her may lawfully be taken.

But here a difficulty occurs -- This inferior kind of property, called private
ownership, to distinguish it from the jurisdiction, over things, is an
exclusive right; those who have such ownership in things, whether private or
public persons, have a right to exclude all others from making use of such
things; and (...) this means, the rights of others are often hindered from
^^^ing effect.

Wild beasts, birds, and fishes, are, till they are catched, (...) common to
all mankind; and I, in common with others, ha^^ a right to take them, and
thereby to make them my own -- (...) I cannot hunt, or shoot, or fish, without
perhaps something using the soil or water of another man; and as I have no
(...) to use these without his consent, he may justly hinder me f^^^^ doing any
of these acts, as far as his right of property exte^^^ Thus by private
ownership I am prevented from taking (...) things, as I should otherwise have a
right to take, if they d^^^ not happen to be in such places as he had an
exclusive right (...) In like manner, though I have a right to take the goods
of (...) enemy, when they are out at sea, yet may not the effect (...) this
right be prevented by the inferior property or ownership which a neutral
nation, or its members, have in the ship (...) which the goods are? If the law
of nations is nothing but (...) law of nature applied to the collective persons
of civil societ^^ instead of saying that the law of nations has decided
other^^^^^ we should disclose a natural reason why it should determi^^^^
otherwise. When I have merely a right to acquire property in a thing that is
common to all mankind, but cannot do it without the use of what is already the
property of some other man; this man neither does me an injury, nor encourages
or protects others who have injured me, by excluding me from the use of what
belongs to him. But when we have a right in war, upon account of the damage
which the enemy has done us, to take goods of the enemy, and these are in a
neutral ship: if the neutral state, though it has property in the ship, should
make use of its right of property to protect the goods against us, this
protection makes it an accessory to the injury, which is the foundation of the
claim upon the enemy to obtain reparation of damages, and consequently is
inconsistent wi^h the notion of neutrality.

But whilst this answer removes one difficulty, it brings another. If a neutral
nation makes itself accessory to the damages done by the enemy, by protecting
such enemy goods as she has a right to take for reparation of damages, when
these goods are out at sea in one of its ships: Why might the same nation,
without becoming in like manner an accessory, protect the same goods when the
ship is in one of its ports, or when the goods are on land within its
territory? A law of nations, which is natural as to the matter of it, and
positive only as to the objects of it, will furnish an answer to this question.

Every state has, by universal acknowledgment and consent, by the law of
nations, an exclusive jurisdiction over its own territory. As long, therefore,
as a state keeps within its own territory, and exercises its jurisdiction
there, the protection its question is not a violation of our rights -- but when
its ships are in the main ocean; as they are then in a place out of its
territory, where, by the law of nations, it has no jurisdiction, this law will
allow us to take notice of the protection, which it gives to the goods of an
enemy, and to consider it as an ^^cessary to the damages done by the enemy,
(...) gives them protection.

In respect to the right of examination or search, if the end it lawful, and
the examination or search a necessary mean to attain this end, the inference is
inevitable, that the examination or search i^ likewise lawful.

If the question, whether enemy goods are seizable on board a neutral ship,
were really doubtful; yet the right to search neutral ships must be admitted
for another reason. All agree that arms, ammunition and other contraband
articles, may not be carried to an enemy by a neutral power -- without
searching vessels at sea, such supply could not be prevented. The right to
search, therefore, results, likewise, from the right to so^^ contraband goods.
Again, the state of war authorizes the capture of enemy ships and goods -- But
on the main ocean, which is the great highway where the ships and goods of all
nations pass; how are the ships and goods of an enemy to be distinguished from
those of a friend? No other way than by examination and search. Hence then the
right of search is deducible from the general right to capture the ships and
goods of an enemy.

It would undoubtedly disembarrass the commerce of neutral nations were
passports and ships papers received, in all cases (...) conclusive evidence of
the quality and property of the cargo. And did treaties, in fact, effectually
secure an exemption (...) rude and detrimental inquisitions upon the ocean,
they would become objects of inestimable worth to the neutral po^^^. But,
notwithstanding the existence of stipulations in (...) other treaties which aim
at giving some force to similar credentials, can it be said, that our ships
have been visited with le^^ ceremony, by one party, than by the other? And may
not the experience of other nations, as well as that of our own (...) appealed
to, in proof of the opinion, that these stipulati^^ however exact and positive,
are too little regarded by (...) class of men, to restrain and govern whose
conduct they (...) instituted?

The right of search ought to be used with moderation, (...) with as little
inconvenience as possible to the rights of national not engaged in the war. And
the law of nations, on the (...) hand, requires the utmost good faith on the
part of the ^^tral powers. They are bound not to conceal the property of (...)
enemy, but on the contrary, to disclose it when examina^^^^ shall be made; in
confidence of this impartiality, the la^^^ nations obliges the powers at war to
give credit to the ^^^^cates, bills of lading and other instruments of
ownership ^^^duced by th^^ masters of neutral ships, unless any fraud ap^^^ in
them, or there be good reason for suspecting their validity. (...) right of
search is always at the peril of those who exercise (...) the right,
notwithstanding, must be acknowledged to be in^^bitable.

The reasoning employed to prove that all neutral ships, ^^^main ocean, are
liable to search, and enemy goods on (...) them to capture, is supported by the
ablest writers on public law, and their decision is believed to be unanimously
in (...) favor.

The Italian states were the first among modern nations, who cultivated the
interests of commerce, and before the passage (...) the Cape of Good Hope,
Venice and Genoa, distributed the manufactures of Asia throughout Europe. They,
therefore, first defined the rights of navigation. Their maritime regulations
are collected in a work called "Consolato del Mare;" I do not possess the
collection, but find the following quotation from it in Grotius. Grotius. Book
3, chap. 1. sect. 5. Note.


"If both the ship and freight belong to the enemy, then, without dispute, they
become lawful prize to the captor; but if the ship belong to those that be at
peace with us, and the cargo be the enemy's, they may be forced by the powers
at war, to put into any of their ports, and unlade; but yet the master must be
satisfied for the freight of them."

Grotius, that learned, and persecuted friend of liberty, whose life and great
talents were dedicated to the service of mankind, and who displayed so much
ability and learning in defending the freedom of the seas, and of commerce, is
clearly of opinion, that enemy goods are not protected by neutral bottoms; he
even goes farther, and allows that such property occasions great presumption,
that the vessel is, likewise, enemy property, Grotius. Book 3. chap. 4, sect. 8
-- Book 3, chap. 6, sect. 6.
Bynkershook is of the same opinion. Bynkershook, quest. jur. pub. lib. 1. cap.
13 and 14.
Puffendorf Puffendorf.
and Heinecius Heinecius de navibus cap. 2 sect. 114, 115, 116.
agree in this law, and Vattel who is the latest writer, is explicit in his
opinion; "without searching neutral ships at sea," says he, "the commerce of
contraband goods cannot be prevented -- There is then a right of searching.
Some powerful nations have, at different times, refused to submit to this. At
present a neutral ship refusing to be searched, would, from that proceeding
alone, be condemned as lawful prize." "Effects belonging to an anemy, found on
board a neutral ship, are seizable by the rights of war; but by the law of
nature, the master is to be paid his freight, and not to suffer by the seizure.
The effects of neutrals, found on board an enemy ship, are to be restored to
the owners, against whom there is no right of confiscation."

Other authors of respectability might be qu^^^; but those already named will
be acknowledged as the a^^^, and their authority the most decisive of any that
can be cited -- so strong, clear and uninterrupted, are the authorities of the
writers on public law in relation to these points, that the advocates (...)
opposite rule, may be challenged to produce a single authority of approved
respectability in support of their opinion. This subject will be resumed and
pursued under different aspects in another number.


CAMILLUS.

No. XXX.
ADMITTING that it was the law of nations that ^^^my's goods might be seized in
neutral ships, it is al^^^ by Cato and other writers, who have appeared on the
(...) side, that the treaties which have been formed between nations have
annulled this law, and established another in its ste^^, equally extensive and
binding on the whole civilized world.

In discussing this allegation, we should remember, that all nations are in a
state of equality, and independent of each other. No law, other than the
necessary or natural law of nations, is binding on any nation without its
consent, expre^^ or tacitly given. A law among nations cannot, like a civil a
municipal law, be annulled, or enacted by a majority, or (...) portion short of
the whole. By agreement between two or (...) nations, the operation of a law
already in existence, may (...) suspended so far as respects themselves; but
such agree^^^ works no change of such law, in relation to the rights or ^^ties
of other nations. The same is true of any rule of active, established by
convention between two nations; such rule ^^ obligatory on the parties that
form the contract, but is wh^^^ without effect and nugatory in respect to all
other nations. (...) less then all nations have concurred in the design to a^^^
this law, it must still exist; and treaties containing opposite ^^pulations,
can be considered in no other light, than as exceptions to the some, in which
certain nations have seen it th^^ interest to (...).

Though one nation may have agreed with another to suspend (...) operation of
this law, and to substitute the rule that free (...) make free goods, and enemy
ships enemy goods, there (...) have been some peculiar reason that induced the
parties to fo^^ this convention with each other, that would not apply in aspect
to any other nation.

A nation may advance its interest perhaps by forming such a treaty, with one
nation, and injure it by forming it with another -- Because a nation has, in
some instances, or for a limited time, formed stipulations of this sort, it
cannot from thence be inferred, that it has thereby, in any sense, expressed
its consent to a total repeal of a law, the operation of which it has agreed to
suspend only for a limited time, and in respect to a particular nation.
Commercial treaties, in which we discover these stipulations, though not
always, are commonly limited in their duration. This limitation is a strong
argument against the doctrine which these treaties are cited to establish. For
so many years, say the parties, we will suspend the operation of the law. When
the treaty expires by its proper limitation, or is dissolved by war, the rule
of the treaty ceases, and the law is again in force between the parties, and,
prescribes to them, in common with other nations, their rights and duties in
this respect.

The law of nations, that authorizes the capture of enemy goods in neutral
ships, requires the restoration of neutral goods captured in enemy ships: The
treaties, which stipulate that free ships make free goods, stipulate also that
enemy ships make enemy goods. I have discovered no instance of the former
stipulation, that has not been accompanied by the latter: though I have found
instances of the latter stipulation unaccompanied by the former. -- This is the
case in the treaty of peace, commerce and alliance between Spain and England,
concluded at Madrid in 1667. Those, therefore, who contend that the law of
nations has been repealed in one instance, must also insist that it has been
repealed in the other. -- If the number of stipulations is to be received as
evidence, the proof is stronger of a repeal in the latter than in the former
case. -- But will any one seriously maintain, that a nation would have a right
to confiscate the goods of a neutral power found on board an enemy ship,
without an express stipulation on the part of such neutral state consenting to
the same? -- Would England or Spain, for example, have a right to confiscate
American property captured in a French ship? Would America ^^^^var, have a
right to confiscate the neutral property of Spain, Portugal, Denmark, or
Russia, found on board an enemy ship? Has any nation ever confiscated property
under this circumstance? If not, the inference is clear, that these
stipulations are exclusively relative to the parties who form them, and that
the rights of other states remain under the protection of the law of nations.

But according to Cato, this reasoning may be just, yet inapplicable; for he
maintains that all nations have consented to the establishment of this
conventional law. "As far back as 150 years," says this writer, "and ever
since, I find that the commercial nations have stipulated in their treaties,
that free ships shall make free goods, that full credit shall be given to ships
papers, and that armed vessels shall not come within cannon shot of a neutral
ship, but send their boats on board with only two or three men at most, to
examine papers, but not to search, and that the treaties (by which is
understood all the treaties) for 150 years back, relative to this object, are
drawn in the words of the treaty between the United States and France."

Struck with the fullness of this assertion, I have carefully examined such
collections of treaties, as I have been able to procure, and going back to the
year 1645, I have given a patient search to all the public conventions between
Great Britain and the several powers of Europe since that period. I find, that
since that epoch, Great Britain has concluded commercial treaties with Spain,
Portugal, France, Holland, Danizie, Denmark, Sweden, and Russia.

In the treaties with Holland and with France, she has agreed to the
stipulation, that free ships should make free goods, and enemy ships, enemy
goods. In Chalmers's collection of treati^^, a similar stipulation is contained
in the 23d article of the trea^^ of alliance, concluded in 1564, between Oliver
Cromwell a^^ the king of Portugal; but in other collections, in which the
treaty is found, it does not contain a stipulation that free th^^ shall make
free goods; and it has been denied, from a rep^^able quarter on the part of
Great Britain, that she has ever acceded to this principle, except in the
instances of her treat^^ with Holland and France; neither of which exist any
longer, the former having expired long since, and the latter being dissolved by
the present war. Her treaties with Spain, Dantzie, Denmark, Sweden, and Russia,
do neither of them contain this stipulation. On the contrary, the 12th article
of the treaty with Sweden, and the 20th of the treaty with Denmark, (...) of
which is now in force, and has been so for more than a century, as like^^^ the
14th article of the treaty with Dantzie, declares, tha^ lest the enemy's goods
and merchandise should be conceabled under the disguise of the goods of
friends, it is stipulated, that all ships shall be furnished with passports and
certificates, by which it shall be manifest to whom the articles, composing the
cargoes, belong:" and the two first of these treaties, moreover, declare it "to
be injurious to protect the property of enemies," and establish special guards
to prevent the same.

In relation to the full credit to be given to ships' papers, and the manner of
boarding neutral vessels, -- in the treaties with Spain, France, and Holland,
it is stipulated, that full faith shall be given to the passports, and that the
boarding shall be by two or three men only. But the treaties with Portugal and
Russia are destitute of any stipulation on this subject, except that in the
latter it is agreed, Treaty of 1776, article 10.
that "the searching of merchant ships shall be as favorable as the reason of
the war can possibly admit, toward the most favored neutral nation, observing,
as near as may be, the principles of the law of nations that are generally
acknowledged." Treaty with Dantzic of 1706, article 20.
In the treaties with Dantzic, Denmark, and Sweden, passports are required for
the purpose of distinguishing, according to the solemnities of those treaties,
the enemy property on board the ships of the parties; and it is stipulated,
that credit shall be given to such passports, except in cases of just and
urgent cause of suspicion, when, say these treaties, the ship ought to be
searched; an exception, that fully recognizes the right to search, essentially
does away the security intended by the passports. But neither of these treaties
contain any regulation relative to the manner of boarding neutral vessels.

This research, though made with care, may have been imperfect; the result
thereof is, that there are only two, possibly three, of these eight nations,
with whom Great Britain has ever agreed to the stipulation, that free ships
shall make free goods; only three of them with whom she has stipulated, that
full credit shall be given to passports or ships' papers, or with whom the
manner of boarding is settled. Instead, therefore, of that uniformity and
universality in the stipulations in the commercial treaties, concluded within
the last 150 years, so confidently asserted by Cato, we see that in five
instances out of eight, of treaties concluded between Great Britain and the
principal powers of Europe, within that term, they have on each of these
points, given their sanction to a law directly in opposition to the assertion
of this adventurous writer.

Yet, says Cato, "the principles of the ar^^^d neutrality, by the general
consent of the great community of the civilized world, changed the law of
nations." -- It is a singular logic that proves the agreement of nations by
their disagreement, and their consent to a principle, by their drawing forth
their fleet to dispute it. The armed neutrality, with those who understand its
history, will not be relied on by way of proving a change in the law of
nations, brought about by universal consent.

It will not be denied that this league, which was aimed principally against
Great Britain, failed to accomplish its purpose, and that it expired with the
American war. Nothing has been heard of it during the present war; and it is
notorious, that Russia, and Holland before its conquest, were under agreements
incompatible with the views of that association. The northern powers of Europe
under the countenance of France, united to support the principles of the armed
neutrality; but the league did not include all the neutral powers; and of the
powers engaged in the war, at that period, Spain consented to observe the
principles contended for by the confederacy, on condition that Great Britain
would agree to them, who, so far from agreeing, openly resisted them.

On the same principle, by which it is contended that this association
introduced a new law of nations, might the a^^^^ leagues between certain
nations to prohibit all commerce wh^^ever with an enemy, be appealed to in
proof of an alteration of the law of nations in this respect. England and
Holland ^^tered into such a league against France, in the year 1689; (...)
other instances are mentioned by Grotius; yet no one has ever imagined that
thereby any change was wrought in the law (...) nations.

The objection that has arisen from the dissimilarity between this article and
those relative to the same subject in our (...) treaties, is equally defective
with those already considered. The objection proceeds from an opinion that the
law of nations (...) been changed, and that the stipulations in our other
treaties are evidence thereof. The observations that have been off^^^^ on this
subject, are equally applicable to this objection, and it is therefore
unnecessary to repeat them.

Not only reason, and the authority of jurists, but likewise the practice of
nations, where they have been unrestrained (...) particular convention^, may be
appealed to in support of the doctrine.

The practice of France, of Holland, even subsequent to particular
stipulations, regulating this subject between themselves, has, in respect to
other powers, been conformable to the law of nations -- The ordinances and
maritime decisions of France may be consulted to show what her practice has
been, and that of Holland is evident by the convention of 1689, between her and
England. The practice of Spain is understood to be the same; and in an instance
that occurred during the American war, she carried the law to its utmost
rigor, in assigning as a cause of condemnation of a neutral Tuscan ship, her
forcible resistance of the right of search. Her capture of American ships,
during the present war, on suspicion of their cargoes being enemy property,
affords additional evidence of her practice and opinions on this subject. In
respect to Great Britain, from the general notoriety of the fact, it seems, in
some sort, unnecessary to add, that she has immemorially adhered, in her
general practice, to the law of nations in its widest interpretation on this
subject. In a few instances, and perhaps for special reasons, as was the case
in respect to the treaty with Holland, concluded in 1667, she has entered into
opposite stipulations; but at this time, unless it may be with Portugal, Great
Britain has no such treaty with any nation.

So undisputed was the law on this subject, and so uniform the practice of
nations in cases, not governed by a conventional rule, that congress, in the
commencement, and through the greater part of our revolution war, authorized
our ships of war and privateers, to capture enemy property on board neutral
ships, and our admiralty courts uniformly restored neutral property found on
board enemy ships. This practice continued years after the conclusion of our
treaty with France, which contains a stipulation, that free ships shall make
free goods, and enemy ships enemy goods; no person, during that period, having
supposed that thereby the law was altered in respect to other nations.

Toward the close of the war, to favor the views of the armed neutrality, in
which league the United States were not a party, but whose opposition to Great
Britain they naturally approved; congress, in an ordinance on the subject of
captures, ordained that neutral bottoms should protect enemy goods -- but here
they stopped. Thus far the authority was indubitable, because it was exercised
only in abridgment of their own rights. Being engaged in war, they could not by
their own act, enlarge their rights, or abridge those of neutral ships; the
extent of both being defined and settled by the public law of nations. They,
therefore, never authorized the capture and condemnation of neutral goods found
in enemy ships, nor could they have authorized the same, without a manifest
violation of the rights of the neutral powers.

It is finally alleged that the article, if sound in its principles, is
defective in those provisions which are requisite to protect and secure the
neutral rights of the parties; inasmuch as it does not contain an explicit
stipulation for the payment of freight on enemy goods, nor for the payment of
damages for the detention or loss of neutral ships taken without just cause. I
do not recollect to have met with any precise stipulation on these points, in
the commercial treaties between other nations. -- None such, if my recollection
be right, are found in any of our other twenties; and I think it would be
somewhat difficult to form (...) as would afford to the parties a more
satisfactory security than that which arises from the law of nations -- a
neutral ship is entitled to freight for enemy goods captured on board her; but
this right, if so admitted, may be forfeited by the ir^^g^^^^ conduct of the
neutral, by the possession of false or double p^pers, by the destruction of
papers, or by those fraudulent concealments and evasions, which are
inconsistent with fair and impartial neutrality. A ship taken and detained
without just cause, is, together with her cargo, at the risk of the cap^^^ from
the moment of capture; and in cases of partial or (...) loss, or of damages by
detention, the owner is entitled to f^^^ and complete indemnification. But in
case the neutral ship i^ under such equivocal and doubtful circumstances, as
a^^^^^ probable cause to believe that either the ship, or cargo, is enemy
property, a situation not to be reconciled with an open (...) fair neutrality,
in such case, though on trial both ship and cargo should turn out to have been
bona ^ide neutral property, yet the captors may avail themselves of her
equivocal situation and character, in mitigation, if not, under very peculiar
circumstances, in total discharge of damages. No stipulation, therefore,
without these exceptions, would have afforded to (...) parties adequate
security against such irregularities, and ^^th them, its want of precision
would have left the subject as it (...) ^^ands, to be regulated by the known
and approved provi^^^^ of the law of nations.

These provisions being well understood, the article co^^^^^^ with a
stipulation against delays in the admiralty, and in the payment and recovery of
the damages it shall decree.

This examination, I flatter myself, has fulfilled its obje^^^, which was to
prove, that the article relinquishes no right (...) we possessed (...) a
nation, that it is agreeable to, and supp^^^^ by, the law of nations. A law in
relation to this subject, (...) with the origin of maritime commerce, and the
principles whereof have immemorially operated among nations.

It was desirable that a stipulation, similar to that co^^^^^^ in our other
treaties, should have been obtained. But the time was unfavorable to the
attainment of this object: and, as with great propriety has been observed by
Mr. Jefferson, in (...) of our government -- "since it depends on the will of
o^^^^ nations as well as our own, we can only obtain it, when they shall be
ready to consent." By the 12th article, the parti^^ agree to renew the
negotiation on this point, within the compass of two years after the conclusion
of the present war; when perhaps the restoration of peace, and other
circumstances, may prove more propitious to our views.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXI.
I RESUME the subject of the two last papers for the sake of a few
supplementary observations.

The objections to the treaty, for not containing the principle, "that free
ships make free goods," as being the relinquishment of an advantage, which the
modern law of nations gives to neutrals, have been fully examined, and, I
flatter myself, completely refuted.

I shall, however, add one or two re^^^ctions by way of further illustration. A
pre-established rule of the law of nations, can only be changed by their common
consent. This consent may either be expressed, by treaties, declarations, etc.
adopting and promising the observance of a different rule, or it may be
implied, by a course of practice or usage. The consent, in either case, must
embrace the great community of civilized nations. If to be inferred from
treaties, it must be shown that they are uniform and universal. It can, at
least, never be inferred, while the treaties of different nations follow
different rules, or the treaties between the same nation and others, vary from
each other. So also as to usage. It must be uniform and universal, and, let it
be added, it must be continued. A usage adopted by some nations, and resisted
by others, or adopted by all temporarily and then discontinued, is insufficient
to abolish an old, or substitute a new rule of the law of nations. It has been
demonstrated, that no consent of either description has been given to the rule,
which is contended for in opposition to the treaty.

The armed neutrality, so much quoted, is entirely deficient in the requisite
characters. Its name imports that it was an armed combination of particular
powers. It grew up in the midst of a war, and is understood to have been
particularly levelled against one of the belligerent parties. It was resisted
by that power. There were other powers, which did not accede to it. It is a
recent transaction, and has never acquired the confirmation of continued usage.
What is more, it has been virtually abandoned by some of the parties to it --
and among these, by the principal promoter of it, the politic and ent^^^prising
Catharine. It is, therefore, a perversion of all just ideas, to ascribe to such
a combination the effect of altering a rule of the law of nations.

In most important questions, it is remarkable that the opposers of the truth
are as much at variance with each other as they are with the truth they oppose.
This was strikingly exemplified when the present constitution of the United
States was under deliberation. The opposition to it was composed of the most
incongruous materials -- the same thing is observable in relation to the
treaty. -- And one instance of the contrariety applies to the rule cited above.

While some of the adversaries of the teeaty complain of the admission of a
contrary principle by that instrument, as the abandonment of a rule of the
present law of nations; others, conceding that there is no such rule yet
established, censure that admission as a check to its complete and formal
establishment and as a retrograde step from this desirable point.

The objection in this form is more plausible than in the other, but it is not
less destitute of substance. If there has been any retrograde step, it was
taken by the government prior (...) the treaty -- authentic documents, which
have been commu^^cated by the executive to congress, contain the evidence of
this fact.

Early in the year 1793, some British cruisers having stopped vessels of the
United States, and taken out of them arti^^^ which were the property of French
citizens, Mr. Genet, (...) then minister of France, in a letter of the 9th of
July of th^^ year, made a lively representation upon the subject to our
government, insisting, in a subsequent letter of the 25th of that month, in
which he recurs to the same point, that the pri^^^ples of neutrality
established, that friendly vessels make friends goods; and in effect, that the
violation of this rule by Gr^^ Britain was a violation of our neutral rights,
which we w^^^ bound to resent.

The reply of our government, is seen in a letter from ou^ secretary of state
to that minister, of the 24th of July -- It (...) in these terms -- "I
believe," says Mr. Jefferson, "It cannot be doubted, but that by the general
law of nations, the go^^ of a friend, found in the vessel of an enemy, are
free, and the goods of an enemy, found in the vessel of a friend, are lawful
prize. Upon this principle. I presume, the British armed vessels have taken the
property of French citizens found in ou^ vessels in the cases above mentioned;
and, I confess, I should be at a loss on what principle to reclaim them. It is
true that sundry nations, desirous of avoiding the inconveniences of having
their vessels stopped at sea, ransacked, carried into port, and detained under
pretense of having enemy goods on board, have, in many instances, introduced,
by their special treaties, another principle between them, that enemy bottoms
shall make enemy goods, and friendly bottoms friendly goods; a principle much
less embarrassing to commerce, and equal to all parties in point of gain and
loss; but this is altogether the effect of particular treaty, controuling, in
special cases, the general principles of the law of nations, and, therefore,
taking effect between such nations only as have so agreed to control it."

Nothing can be a more explicit or unequivocal abandonment of the rule, that
free ships make free goods, and vice versa, than is contained in this
communication. But this is not all: In the letter, from Mr. Jefferson to our
minister in France, of the 26th of August, 1793, instructing him to urge the
recall of Mr. Genet, the subject is resumed, the position asserted in answer to
Mr. Genet, insisted upon anew, and enforced by additional considerations: Among
other suggestions, we find these, "We suppose it to have been long an
established principle of the law of nations, that the goods of a friend are
free in an enemy's vessel, and an enemy's goods lawful prize in the vessel of a
friend. The inconvenience of this principle has induced several nations
latterly to stipulate against it by treaty, and to substitute another in its
stead, that free bottoms shall make free goods, and enemy bottoms, enemy goods.
We have introduced it into our treaties with France, Holland, and Russia; and
French goods, found by the two latter nations in American bottoms, are not made
prize of. It is our wish to establish it with other nations: -- But this
requires their consent also, is a work of time, and, in the mean while, they
have a right to act on the general principle, without giving to us or to
France, cause of complaint. Nor do I see, that France can lose by it on the
whole -- For though she loses her goods, when found in our vessels, by the
nations with whom we have no treaties -- yet she gains our goods when found in
the vessels of the same and all other nations; and we believe the latter mass
to be greater than the former."

Thus, then, stood the business antecedent to the treaty. Great Britain,
adhering to the principle of the general and long established law of nations,
captures French property in our vessels, and leaves free our property in French
vessels. We acquiesce in this practice, without even a remonstrance or murmur.
The French minister complains of it, as contrary to the principles of
neutrality -- We reply, that, in our opinion, it is not contrary to those
principles -- that it is fully warranted by the general law of nations -- that
treaties, which establish a different rule, are merely exceptions to that law,
binding only on the contracting parties; that having no treaty of the sort with
Great Britain, we should be at loss on what ground to dispute the legitimacy of
her practice. We do not simply forbear to oppose -- We do not offer to France
as an excuse for our forbearance, that it is inconvenient to us, at the moment,
to assert a questionable right at the hazard of war -- But we tell her
peremptorily, that in our opinion, no such right exists, and that the conduct
of Great Britain, in the particular case, is justified by the law of nations --
neither do we wrap the motive of our forbearance in silence, nor content
ourselves with revealing it confidentially to France alone; but we publish it
without reserve to the world, and thus, in the presence of Great Britain, and
of every other nation, make a formal renunciation of the pretension, that "free
ships shall make free goods, and enemy ships enemy goods:" no counter
declaration is heard from either house of congress.

It was impossible to give a more full sanction to the opposite principle than
was given by this conduct, and these public and positive declarations of our
government. It was impossible more completely to abandon the favorite ground.
It is puerile to attempt to discriminate between the force of this species of
renunciation and that of an admission of its propriety by treaty. The conduct
of a government avowed and explained, as in motives, by authentic public
declarations, may assert or renounce a pretension as effectually as its
compacts -- Every nation, with whom we had no contrary stipulation, could say
to us as (...) before as since the treaty with Great Britain, "your government
has explicitly admitted that free ships do not make free goods, and you have no
right to complain of our not observing that rule toward you." Candor,
therefore, would oblige us to say that the treaty has left this point where it
found it -- that it has only not obtained from Great Britain a concession in
favor to establish, but which cannot be claimed as matter of right. Though,
therefore, it may not have the merit of strengthening, it has not the demerit
of weakening the ground.

The difference in our position, in this respect, before and since the treaty,
amounts to this, that before the treaty the government had abandoned the ground
through one organ, Mr. Jefferson; by the treaty, it continued the abandonment
through another organ, Mr. Jay -- if we consider the organ as the ^oluntary
cause in each case, (the presumption of which is equally fair in both cases)
and if there be any blame, it falls more heavily on Mr. Jefferson than on Mr.
Jay; for the former founded and made the retreat, and the latter only did not
advance from the disadvantageous post to which he had retreated. In other
words, Mr. Jay did only not recover the ground which Mr. Jefferson had lost.
And we know that, in general, it is a far more difficult task to regain than to
keep an advantageous position.

But, in truth, no blame can justly be imputed in either case. The law of
nations was against the rule which it is desired to introduce. The United
States could not have insisted upon it as matter of right; and in point of
policy it would have been madness in them to go to war, to support an
innovation upon the pre-established law. It was not honorable to claim a right,
and suffer it to be infracted without resistance. It is not for young and weak
nations to attempt to enforce novelties or pretensions of equivocal validity.
It is still less proper for them to contend, at the hazard of their peace,
against the clear right of others. The object was truly not of moment enough to
risk much upon it. To use a French proverb, "The play was not worth the
candle." In every view, therefore, it was wise to desert the pretension.

So also, in the midst of war, like that in which Great Britain was engaged, it
were preposterous to have expected, that she would have acceded to a new rule,
which, under the circumstances of her great maritime superiority, would have
operated so much more conveniently to her enemy than to herself. And it would
have been no less absurd to have made her accession to that rule the sine qua
non of an arrangement, otherwise expedient. Here again the play would not have
been worth the candle.

The importance of the rule has artfully been very much magnified, to
depreciate proportionably the treaty, for not establishing it. It is to be
remembered, that if something is gained by it, something is also given up. It
depends on incalculable circumstances, whether, in a particular war, most will
be lost or gained. Yet the rule is, upon the whole, a convenient one to neutral
powers. But it cannot be pretended that it is of so great a value, as that the
United States ought to adopt it as a maxim, never to make a treaty of commerce,
in which it was not recognized. They might by this maxim forego the advantages
of regulating their commercial intercourse in time of peace with several
foreign powers, with whom they have extensive relations of trade, by fixed and
useful conventional rules, and still remain subject in time of war to the
inconveniences of not having established, with those powers, the principle to
which they make that sacrifice.

Though, therefore, it be a merit to a certain extent in a treaty to contain
this principle, it is not a positive fault or blemish, that it does not contain
it. The want of it is not a good cause of objection to a treaty otherwise
eligible.

Let me add, too, in the spirit of Mr. Jefferson's letter, that however it may
be our wish to establish the rule with other nations besides those with whom we
have already done it, this requires their consent also, of course their
conviction, that it is their interest to consent; and that, considering the
obstacles which lie in the way, the attainment of the object must be "a work of
time." It pre-supposes, in some of the principal maritime powers, a great
change of ideas, which is not to be looked for very suddenly. It was not,
therefore, to have been expected of our envoy, that he was to have accomplished
the point at so premature and so favorable a juncture.

The assertion, that he has abandoned it, is made in too unqualified a manner.
For while he admits the operation for the present, of the general rule of the
law of nations, he has, by the 12th article, engaged Great Britain in a
stipulation, that the parties will, at the expiration of two years after the
existing war, renew their discussion, and endeavor to agree whether in any,
and what cases neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property. It is true, it
will be in the option of Great Britain then, to agree or not: but it is not
less true that the principle is retained with consent of Great Britain in a
negociable state. So far perhaps some ground has been retrieved.

I confess, however, that I entertain much doubt as to the probability of a
speedy general establishment of the rule, that friendly ships shall make
friendly goods, and enemy ships enemy goods. It is a rule against which, it is
to be feared, the preponderant maritime power, to whatever nation this
character may belong, will be apt to struggle with perseverance and effect,
since it would tend to contract materially the means of that power to annoy and
distress her enemies, whose inferiority on the sea would naturally cause their
commerce, during war, to be carried on in neutral bottoms. This consideration
will account for the resistance of Great Britain to the principle, and for the
endeavors of some other powers to promote it -- and it deserves notice, that
her last treaty with France was severely assailed by some of the chiefs of
opposition, for containing a stipulation in favor of that principle. The motive
for consenting to it, in this instance, probably was, that the stipulation was
likely to be rendered, in a great degree, nugatory by the relative situation of
the two nations, which, in almost any war in which one of the two was engaged
on one side, would probably render the other a party on the opposite side.

If these conjectures be right, there is a reflection which lessens much the
value of stipulations in favor of the rule; that so long as one or more of the
maritime powers disavow it, there will be a strong temptation to depart from a
scrupulous observance of such stipulations, as we, in relation to France, have
experienced in the present war.

In the course of the arguments against the 17th article, for virtually
admitting the right of search in time of war, the objectors have had the
temerity to cite the opinion of Vattel, as being opposed to that right; and a
mutilated quotation has given an appearance of truth to the assertion. It has
been heretofore shown, by passages extracted from his work, that his opinion,
so far from denying explicitly, supports the right to search. But it may be
useful to examine the part of it which has been tortured into a contrary
inference.

After affirming the right of search (B. 3. chap. 7, 8. 14) he proceeds thus,
"but to avoid inconveniences, violence, and every other irregularity, the
manner of the search is settled in the treaties of navigation and commerce.
According to the present custom, credit is to be given to certificates and
bills of lading produced by the master of the ship." Hence it is alleged the
right to search is turned into the right of inspecting the ship's papers,
which, being entitled to credit, are to preclude further scrutiny.

But what immediately follows, destroys this conclusion! the words "unless any
ground appear in them, or there be very good reasons for suspecting their
validity," are subjoined to the clause just quoted. This admits clearly, that
the ship's papers are not to be conclusive -- But that, upon just cause of
suspicion, the papers may be disregarded, and the right of search may be
exercised.

Who is to be the judge of the credit due to the papers and of the just cause
of suspicion? Manifestly the officer of the belligerent party, who visits the
neutral vessel. Then what does the whole amount to? -- Merely this -- That
ship's papers are entitled to a certain degree of respect and credit; how much,
is left to the discretion of the officer of the belligerent party! -- who, if
he be not satisfied of the fairness and validity of the papers, may proceed to
their verification, by a more strict and particular search, and then if he
still sees, or supposes he sees, just cause of suspicion, he may carry the
vessel into a port of his own country, for judicial investigation -- In doing
this, he acts at his peril, and for an abuse of his discretion exposes himself
to damages and other punishment.

This is the true and evident sense of Vattel, and it agrees with the doctrine
advocated in these papers, and, I will add, with the treaty under examination.

The 17th article admits, that the vessels of each party for just cause of
suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the enemy
contraband articles, may be captured or detained, and carried to the nearest
and most convenient port of the belligerent party, to the end that enemy's
property and contraband articles on board may become lawful prize. But so far
from countenancing any proceeding without just cause of suspicon, or from
exonerating the officer of the belligerent party from a responsibility for such
proceeding, it leaves the law of nations, in this particular, in full force,
and contemplating that such officer shall be liable for damages, when he
proceeds without just cause of suspicion, provides that all proper measures
shall be taken to prevent delay in deciding the cases of ships or cargoes
brought in for adjudication, or in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters or owners of such
ships. Besides which, the 19th article stipulates, in order that more abundant
care may be taken for the security of the respective subjects and citizens of
the contracting parties, and to prevent their suffering injuries by the men of
war and privateers of either party, that the commanders of ships of war and
privateers, shall forbear doing any damage to those of the other party,
committing any outrage against them; and that if they act to the contrary, they
shall be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates, (...)
make satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be. And further, after establishing that
the commanders of privateers shall, before they are commissioned, give security
to satisfy all damages and injuries, it adds, that in all cases of aggressions
their commissions shall be revoked and annulled.

These provisions not only conform to, and corroborate the injunctions of the
laws of nations: but they refute the assertion, that the treaty is altogether
deficient in precautions for guarding neutral rights; since those
abovementioned are among the most efficacious. -- It is not presumable that
any stipulations have been or can be made which will take away all discretion
from the marine officers of the belligerent parties; for this would be a total
surrender of the rights of belligerent to neutral nations, and so long as any
discretion (...) le^t, its right or wrong exercise will depend on the per^onal
character of each officer: and abuses can only be restrained by the penalties
that await them. Those stipulations of treaties, then, which reinforce the
laws of nations as to the infliction of penalties, are the most effectual of
the precautions which treaties can adopt for the security of neutral rights;
and in this particular the treaty with Great Britain is to the full as
provident as our other treaties. In one point I believe it is more so; for it
expressly stipulates a revocation of the commissions of the commanders of
privateers, for the aggressions they may commit.

Is not the passage last cited from Vattel a true commentary on those
stipulations, for regulating and mitigating the right of search, which are
found in our own and other treaties? Do they not all intend to reserve to the
belligerent party a right of judging of the validity and fidelity of the papers
to be exhibited, and of extending the search or not, according to the
circumstances of just suspicion which do or do not appear? and if this be their
true construction, as it certainly is their construction in practice, which our
own experience testifies, to what, after all, do they amount, more than without
them the laws of nations, as universally recognized, of themselves pronounce?
What real security do they afford more than the treaty with Great Britain
affords?

It is much to be suspected, that there will always be found advantages
essentially nominal, operating or not according to the strength or weakness of
the neutral party; which, if strong, will find abundant foundation in the
acknowledged laws of nations on which to rest the protection of its rights.

It has been said to be just matter of surprise, that these precautions should
have no place in a treaty with Great Britain, whose conduct on the seas, so
particularly suggested and enforced every guard to our rights that could be
reasonably insisted on. Observations of this kind assume constantly the
supposition, that we had it in our power to fashion every provision of the
treaty exactly to our own taste, and that the ideas of the other contracting
party were to have no influence even upon the minor features of the contract.
But this supposition is absurd; and a treaty may still be entitled to our
approbation, which adjusts acceptably the great points of interest, though in
some of its details it falls short of our desires. Nor can any well-informed
man sincerely deny that it was to have been expected, that an adjustment of the
particulars in question, would fall short of our ideas. It may be answered,
that we were then at liberty not to make the treaty; so we were; but does it
follow that it would have been wise to split on such points? -- upon a just
estimate, their intrinsic value is very moderate.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXII.
THE eighteenth article of the treaty, which regulates the subject of
contraband, has been grievously misrepresented; the objections used against it
with most acrimony, are disingenuous and unfounded! Yet while I make this
assertion, which, I flatter myself, I shall be able to prove, I shall not
pretend to maintain that it is an article completely satisfactory. I even admit
that it has one unpleasant ingredient in it, and I am convinced that our envoy
must have consented to it with reluctance.

But while candor demands this concession, it equally admonishes us, that,
under the circumstances of the moment, the points in this respect to be
adjusted were peculiarly unmanageable -- that the position of the other party
rendered an arrangement, entirely agreeable to us, impracticable; that without
compromise nothing could have been regulated; that the article made no change
for the worse in our prior situation, but i^ some particulars made our ground
better; and that estimating truly the relative circumstances of the parties,
there is no probability that any thing more acceptable could have been
established.

I will add, that a degree of imperfection, which may fairly be attributed to
this article, is far from being of such im^^^ance, as, on solid calculations,
ought to defeat the treaty -- (...) clear right is abandoned, no material
interest of the nation injured.

It is one thing, whether every part of the treaty be satisfactory -- another,
and a very different thing, whether in the aggregate it be eligible or not, and
ought to be accepted or rejected. Nations could never make contracts with one
another, if each were to require that every part of it should be adjusted by
its own standard of right and expediency. The true question always is upon the
collective merits of the instrument; whether, upon the whole, it reasonably
accommodates the opinions and interests of the parties. Tried by this test, the
treaty negociated with Great Britain, fully justifies the acceptance of it by
the constituted authorities of our country, and claims the acquiescence of
every good citizen.

The most labored, and, at the same time, the most false of the charges
against the eighteenth article is, that it allows p^^visions to be contraband
in cases not heretofore warranted by the laws of nations, and refers to the
belligerent party, the decision of what those cases are. -- This is the general
form of the charge. The draft of a petition to the legislature of Virginia,
reduces it to this shape. The treaty " expressly admits, that provisions are to
be held contraband in cases other than when bound to an invested place, and
impliedly admits, that such cases exist at present."

The first is a palpable untruth, which may be detected by a bare perusal of
the article. -- The last is an untrue inference, impregnated with the malignant
insinuation that there was a design to sanction the unwarrantable pretension of
a right to inflict famine on a whole nation.

Before we proceed to an analysis of the article, let us review the prior
situation of the parties. Great Britain, it is known, had taken and acted upon
the ground, that she had a right to stop and detain, on payment for them,
provisions belonging to neutrals, going to the dominions of France. For this
violent and impolitic measure, which the final opinion of mankind will
certainly condemn, she found color, in the sayings of some writers of
reputation, on public laws.

A passage of this kind, from Vattel, has been more than once quoted, in these
terms, "Commodities, particularly used in war, and the importation of which, to
an enemy, is prohibited, are called contraband goods. Such are military and
naval st^res timber, horses, and even provisions in certain junctures, when
there are hopes of reducing the enemy by famine." Heinecius Law of nature and
nations. B. 2. C. 9. S. 201. Navibus ob vect.
countenances the same opinion, and even Grotius seems to ^^an toward it. Book
III, Chap. I. and V. 3. Chap. I. and X.


The United States, with reason, disputed this construction of the law of
nations! restraining the general propositions which appear to favor it, to
those cases in which the chance of reducing by famine was manifested and
palpable, such as the cases of particular places, bona fide, besieged,
blockaded or invested. The government accordingly remonstrated against the
proceeding of Great Britain, and made every effort against it which prudence,
in the then posture of affairs, would permit. The order for seizing provisions,
was, after a time, revoked.

In this state our envoy found the business, pending the very war in which
Great Britain had exercised the pretension, with the same administration which
had done it, was it to have been expected that she would, in a treaty with us,
even virtually or impliedly have acknowledged the injustice or impropriety of
the conduct? Here was no escape, as in the instance of the order of the 6th of
November, 1793, in the misconceptions of her officers. The question was to
condemn a deliberate and unambiguous act of the administration itself. The
pride, the reputation, and the interest of that administration forbade it.

On our side, to admit the pretensions of Great Britain was still more
impossible. -- We had every inducement of character, right, and interest
against it. What was the natural and only issue out of this embarrassment?
Plainly, to leave the point unsettled; to get rid of it; to let it remain
substantially where it was before the treaty. This, I have good ground to
believe, was the real understanding of the two negociators; and the article has
fulfilled that view.

After enumerating specifically what articles shall be deemed contraband, it
proceeds thus, "And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases, in
which alone provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may be
regarded as such, renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences
and misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is further agreed, that
whenever any such articles, so becoming contraband according to the laws of
nations, shall, for that reason, be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, (...) in their default, the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels, the (...) value of all
articles with a reasonable mercantile profit the^^^ together with the freight
and also the demurrage, incident (...) such detention."

The difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which a^^^cles, not
generally contraband, become so, from particular ^^^cumstances, is expressly
assigned as the motive to the stipula^^^ which follows. -- This excludes the
supposition that any (...) whatever were intended to be admitted or agreed. But
this ^^^ficulty rendered it expedient to provide against the inconveni^^cies
and misunderstandings which might thence arise -- a pro^^^sion, with this view,
is, therefore, made, which is that (...) liberal compensation for the articles
taken -- The evident in^^^ of this provision is, that in doubtful cases, the
inconvenienci^^^ to the neutral party being obviated or lessened by
compensation there may be the less cause of temptation to controversy and
rupture -- the affair may be the more susceptible of negotiation and
accommodation. More than this cannot be pretended; because it is further
agreed, "that whenever any such articles, so become contraband, according to
the existing laws of nations, shall, for that reason, be seized, the same shall
not be confiscated, but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely
indemnified," etc.

Thus the criterion of the cases, in which articles, not generally contraband,
may, from particular circumstances, become so, is expressly the existing law of
nations; in other words, the law of nations at the time the transaction
happens. When these laws pronounce them contraband, they may, for that reason,
be seized; when otherwise, they may not be seized. Each party is as free as the
other to decide whether the laws of nations do, in the given case, pronounce
them contraband or not, and neither is obliged to be governed by the opinion of
the other. If one party, on a false pretext of being authorized by the laws of
nations, makes a seizure, the other is at full liberty to contest it, to appeal
to those laws, and, if it thinks fit, to oppose, even to reprisals and war.
This is the express tenor of the provision -- there is nothing to the contrary;
nothing that narrows the ground; nothing that warrants either party in making a
seizure, which the laws of nations, independent of the treaty, permits; nothing
which obliges either party to submit to one, when it is of opinion the law of
nations has been violated by it.

But as liberal compensation is to be made in every case of seizure, whereof
difference of opinion happens, it will become a question of prudence and
expediency, whether to be satisfied with the compensation, or to seek further
redress. The provision will, in doubtful cases, render an accommodation of
opinion the more easy, and, as a circumstance conducing to the preservation of
peace, is a valuable ingredient in the treaty. A very different phraseology was
to have been expected, if the i^^ention had been, to leave each party at
liberty to seize, agreeably to its own opinion of the law of nations, upon the
condition of making compensation -- The stipulation would thus have been: "It
is agreed, that whenever either of the contracting parties shall seize any such
articles so becoming contraband, and which shall, for that reason, be seized;"
this makes, not the opinion of either party, but the fact of the articles
having become contraband by the laws of nations, the condition of the sei^^re.

A cavil has arisen on the term "existing," as if it had the effect of enabling
one of the parties to make a law of nations for the occasion. But this is a
mere cavil.

No one nation can make a law of nations; no positive regulation of one state,
or of a partial nomination of states, can pretend to this character. A law of
nations is a law which nature, agreement, or usage has established between
nations; as this may vary from one period to another by agreement or usage, the
article very properly uses the term "existing," to denote that law, which at
the time the transaction may happen, shall be then the law of nations. This is
a plain and obvious use of the term, which nothing but a spirit of
misrepresentation could have perverted to a different meaning.

The argument against the foregoing construction is in substance this (viz.) it
is now a settled doctrine of the law of nations, that provisions and other
articles, not generally contraband, can only become so when going to a place
besieged, blockaded, or invested -- cases of this kind are fully provided for
in a subsequent part of the article; the implication therefore is, that
something more was intended to be embraced in the antecedent part.

Let us first examine the fact, whether all the cases of that kind are
comprehended in the subsequent part of the article. I say they are not -- the
remaining clause of the article divides itself into two parts. The first
describes the case of a vessel sailing for a port or place belonging to any
enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged, blockaded, or
invested; and provides, that, in such case, the vessel may be turned away, but
not detained, nor her cargo, if not contraband, confiscated, unless after
not^ce she shall again attempt to enter: The second ^efer bes^ the case of a
vessel, or goods, which had entered into (...) or place before it was besieged,
blockaded, or invested, (...) ^^^ares that the one or the other shall not be
liable to confis^^^, but shall be restored to the owners thereof. These a^^ the
only cases described or provided for. A third, which occ^^^ on the slightest
reflection, is not mentioned: the case of a v^^sel going to a port or place
which is besieged, blockaded or invested, with notice of its being in that
state when she commences her voyage, or previous to her receiving notice from
the besieging, blockading, or investing party. This is left to the operation of
the general law of nations, except so far as it may be affected in respect to
compensation by the antecedent clause. Thus the fact, which is the foundation
of the argument, fails, and with it, of course, the argument itself.

But had this been otherwise, the conclusion would still have been erroneous --
the two clauses are entirely independent of each other, and though they might
both contemplate the same cases in whole, or in part, they do it with an eye to
very different purposes.

The object of the first is to lessen the danger of misunderstanding, by
establishing this general rule, that wherever articles, not commonly
contraband, become so from particular circumstances, according to the law of
nations, they shall still not be confiscated, but, when seized, the owners of
them shall be indemnified.

The object of the last is to regulate some special consequences with regard to
vessels and goods going to, or which had previously gone to places besieged,
blockaded, or invested; and in respect to which the dispositions of the laws of
nations may have been deemed doubtful or too rigorous. Thus it is held, that
the laws of nations permit the confiscation of ships and goods going to places
besieged, blockaded, or invested; but this clause decides, that if going
without notice, so far from being confiscated, they shall not even be detained,
but shall be permitted to go withersoever they please. If they persist after
notice, then the contumacy shall be punished with confiscation. In both
instances the consequence is entirely different from every thing in the
antecedent clause.

There, there is seizure, with compensation. Here, in one instance, seizure is
forbidden, and permission to go elsewhere is enjoined. In the other instances,
the offending things are confiscated, which excludes the idea of compensation.
Again, the last part of the last clause stipulates in the case, which it
supposes, the restoration of the property to its owners, and so excludes both
seizure and compensation. Hence it is apparent the objects of the two clauses
are entirely foreign to each other, and that no argument nor inference whatever
can be drawn from the one to the other.

If it be asked, what other cases there can be, except those of places
besieged, blockaded, or invested? and if none other, what difficulty in
defining them? why leave the point so vague and indeterminate? One answer,
which indeed has already been given in substance, is, that the situation of one
of the parties prevented an agreement at the time; that not being able to
agree, they could not define; and the alternative was to avoid definition --
The want of definition only argues want of agreement. It is strange logic to
assert, that this or that is admitted, because nothing is defined.

Another answer is, that even if the parties had been agreed that there were no
other cases than those of besieged, blockaded, or invested places, still there
would have remained much room for dispute about the precise cases, owing to the
impracticability of defining what is a besieged, blockaded, or invested place.
About this there has been frequent controversy; and the fact is so complicated,
puts on such a variety of shapes, that no definition can well be devised, which
will suit all. Thence nations, in their compacts with each other, frequently do
not attempt one; and where the attempt has been made, it has left almost as
much room for dispute about the definition as there was about the thing.

Moreover, is it impossible to conceive other cases than those mentioned above,
in which provisions and other articles not generally contraband might, on
rational grounds, be deemed so? What if they were going expressly, and with
notice, to a besieging army, whereby it might obtain a supply essential to the
success of its operations? Is there no doubt that it would be justifiable in
such case to seize them? Can the liberty of trade be said to apply to any
instance of direct and immediate aid to a military expedition? It would be at
least a singular effect of the rule, if provisions could be carried without
interruption for the supply of a Spanish army besieging Gibra^^^^, when, if
destined for the supply of the garrison in that place, they might, of right, be
seized by a Spanish fleet.

The calumniators of the article have not had the candor (...) notice that it
is not confined to provisions, but speaks of provisions and other articles.
Even this is an ingredient which combats the supposition that countenance was
intended to be gi^^ to the pretension of Great Britain with regard to
provisions, which, depending on a reason peculiar to itself, cannot be d^^^^ed
to be supported by a clause including orther articles, to whi^^ that reason is
entirely inapplicable.

There is one more observation which has been made against this part of the
article which may deserve a moment's atten^^^^. It is this, that though the
true meaning of the clause, be (...) as I contend for, still the existence of
it affords to Great (...) a pretext for abuse which she may improve to our
disadvanta^^^ I answer, it is difficult to guard against all the perversions
(...) contract which ill faith may suggest. But we have the (...) security
against abuses of this sort, which we have against those of other kinds,
namely, the right of judging for oursel^^^ and the power of causing our rights
to be respected. We have this plain and decisive reply to make, to any uncandid
const^^^tion which Great Britain may, at any time, endeavor to (...) "The
article pointedly and explicitly makes the existing law of nations, the
standard of the cases in which you may rightf^^^y seize provisions and other
articles not generally contraband. This law does not authorize the seizure in
the instance in question; you have consequently no warrant under the treaty for
what you do."

The same disingenuous spirit which tinctures all the conduct of the
adversaries of the treaty, has been hardy enough to impute to it the last order
of Great Britain, to seize provisions going to the dominions of France.

Strange, that an order issued before the treaty had ever been considered in
this country, and embracing the other neutral powers besides the United States,
should be represented as the fruit of that instrument! As reasonable would it
be to place to its account the similar order which was issued before the
mission of an envoy was thought of.
The appearances are, that a motive no less imperious than that of impending
scarcity, has great share in dictating the measure, and time, I am persuaded,
will prove that it will not ever be pretended to justify it by any thing in the
treaty.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXIII.
THE course thus far pursued in the discussion of the 18th article, has
inverted the order of it, as it stands in the treaty. It is composed of three
clauses; the two last of which have been first examined -- I thought it
advisable, in the outset, to dispose of an objection which has been the
principal source of clamor.

The first clause of that which remains to be examined, enumerates the
articles, which, it is agreed, shall be deemed contraband of war. These are,
"all arms, and implements serving for the purpose of war, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenadoes, carcases, saucisses, carriages
for cannon, musquet-rests, bandoliers, gunpowder, match, saltpeter, balls,
pikes, swords, head-pieces, cuirasses, halberts, lances, javelins, horse
furniture, holsters, belts, and generally all other implements of war; as also
timber for ship-building, tar or rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp, and
cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels,
unwrought iron and fir planks only excepted."

All which articles are declared to be just objects of confiscation, when
attempted to be carried to any enemy of either party.

It is well understood, that war abridges the liberty of trade of neutral
nations; and that it is not lawful for them to supply either of two belligerent
parties with any article deemed contraband of war; nor may they supply any
article whatever to a place besieged, blockaded or invested. The former case
includes a special catalogue of articles which have an immediate reference to
war -- The latter extends to all kinds of goods and merchandise. The penalty in
both cases is confiscation.

These positions have not been disputed. The only question which has been or
can be raised, must respect the enumeration of the articles which are to be
considered as contraband.

In comparing the enumeration in the present treaty, with that of our former
treaties, we find the differences to be these. Our former treaties include
"horses," and one of them "soldiers," which our present does not; but our
present includes "timber for ship-building, tar or rosin, copper in sheets,
said, hemp, and cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the
equipment of vessels, unwrought iron and fir planks only excepted," which are
not to be found in our former treaties.

It is alleged that the including of these articles is an extention of the list
of contraband beyond the limit of the (...) law of nations; in support of which
allegation, it is affirmed, that they have been excluded by the uniform tenor
of the treaties which have been formed for more than a century past.

Though this position will not, upon careful examination, appear correct; yet
it is so far founded, as to claim an acknowledgment, that the article under
consideration has, in this instance, pursued the rigor of the law of nations.
It was to this, I alluded, when I observed that it contained one unpleasant
ingredient.

It is a fact, that far the greater proportion of modern ^^^ties exclude naval
stores or articles for ship-building; yet this is not universally the case.

By the third article of the treaty of alliance and comment between Great
Britain and Denmark, in 1670, the parties agree "not to furnish the enemies of
each other with any provisions of war, as soldiers, arms, engines, guns, ships
or other necessaries for the use of war, nor to suffer the same to be furnished
by their subjects." An explanation of this article was made by a convention,
dated the 4th of July, 1780, which, after enumerating as contraband, the usual
catalogue of military implements, adds, in the precise terms of our article,
"as also timber for ship-building, tar, rosin, copper i^ sheets, sails, hemp,
and cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of
vessels, unwrought iron, and fir planks only excepted."

In a series of treaties between Great Britain and Portugal, down to the year
1703, I do not discover that there has ever been a regulation of the articles
which are to be treated as contraband, between these powers.

And between Sweden and Great Britain, the 11th article of a treaty, entered
into in 1661 (and still in force unaltered, though a subsequent commercial
treaty was made between these powers as late as 1776) subjects to confiscation
equally all articles called contraband, and especially money, provisions, etc.
The specification not being complete, naval stores are left upon the open
ground of the law of nations; but money and provisions are superadded -- This
latitude would bear little doubt as to the intention to include naval stores.
An opinion has been propagated that Sweden armed in concert with Denmark, in
order to maintain the neutral right of carrying corn and flour to France, in
opposition to the convention of March, 1793, between Great Britain and Russia;
and that, in consequence of this proceeding, the remonstrances of these powers
have proved more successful than we have been in obtaining satisfaction from
Great Britain. This opinion is throughout, an error, made, use of by those
whose persevering aim has been, by silencing truth, reason, and moderation, and
inflaming the angry passions of the community, to involve the country in
anarchy and war. -- The authors of this imposture, as well as the exalted
patriots who have seen in the memorial of our envoy, the humiliation of our
country, are referred to a "collection of state papers relative to the war
against France," published by Debret, in 1794. The perusal of the Swedish state
papers; as well as the memorials of the able and prudent B^rnstorss, may teach
these gentlemen a little of what is deemed good manners on these occasions.

So far from even remonstrating, much less arming on account of the British
instruction of June, 1793, when that order was notified at Stockholm, by the
British resident there, the government of Sweden, by their resident at London,
acknowledged, in terms too respectful to be repeated in the hearing of our
exclusive patriots, that Sweden was perfectly satisfied with the instruction;
since, instead of payment, which the order insurred, all provisions, in virtue
of an existing treaty between the two nations, were liable to confiscation when
seized, on their way to an enemy.

This note is added for the purpose of refuting a popular error, and not to
vindicate the instruction alluded to, which I consider as an injury to the
rights of neutral nations, that has not been justified by the answers th^^ have
been given by Great Britain to the (...) and Du^^sh (...).




It appears from these specimens, that there is not a perfect uniformity in the
conventions between nations; and that no purely positive law of nations can be
deduced from that source.

If we call to our aid the principles of reason and natural justice, which are
the great foundations of the law of nations, we shall not discover, in this
instance, data as certain as could be wished, for a satisfactory conclusion;
and the soundest determination, which we can adopt, will be, that beyond a
certain point, the question is in a great degree arbitrary, and must depend
materially upon conventional regulation between nation and nation. -- Hence it
is there is so great a diversity in the stipulations of different parties on
this point; indicating that there is no absolute rule. Hence also it is, that
several nations, at different times, being at war, have thought themselves
authorized to regulate and announce, by public declarations, the article which
they would consider and treat as contraband.

The opinion of writers will be found to support the article as it stands, in
the particular, which is now the subject of discussion.

Vattel, we have before seen, (B. B. C. 3. 6, 7. s. 112) expressly ranks naval
stores and timber under the denomination of contraband goods.

Hienecius ( de navibus, etc. Chap. I. S. 10, 11 and 14) accords in the same
position to the extent of whatsoever appertains to the equipment of vessels.
Vela, Restes et si quoe alia ad apparatum nauticum pertinent.


Bynkershook is less explicit. After laying it down as the general rule that
naval stores or the materials of ships, are not contraband, he proceeds thus --
"Yet it sometimes happens that the materials of ships may be prohibited, if an
enemy is (...) great want of them, and without them cannot conveniently carry
in the war;" Quandoque tamen accidit ut et navium materia prohibeatur, si
hostis eaquam maxim indigeat at absque ea commode bellum gerere haud possit --
Quaestionum juris Publici L. 1 chap. X. page 80.
and he afterward cites, with approbation, several edicts or proclamations,
which the states general, in different wars with different nations, have
published, declaring those articles contraband -- thus referring it to the
belligerent party to judge of, and pronounce the cases when they may rightfully
be deemed so -- And the same idea seems to have been adopted by Grotius B. iii.
C. 1. V.
and some other writers on public law -- I have not met with one whose opinion
excludes naval stores from the list of contraband.

Grotius, in discussing this question, divides goods into three classes, 1.
Those which are of use only in war, as arms, etc. 2. Those which serve only for
pleasure; 3. Those useful for peaceable as well as for warlike purposes, "as
money, provisions, ships and naval stores"
-- concerning which he argues in substance, that the first class are clearly
contraband; that the second class are clearly not contraband; and that the
third class may or may not be so, according to the state and circumstances of
the war; alleging, that if necessary to our defense, they may be intercepted,
but upon condition of restitution, unless there be just cause to the contrary;
which just cause is explained by the examples of sending them to a besieged, or
blockaded place.

The reasoning about the third class has a very inconvenient latitude. It
subjects the trade of neutral nations too extensively to the discretion of
belligerent powers; and yet there is a serious embarrassment about drawing the
true line, one which will duly conciliate the safety of the belligerent, with
that of the neutral, party.

What definition of contraband, consulting reason alone, shall we adopt? Shall
we say, that none but articles peculiar to war ought to receive this
denomination? But is even powder exclusively applicable to war? Are nitre and
sulphur, its chief ingredients, peculiar to war? Are they not all useful for
other purposes; some of them in medicine, and other important arts? Shall we
say, that none but articles prepared and organized for war, as their primary
object, ought to have that character? But what substantial difference can
reason know, between the supply to our enemy of powder, and that of sulphur and
saltpeter, the easily convertible materials of this mischievous compound?

How would either of these definitions, or any other, comport with what those
of our treaties which are thought unexceptionable, in this particular, have
regulated, or with what is common in the treaties between other nations? Under
which of them shall we bring horses and their furniture?

If we say, that in wars by land, these are instruments little less important
than men, and, for that reason, ought to be comprehended; it may be asked in
return, what can be more necessary in wars by sea, than the materials of ships,
and why should they not, for the like reasons, be equally comprehended?

In wars between maritime nations, who transfer its calamities from the land to
the ocean, and wage their most furious conflicts on that element, whose
dominions cannot be attacked or defended without a superiority in naval
strength, who moreover possesses distant territories, the protection and
commercial advantages of which, depend upon the existence and support of
navies, it is difficult to maintain, that it is against reason, or against
those principles which regulate the description of contraband, to consider as
such the materials which appertain to the construction and equipment of ships.

It is not a sufficient objection, that these articles are useful for other
purposes, and especially for those of maritime commerce -- Horses are of
primary utility in agriculture; and it has been seen that there are other
articles indisputably on the list of contraband, which are entirely within the
principle of that objection.

Rutherforth, a sensible modern writer, Institutes of Natural Law, book II.
chap. x. xix.
after truly observing, "that the notion of contraband goods is of some
latitude, so that it is not easy precisely to determine what are and what are
not of this sort -- that all warlike stores are certainly contraband, but that
still the question returns, what are to be reckoned warlike stores?" -- after
noticing the division of articles by Grotius and the difficulties with regard
to the third class -- draws this conclusion, that "where a war is carried on by
sea as well as by land, not only ships of war which are already built, but the
materials for building or repairing of ships, will come under the notion of
warlike stores." This is a precise idea, and, it must be confessed, on
principle, not an irrational one.

If we resort to the opinions which have been entertained and evidenced in our
own country, they will be found to have given great extent to the idea of
contraband -- Congress, by an act of May the 3th, 1777, establishing the form
of commissions for privateers, authorize them "to attack, subdue, and take all
ships and other vessels whatever, carrying soldiers, arms, gunpowder,
ammunition, provisions, or any other contraband goods, to any of the British
armies or ships of war, employed against the United States. And in their act of
the 27th of November, 1780, acceding, in part, to the rule of the armed
neutrality, they declare, that contraband shall be thereafter confined to the
articles contained under this character, in our treaty with France; indicating,
by this, their opinion that the list of those articles is abridged by that
treaty. If the first mentioned act was well founded (and there are strong
reasons for it) it establishes that even provisions may be contraband, if going
directly to invading fleets and armies; which affords an instance of their
being so (analogous to be case heretofore put of a besieging army) in addition,
to the cases of places besieged, blockaded, or invested. And as to naval
stores, I assert a belief, that the common opinion of those persons in this
country, whose contemplation had embraced the subject, included them in the
catalogue of contraband.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]
[No. XII.]

THE American Remembrancer; OR, AN IMPARTIAL COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, RESOLVES,
SPEECHES, etc.

RELATIVE, OR HAVING AFFINITY, TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN.

VOLUME III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET.

-- JANUARY 20, 1796. --

CONTENTS.
1. CINNA, No. V. Page 219 2. -- No. VI. Page 226 3. Address to the Citizens of
New York Page 233 4. New York Representation and Petition Page 236 5. Camillus,
No. XXXIII. -- concluded Page 238 6. -- No. XXXIV. Page 240 7. -- No. XXXV.
Page 245 8. -- No. XXXVI. Page 253 9. -- No. XXXVII. Page 259 10. -- No.
XXXVIII. -- and last Page 266 11. Remarks on the Treaty of Amity, Navigation,
and Commerce, etc. By a Citizen of the United States Page 276 12. Plymouth
Protest Page 310 13. Resolutions adopted at a Meeting of the Inhabitants of
Westmoreland County (Virginia) September 25th, 1795 Page 311 14. Answer of the
President of the United States Page 312
American Remembrancer, etc.
CINNA. -- No. V.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 102.]
CAMILLUS, and all those who have preceded him, in considering the second
article of the treaty, assert that it accomplishes a primary object of the
envoy's mission, and one of great importance to the United States. He then
details, at some length, the important advantages which must result from an
acquisition of the western posts. Although there be nothing new in these
details, I am glad he has gone into them, as such a view will enable us
properly to appreciate the article in question.

Camillus states, that a recovery of these posts will extinguish a source of
controversy between the two countries -- will enable us to control the
hostilities of certain Indian tribes, which have already cost four millions --
will extend our trade -- will prevent Great Britain from contracting our
boundaries -- and will promote an harmonious and permanent connection between
the western and Atlantic countries.

That all these benefits would have accrued to the United States from an
unconditional surrender of these posts, cannot be doubted. I say,
unconditional, because when we come to the third article, we shall find, that
as far as an extension of trade is concerned, Great Britain has taken care not
only to come in for a participation of the fur trade, but that this clause is
so constructed, as to secure to her, especially when her local situation is
considered, an almost exclusive right to this lucrative branch of it. If the
surrender of these posts will be of such immense moment to the United States,
and their detention a proportional detriment, how happens it that the
acquisition is not better secured than it is? You say, it is true, that the
object is "accomplished:" from which expression, taken by itself, it might be
inferred, that a restoration had actually taken place, that being the natural
and obvious meaning of the word which is here made use of. It is not intended
in this place to charge Camillus with an intention to deceive, because from
other parts of this number, the period limited for this purpose is ascertained.
But he will allow me to ask, as has often been done already, why the
differences between the two countries could not have been adjusted in a
separate instrument? and why so remote a period is fixed for an evacuation,
which might certainly have been made in a much shorter time?

Great Britain and the United States mutually complained of infractions of the
treaty of peace. The former charged as with impeding the recovery of debts; and
we, on the other hand, remonstrated, among other things, against her detention
of the western posts. Without reviving here the question of, who was first in
fault? which would only lead to repetition, and does not admit of much new
light, it may be demanded, as the United States have, by the 6th article, not
only admitted the truth of the allegation against them, but provided for, and
actually assumed, and pledged their faith for payment of the principal and
interest of all the British debts of this description; why, after so solemn and
entire removal of the sole ground of complaint, did not our envoy insist upon a
more prompt execution of those parts of the treaty which had been violated by
Great Britain? It is evident that actual payment was not made by her a
condition precedent; for (...) less than eighteen months are allowed for the
exhibition (...) claims after the commissioners meet. She, therefore,
consi^^^ed the promise on the part of our government as equival^^^ to a
complete performance of such parts of the treaty as (...) alleged had been
infringed by us. It became her duty, th^^, the moment this obstacle was
removed, to withdraw her g^^risons, in the words of that treaty, "with all
convenient speed." These terms have been called ambiguous, although Gro^^
Britain herself, by her conduct immediately subsequent to the treaty, assigned
to them a meaning which they plainly import and which none but a skeptic would
ever have called i^ question. It we may judge by the time employed in re^^^ing
from other parts of the United States, and particularly from this city (New
York, whose evacuation was comple^^d in the fall of 1783) we may conclude, that
the garrisons from these posts might have all been withdrawn in fewer weeks
than our envoy has granted months for the purpose.

Taking together this article, so far as it respects the contemplated
evacuation, and the sixth article, abstracted from other parts of the treaty,
perhaps no other reasonable objection can be offered against them, except the
unreasonable time allowed t^ Great Britain to perform her part of the
stipulation. But when it is considered, that this article makes part of a
treaty of commerce, replete with the most injurious concessions from the United
States, some of which have undoubtedly been insisted upon as considerations for
it; who will be hardy enough to expatiate upon advantages which bear no
comparison with the sacrifices which have been incurred to obtain them? It will
readily occur, to every reader, that if America refuses to ratify a single
article, this one which has been excepted as the chef d'oeuvre of our
negociator, must also become a dead letter. Every friend to his country must
fervently wish either that the president will have virtue and firmness enough
to refuse it his sanction, or that the king, in a fit of pride, will not
consent to the modification proposed by the senate. That honorable body may
yet, without intending it, have promoted the salvation of their country.

But admitting a ratification to take place, is not every page a fruitful
source of doubts and altercations? If about so plain and short an instrument as
that which gave us peace, disputes immediately arose between the two countries,
and continued without adjustment for more than ten years -- if the plainest
expressions, and one of the most important articles, were quibbled into
unmeaning and nugatory stipulations -- if the constructions of Great Britain,
although manifestly repug^ant to the sense of the contracting parties -- to the
subject matter of the compact, and to the plain import of the terms, has been
warmly supported by men of talents and character among ourselves, who can say
that similar discussions and difficulties will not very soon take place
respecting an agreement, containing as many pages as the other does sentences,
and embracing a much greater variety of matter? In such an event, the charge
that we have first broken the treaty will be renewed; we may retort it if we
please; but the posts will be detained until the differences are settled, for
which purpose another embassy extraordinary must be recurred to; and who can
insure that we shall then be able to command the diplomatic skill and talents
of Governor Jay? Notwithstanding, therefore, Camillus considers this object as
accomplished, it may fairly be regarded as distant as ever, or at least
depending on such a variety of intervening incidents, as may probably defeat it
altogether. It has frequently been urged, that nothing but a desire to
procrastinate, and finally to break her engagements, if circumstances render it
prudent, could have induced Great Britain to insist upon so unreasonable a time
to perform what good faith demanded of her, the moment we satisfied the breach,
alleged to have been made by us, and which she could have no interest in
deferring to a remote day, if she ultimately intended to comply with her
promise. To garrison so many forts must be a great expense, to say nothing of
the troops who might be much more profitably employed elsewhere. The views,
therefore of the British cabinet in retaining them so long, can neither be
honorable, nor of the most pacific nature. They foresee, that if any
controversy arises between the two governments, which is almost unavoidable,
Great Britain will have a pretext for not carrying into effect this
stipulation. They also foresee, or hope, that peace will, in the mean time, be
restored to Europe, and that the king will have it in his power to make such
use of intervening occurrences as circumstances may render prudent. On the part
of America, no propitious event can reasonably be expected. Determined as she
is to abide by all her engagements, which she has evinced in every trying
situation, hers was the present moment! It is almost past; if she neglects, as
an inconsiderate individual, to improve it, which has too long been the case,
years of remorse and regret must follow.

If America could have commanded events, a more fortunate coincidence could not
have occurred than those which succeeded each other, in rapid and astonishing
progress, during the whole of her negotiation; a more brilliant campaign, than
the one on the part of our ally, is not furnished in the annals of hist^^^.
Success every where crowned her arms -- although singly opposed to the
coalesced powers of Europe, she not only expe^^^d which surpass belief. Great
Britain, with an obstinacy bordering on despair, expected her fate, which all
Europe considered inevitable. Could a more auspicious season for negotiation
have been desired? Our information from Great Britain corresponded with the
sanguine expectations which the reiterated defeats of the combined armies,
composed in part of British regiments, could not fail to excite. Every letter
from London was repla^e with the successful career of our envoy. He was
represented (...) obtaining every thing he asked; the mercantile interest of
that country had arranged itself on his side. Disgusted with the conduct of
their own court, and alarmed at the probable cons^quence, the merchants, in a
body, or by deputation, even before Mr. Jay's arrival, waited on Mr. Pit, and
extorted, (...) his fears, or a sense of justice, a relaxation in the prod^^^^
system, which was pursuing toward the United States. Nothing was talked of on
either side of the Atlantic, but the gracious reception of the American
minister, and the distinguished attentions which he received. Even the royal
family vied with the ministers in their efforts to render his visit as pleasing
as possible; and when intelligence arrived, that a treaty was signed, (...) a
man doubted but the terms of it corresponded with this for^^nate concurrence of
circumstances. The effect of these ex^^gerated accounts upon a late election is
well known. Wh^, after all this, can believe that this golden opportunity has
been permitted to escape, and that the fears of Great Britain have been allowed
to subside without our compelling her to do us justice? Who can believe that
she has had address enough to send our envoy home with a treaty which has
kindled throughout the continent a flame greater than any excited by her former
indignities or vexations? Camillus will smile, as he always does, at the idea
of addressing the apprehensions of Great Britain, or laying hold of her fears
to extort from her that redress which a sense of justice should long since have
induced her to grant. Philo-Camillus has resented, in very intemperate
language, my calling Camillus an apologist of Great Britain. I must be excused
for not retracting an appellation, which is not less courted by Camillus, than
deprecated by his friend.

Does not the 7th number of the Defense furnish new proofs of the epithet which
has been applied to Camillus? Every picture which represents the situation of
Great Britain as critical, is termed by him "exaggerated or false." If her
armies and those of her allies have been defeated by land, she is,
notwithstanding, "triumphant on the ocean." If she owes an immense debt, "her
credit is unimpaired" and "her resources are prodigious." If some discontents
prevail, "her government is vigorous, and was never better supported." If her
manufactures are injured, "they are still in a flourishing situation." If her
commerce is annoyed, "it is, notwithstanding, extensive, and prosperous." If
she is in difficulties or distress, "she is still haughty and overbearing."
Truly, sir! while you thus ring changes on the strength and resources of Great
Britain, who can be blamed for suspecting your motives? Injured as we are,
would it not have been a better proof of your amor patriae, if you now and then
brought into view, and no one can do it better, some of the resources of your
own country? Your language constantly reminds us of the conduct of the
royalists at the commencement of the late war. They expatiated, in very similar
terms, on the folly, and even madness, of opposing by force, acts of the
British parliament. They asserted, and with too much truth, that we were
without men, without arms, without military knowledge, without money, without
ships, without forts, without credit, and without any of the common means of
defense; that our commerce would be ruined, our towns reduced to ashes; and our
country laid waste. America, although the evils which she then complained of
were inconsiderable, when compared with the aggravated insults and wrongs she
is now submitting to, spurned at the thousand dangers which awaited her.
Disdaining to submit, she risked all to obtain redress. Heaven smiled on her
god-like efforts, and the bloody and unequal contest terminated in freedom and
independence.

It will not be without use to take a cursory view, in this place, of some, of
our resources, in case we are forced into war with a nation whose vexations,
want of faith and justice, will scarcely leave us any other alternative. War,
at any time, and under any circumstances, is an evil to be seriously
deprecated; but it is a calamity, against which no human prudence or foresight,
can, at all times, guard us. It is profitable, therefore, to know our own
strength and importance, not that we may become insolent, and provoke
aggressions, but that we may resent, in a dignified manner, those to which we
may be exposed from the injustice or pride of other nations. It is not by
tamely crouching to insults and indignities that we can long hope for the
invaluable blessings of peace; it is by being just to others, and compelling
others to be just to us. We may suffer in the conflict; but while our conduct
is remembered, our public character will command respect, and no nation will
gladly seek occasions to quarrel with us. The concessions we have been in a
habit of making to Great Britain, and the returns we have received, have not
only debased us abroad, but have damped the ardour of our youth, who cannot too
early be taught to respect their country, and to resent the injuries she may
receive. The pusillanimous language with which our public prints abound, would
better suit the minions of an arbitrary despot, than the citizens of a free and
enlightened nation. Patriotism and the love of liberty are almost extinct, and
we must not be surprised, if the virtuous and heroic deeds of our countrymen
who conducted us to the temple of freedom, and gave us a seat among the nations
of the earth, are soon stigmatized as the Jacobinical efforts of discontented
Democrats and Anarchis^s. These are the mild epithets which are constantly
applied by a certain party, to the best patriots among us, for no other reason,
than because, feeling for the prostrated honor and violated rights of their
country, they urge the government to a more manly expression of their
sentiments, and a more spirited vindication of their wrongs.

In case of war with Great Britain (which is by no means probable, if we act
with becoming spirit) what are the evils to be apprehended? -- Her most zealous
partisans ridicule the idea of her ever obtaining a footing in this country. At
the distance of a thousand leagues, reduced as her army already is, and at war
with a great maritime power, it cannot be dreaded that she will be able to
transport to this country, troops adequate to such an attempt. If she had the
means, her experience in the last war must satisfy her, that no conquest she
can attempt will be an equivalent for the enormous expense of making and
holding it. During the last war, although she recruited her armies in this
country, although she subsidized several German princes, yet, with all this
strength, added to her own, the only permanent acquisitions she made were a few
acres on our sea coasts. Many of the disadvantages with which America then had
to contend exist no longer. Among these may be reckoned, a cruel internal foe,
whom, for a long time, we did not dare to punish as traitors. Yet many
well-intentioned, weak-minded perso^^, whose opinions and wishes were on the
side of their countr^, but dreaded too much the power of Great Britain, and the
punishment which invariably follows an unsuccessful rebellion, openly to
espouse her cause, total want of military skill, no regular government or
constituted authorities, for committees and conventions could hardly be deemed
such, no arms, a weak and undisciplined militia, no credit, nor any other means
of representing money but by the pernicious circulation of a paper currency.
Great Britain, it will also be remembered, was then in the zenith of her power,
and at peace with all the world, which she had enjoyed without interruption
since the treaty of Paris, in 1763, a period of more than twelve years. Under
all these discouraging circumstances, America unsheathed the sword. She
^^^^ered, it is true; but in the midst of calamities, which she can never
experience again, she achieved prodigies of valor; and a success exceeding her
most sanguine hopes, finally crowned her arms. What is our situation at
present? We have constitutions and governments of our own choice -- Our general
government is as well obeyed, notwithstanding daily allegations to the
contrary, as any in the world -- We shall no longer fight with halters about
our necks, or with a gibbet in view -- We have men, whose military skill and
experience, acquired in the late war, will be inestimable -- We have not only
credit, but other means of raising a revenue, without again recurring to the
depreciating and fluctuating medium of paper -- We have a militia exceeding
half a million of men, well disciplined and accoutred, and officered, in many
instances, by persons who have received military lessons in the field of danger
and of death -- Great Britain has added millions to her debt; her commerce, if
not ruined, has greatly suffered by the French privateers; her manufacturers
are out of employ, and clamorous, and, what is no unimportant consideration, we
shall have a powerful ally in France, who has stemmed the united force of
Europe, has conquered some of her enemies, and compelled others to sue for
peace. This subject will be resumed in my next number, and further notice taken
of the seventh essay of Camillus.

CINNA.
New York, August 15, 1795. P. S. I am abused for my intemperate expressions
with respect to Camillus. I neither know him, nor does he know me. My
conclusions are drawn from his writings. If (...) be a patriot, he takes
uncommon pains to make the world think otherwise. He calls me a Jacobin for
defending my country; and he and his friends are angry with me when I suspect
his patriotism for making such defense necessary. No good will result from
being personal. Let principles, and not men, be our objects. Against arguments,
and not motives (except when they may be fairly inferred from our public
conduct or writings) be our attack. By his defense (for I know nothing more of
him) shall my judgment be formed of Camillus. By my reply (which is all he will
probably ever know of me) he is at liberty to make up his opinion of me.
Ridicule and abuse are no more tests of truth, than flowing numbers or
fine-turned periods. A question more momentous, than the one in which we are
engaged, has not been agitated since our existence as a nation! Let us be warm,
but not rude. With the talents of Camillus, the ta^^ would be easy to convince
any unprejudiced person, that our very independence hangs on a rejection of the
treaty. But nature is seldom as lavish of her gifts as she has been to
Camillus; I must be content, therefore, to pursue, in plain and unadorned
language, a duty which birth and citizenship impose upon me, and in which I
have no object unconnected with the welfare and happiness of my country.



No. VI.
IT is objected by some, who are for enduring every extremity, rather than
incur the hazards of war, that our trade will be ruined by British cruisers,
and that the revenue arising from it will fail. That our intercourse with
foreign nations will undergo some interruption, and our commerce be exposed to
considerable risk and injury, cannot be denied; but let us not look only at the
dark side of the picture; if our trade to other nations is impeded, their ships
will find no difficulty in obtaining access to us; they will assert their
neutral rights; and, being no longer colonies, Great Britain will have no
pretentions to interdict this communication, unless, indeed, she should attempt
to starve the United States, and by proclamation blockade every port in the
union. Such of these nations, as have not had the weakness or complaisance of
America, to sacrifice to Great Britain, the protection which neutral bottoms
should over afford, even to enemies' goods, may transport our property in
safety to any part of the globe. It may well be doubted, then, whether our
imports will be much less in times of war than at present, and ^ven our exports
in neutral vessels, and our own, will be considerable. Our merchants often
mention, with astonishment, the number of vessels, which arrived safe during
our revolutionary contest; when even neutral bottoms could not reach us without
the same hazard of being captured and condemned as our own. But the commerce we
should carry on, and that of neutral countries, would not be the only sources
of revenue; our privateers would cover the ocean. Does not the commerce of
Britain hold out allurements, and afford an extensive source of wealth to our
enterprizing merchants and mariners? The duty on prize goods, added to that on
the importation of goods in the ordinary way, would not only prevent a
diminution of the revenue, but carry it beyond its present point. Who would
believe, that in the maritime courts of only three of the counties of
Massachusetts, namely, of Suffolk, Essex, and Middlesex, there were libelled,
during the last war, no less than one thousand and ninety-five vessels, with
their cargoes, and thirteen cargoes which had been taken from vessels abandoned
after their capture, making in the whole eleven hundred and eight! Mr. Coxe, in
his View of the United States, assures us, that the records of those counties
authenticate the fact. He also adds, that the number of vessels belonging to
Great Britain, in 1774, as stated by a British premier, in his place in
parliament, was, 6219, whereof 3908 were British built, and 2311 were American
built. "What havoc then," exclaims Mr. Coxe, "did these fishermen make among
the British merchantmen? above a sixth of all their vessels, were brought by
these people as prizes into the markets of the United States, with cargoes to
an immense amount, composed of every species of military and domestic supply,
in a season of the utmost emergency: it appears too, that these prizes were no
less than a fourth part of all the British built ships of that nation. The
opinion of the most candid and best-informed estimaters, founded on careful
enquiry, countenance the presumption, that fifty-five per cent. of all the
vessels, captured by the people of Massachusetts during the war, were taken
before their arrival; so that there is the utmost probability, that the whole
number of vessels, which were captured by the shipping of these three counties,
was 2450 sail. How great a derangement was this to the British commerce; and
how heavy must have been the expense of salvage paid to the re-captors; how
great the number of marine prisoners; how serious the interruption to the
manning of the navy? "It would appear," says Mr. Coxe, "that the armed vessels
of our principal fishing state, captured, in the course of the late war, near
one half of the merchant ships, ordinarily belonging to Great Britain, and
abo^^ three-fourths of the number of her nat^^^ built ships."

A striking proof is exhibited, in what precedes, of the serious impression
made by our vessels on the navigation of Great Britain, at a time too, when it
might reasonably be thought she had nothing to fear from us. The source from
which this information is drawn, precludes the possibility of error. It may be
added, that such were the apprehensions then entertained of American
privateers, that insurance of British merchantmen was more exorbitant than in
any war, in which that kingdom had been engaged for fifty years past, although
no maritime nation, with whom she had contended during that period, had been so
deficient in ships of war, as the United States. If America, then, in her very
infancy, when she had to contend with a thousand difficulties, which are now
surmounted, and can never occur again, was able thus to annoy the greatest
naval power in Europe -- who can estimate the wounds which she may now inflict
on her commerce, in the present advanced state of her population and shipping?
She would indeed find us an unprofitable and troublesome enemy; without the
means of retaliation, she would have every thing to apprehend from America. Her
trade, as well as that of Spain, Holland, and Portugal, passes by our coasts;
and the injury and losses to which it would be exposed, are incalculable.

But not in her trade alone, would Great Britain be vulnerable; her colonial
possessions on the continent, must fall into our hands. If the gallant
Montgomery, at the head of a few hundred men, raised in haste, badly armed, and
although brave, mere novices in discipline, reduced, in an inclement season,
the whole province of Canada, except its capital, which, but for his
unfortunate and much-lamented death, would also have opened its ^^^tes to the
American arms; what may we not expect (...) ^he formidable force we should now
be able to send against (...)? The inhabitants of Vermont alone, which was then
but beginning its settlement, would more than suffice for its conquest. I make
no account of the disposition of the inhabitants, who are represented as highly
incensed against the British, and anxiously waiting a favorable occasion to
shake off their yoke, and become part of the United States. Nova Scotia too,
and the adjoining settlements, would be an easy prey to the militia of
Massachusetts and the Province of Maine. These important acquisitions to the
United States would more than countervail any loss they could possibly sustain.
Nor would any part of the West Indies, in case of an American war, long
continue colonies of Great Britain. France, with the aid she might derive from
this country, could not sail to reduce them. Her fleets and armies, destined
for such an expedition, after recruiting in the United States, might proceed,
full of health and well-provisioned for the islands.

The evils to Great Britain would not stop here. Her subjects hold great part
of the public debt of the United States, and our citizens are indebted to them,
to the amount of many millions sterling. Britain being the aggressing nation,
and the war not only of her seeking, but manifestly unjust on her part, the
principles of self-preservation would dictate, and her own conduct, and the
laws of war justify, the sequestration of this property. Mr. Jay, it is true,
with more complaisance to Lord Grenville, than delicacy to his own government,
has declared such conduct impolitic and unjust. Congress, and in particular Mr.
Dayton, who moved the measure, will not soon forget so handsome a compliment
from a minister, whose respect for the legislature of his own country, whatever
his private sentiments might be, ought to have checked this intemperate
effusion. Mr. Jay appears to have thought an excuse necessary for an article,
by which we yield much, without gaining any thing; and was, therefore,
determined to insert one even at the expense of congress and the honor of his
own country.

The tenth article will probably undergo an investigation hereafter; we
proceed, therefore, to enumerate some other distresses to which an American war
might expose Great Britain. The injury to her trade, from our privateers, has
already been stated; but if not a single vessel of this description was fitted
out, still her commerce would suffer beyond estimation. The interruption of her
trade to this country, would be an evil which admits of no alleviation. In the
year one thousand seven hundred and ninety one, we took from Great Britain,
excluding Ireland and the British East Indies, in British manufactures, to the
immense value of very near four millions of pounds sterling. It also appears,
from authentic public documents, that the vessels of Great Britain, loaded in
the United States, in 1791 and 92, were about equal in tonnage to all the
British vessels, cleared out of that kingdom for Russia, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden, Prussia, Poland, Hamburgh, Bremen, and Germany in general. Will a
nation, not infatuated, readily plunge into war with America, and encounter so
great a loss as must inevitably ensue from a stagnation of trade; for the
uncertain and precarious advantages to be reaped from such a state of things?
If we have no security in her wisdom or justice, may we not place some reliance
on her interest, which will be so sensibly and directly affected by a cessation
of all intercourse between her and the United States? what will be the clamours
of her manufacturers, many of whom are already idle and starving, when such
valuable consumers, as the Americans, are compelled, by the injustice of their
own government, to withdraw their custom? What must be the difficulties and
discontents of the merchants, when all remittances from this country not only
cease, but when their debtors here may be rendered unable, in the course of the
war, to pay any part of their dues, even on the return of peace? What, but an
universal spirit of distrust and dissatisfaction must pervade the whole
kingdom, which is now panting for peace, when it is discovered, that the
minister, by his violence and rashness, instead of restoring to it so great a
boon, has precipitated it into a new war, which cannot fail to be unpopular,
and as long as such extensive commercial connexions subsist between the two
countries, must be execrated in proportion to the ruin and distress which will
ever accompany it? Those who affect to despise the public opinion of Great
Britain, betray an ignorance of the history of that kingdom. However strong the
present attachment to their constitution -- however well supported the crown
may be -- whatever backwardness or apprehension may be discovered at the
mention of a revolution, after some of the unfortunate excesses which have been
perpetrated in France, the voice of the people, in much more arbitrary reigns,
has made itself heard, and ministers, who have been favorites of the crown, and
supported with all the patronage and weight of royalty, have been compelled to
yield to the imperious, torrent, or have been brought to the block in their
attempt to withstand it.

To conclude, from what happened in England in the last war, that one with
America at present will be popular, would be to reason from mistaken premises.
At that time an act of parliament had declared us in rebellion, and the general
acceptance and belief corresponded with the declaration. The very term carried
with it something that enlists the feelings of mankind against those, who are
branded with the odious epithet. Many wise men in England, were in sentiment
with this country, while she confined her object to redress of grievance, and
sought it by petitions and addresses; but when she took up arms, and more
especially when she declared herself independent, views, hostile to the mother
country, were imputed to her from the beginning, and a measure, extorted by
dire necessity, and a sense of self-preservation, was considered, as full
evidence of an original and early design to separate the colonies from the
mother country. Although nothing could be more fallacious, and, in point of
fact, more erroneous than such an inference, it had its effect; and either from
real abhorrence of its attempt, or from a fear to avow their real sentiments,
the American cause, for some time, lost ground in England.

At present, we are not only an independent people, but have been formally
recognized in that character by the king and parliament of Great Britain. The
justice or injustice, as well as the advantages and injuries of the war, would,
therefore, become objects of enquiry in England, the result of which could not
fail to be favorable to the American government and character. It could not
escape the most cursory observer, that with a sincere disposition to cultivate
peace, justice, and good understanding with all mankind, we had been most
cruelly insulted and outraged by the British cabinet. Corresponding sentiments
would take place, and the throne and parliament would be environed with
petitions for peace; for, even in that country, it is yet lawful for the
subject to convey, in respectful language, his complaints to the supreme
authority of the nation, without incurring the appellation of Jacobin or
Anarchist. What would be the effect of a war on the public debt of Great
Britain, besides a prodigious accumulation, cannot be ascertained. Its present
enormous bulk must fill thinking men with serious apprehensions for the
consequences of a further increase. It already exceeds what the most intrepid
financier would dare to call a public blessing. When we consider what an
enormous sum was added to it by her attempt to reduce this country to
unconditional submission, and the immense expense attending the operations of
war, whose scene is so distant as America, it would excite no surprise, should
a national bankruptcy be the consequence of another similar exertion. Private
bankruptcy must follow, and public, as well as individual ruin must ensue. No
man yet has forgotten the numerous failures and private distress which
immediately succeeded the late rupture with France, the shock of which must
have been inconsiderable, compared with what would happen on a breach with this
country.

But, say those, who are, at all events, for peaceful measures, your sea ports
are defenseless, and will be laid in ashes. Degrading as my opinion is of the
public conduct of Great Britain, I cannot bring myself to believe, that she
will pay so little regard to the laws of war and humanity, as to conduct it in
a way so totally repugnant to both. The burning of defenseless towns, or even
those which are fortified, unless in attempts to reduce them, is an imputation
so horrid, that it can only be made to excite our alarms. It is an evil not to
be seriously apprehended. It is a possible, but not a probable danger.
Desolating as the last war was, which raged with all the bitterness of civil
fury, when neither principles, character, nor humanity were respected, how few
of our towns were consumed: If then this calamity was but partially experienced
during a controversy, in which a breach of faith and humanity toward rebels,
was deemed no stain on the national character of Great Britain, why are we to
apprehend this merciless warfare at present? It will neither be the policy nor
interest of our enemy to conduct it in this way. The sea ports are emphatically
the residence of their best friends. Destroy them, and by whom will the injury
be felt? Principally by the advocates, not the enemies of Great Britain; by her
apologists, not by our friends. Burn the sea ports, and what becomes of the
British debtors? Set fire to our cities, and America, having lost all, she will
become a desperate and implacable foe. But has Great Britain no defenseless
towns? If justice and humanity have lost their influence on her councils, still
motives of interest will not be wanting to restrain her from such barbarous
displays of her superiority. Will she not dread retaliation? If America cannot,
will not France be able to return the infamous warfare in kind? Will not all
Europe applaud a deed provoked by her own cruelties and wantonness? Let us turn
then from the disgusting apprehension, chimerical in the extreme. While France
is at war, she can always, and it will be her interest to, furnish a fleet
sufficient for the protection of those of our towns which are most exposed.
Twelve ships of the line and as many frigates, which we ought to have of our
own, will more than suffice for the purpose. Many of them are capable of
fortification, and it would be no discredit to the government to employ more
activity in putting them in a better state of defense. It is become so common,
to attribute every effusion of patriotism to the worst of motives; that it is
with some reluctance I dare to remind my fellow citizens, of the united voice
of America, when similar apprehensions were excited to deter her from any
opposition to the claims of the British parliament. I must, however, be so
consonant to the feelings of many of the patriots of that day who yet survive,
and whose principles are not adulterated by pensions and offices, that I cannot
withhold the pleasure it must afford them. "No, sirs," says congress, with one
voice, addressing themselves to the people of Great Britain, "we never will,
while we revere the memory of our gallant and virtuous ancestors, we never can
surrender these glorious privileges for which they fought, bled, and conquered;
admit, that your fleets could destroy our towns, and ravage our sea coasts;
these are inconsiderable objects; things of no moment to men, whose bosoms glow
with the ardour of liberty. We can retire beyond the reach of your navy, and,
without any sensible diminution of the necessaries of life, enjoy a luxury,
which, from that period, you will want; the luxury of being free!" This was the
language of America, when she had infinitely more to apprehend than at present.
Whither has the spirit, that dictated it, taken its flight? Where is now that
public virtue, which not only manifested itself by those solemn expressions,
which are now ridiculed as the frantic ravings of a distempered imagination,
but carried into exercise, resolutions which astonished those to whom they were
addressed, and which, any but men struggling to be free, would have shuddered
to adopt? What, I repeat, is become of this spirit and patriotism? Are they
laughed to scorn? Or do they cease to warm and animate the sons of Columbia?
Heaven forbid! A few years of peace and luxury cannot have enervated their
limbs, extinguished their martial fire, or stifled, in their generous breasts,
sentiments which were once esteemed their ornament and pride. They want but to
be rouzed into action. Should a necessity exist, and the gallant youth of
America be summoned to their country's standard, may we not indulge the fond
hope, that they will pant to entwine their brows with laurels, gathered in the
walks of glory and honor, and burn to emulate, if not surpass, their
illustrious fathers in heroic efforts, to avenge the public cause?

CINNA.
New York, August 18, 1795.
ADDRESS To the Citizens of New York.
IF ever a period existed in the history of any people, in which great prudence
and circumspection were essential to the preservation of public liberty, that
period is now completely realized in the affairs of this country. To preserve
our constitution of government in its present limited, and happy form; to guard
against the encroachments, and the ambitious views of men, with whom the arm of
power is entrusted; to prevent the executive magistrate from interfering with
and exercising legislative authorities; to maintain inviolate our national
independence, and to give stability and energy to those political rights and
liberties which are guaranteed by the first terms of the social compact; is
indeed an arduous, but it is a necessary duty; a task which requires the most
intimate union of patriotism and talents, of deliberation and caution, with
fortitude and firmness.

Shall we ever remain embarrassed, as we hitherto have been, by the unhappy
dissentions which so long have enlisted us under the dangerous banners of
party? Subdued by prejudices, and governed by delusion, shall we ever continue
unmindful of the dictates of truth and reason? Shall resentment and passion be
always substituted for solid argument, and the invidious tongue of calumny be
permitted to stifle enquiry? If we really, with sincerity, regard our own
rights and liberties, if we are, in truth, attached to the constitution of our
country, the resolution must be formed to defend them from all invasion, from
whatever quarter the attack may originate.

The late treaty with Great Britain has long been transmitted to public
discussion; already we perceive the undisguised aversion of our countrymen to
that most odious of instruments: In vain do we search for its admirers among
the steady patriots of our country. They are only to be found among the
missionaries of Britain, and among the advocates of unlimited authority. These,
indeed, have attempted to influence your prejudices, in favor of particular
men, to excite your apprehensions, to seduce your understandings, and betray
your judgments, into a compliance with the unnatural compact; but all in vain.
Truth is omnipotent, and will, eventually, discomfit their insidious attempts.

Were we not told, and did we not believe, that the sole object of negotiation
was "a friendly adjustment of our complaints?" was it not officially intimated,
that our envoy would "carry with him a full knowledge of the existing temper
and sensibility of our country, and thus be taught to vindicate our rights with
firmness?" Were we apprized, or who of us had reason to imagine, that the
secret views and real intentions of our cabinet, was to strengthen the bands of
political connection, between this country and the monarchy of Great Britain? At
the moment the property of our industrious merchant was wrested from his
possession by the rapacious hand of violence; when our rights, as a neutral
nation, were invaded, and the honor of our flag most basely injured and
insulted, in short, when all the finer feelings of the American people were
kindled into indignation at the perfidious combination against the common
rights and liberties of mankind; the executive part of our government,
regardless of the dignity of their country, and unmindful of the sentiments of
the people, have concluded a treaty of amity and commerce with the most
unprincipled of nations -- Yet this is not all. We see in that baneful
instrument, our commercial interests abandoned to British rapacity, our
constitution violated, and its security submitted to the mercy of future
administrations; we perceive a branch of the government attempting to bind us
in particulars to which we had never, either expressly, or virtually, given our
assent, and endeavoring to establish, as a constitutional principle, its
unlimited right to bind us in all cases whatsoever. -- With pain we view that
branch attempting to draw the peculiar powers of the legislature within the
vortex of its own authority; to invade the sovereignty of the constituent
members of our union; to dispense with the existing laws and statutes of our
country; to destroy the personal security and liberties of our fellow citizens,
and, in time, to distort every feature that has either proportion, symmetry, or
beauty, in our federal constitution. Such is the operation and nature of the
present treaty. Such the injuries for which the American people unite to obtain
redress.

To the House of Representatives of the United States -- to the constitutional
organs of the people, assembled in their legislative capacity, composed of men
freely chosen from the body of the people by the voice of their country --
actuated by their common sentiments, impelled by their general sensibilities,
and authorized to declare the public will, we must submit our representations,
in them repose our hopes of redress; in that high deliberative assembly we must
place our trust, for the preservation of public liberty, and the safety of the
constitution.

Citizens of New York! your countrymen throughout the United States have
adopted a memorial to be transmitted to their public representatives. To that
memorial they have affixed their signatures. -- Their attention is placed upon
you wi^h an anxious solicitude that plainly bespeaks the importance of the
occasion. Remember, that the preservation of public liberty is one of the most
essential duties of social life. It remains then for you to evince to the
world, that while you are zealously anxious to preserve the blessings of peace
and order, and civil government, you are equally determined to preserve the
liberti^^ and constitution of your country.

Form of the petition, to be transmitted to Congress.
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled: The Representation and Petition of
the Subscribers, Inhabitants of the State of --, and Citizens of the United
States,
Respectfully Shows,
THAT, viewing, with deep and anxious concern, the present awful crisis in the
affairs of our common country, and influenced by an equal solicitude for the
security of our rights and liberties, and the preservation of peace with all
the world, we hereby exercise our constitutional right of petition, on a
subject as momentous as any that has ever agitated the feelings, or affected
the interests, of a free people.

The treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation between the United States and
Great Britain, lately negociated by the authority of the president of the
United States, and conditionally ratified by the senate, has been submitted to,
and undergone a full and public discussion: And your petitioners, having given
to it an impartial and deliberate consideration, feel it a solemn and paramount
duty, which we owe to ourselves and our posterity, to convey to you our free
and unb^affed opinion thereon; in doing which, with due deference to the
constituted authorities of our country, whose sanction to the instrument in
question, has been, in any manner, expressed, we declare, that to your
respectable body alone we now look up, as that great and dernier constituted
authority, which, having a more general and equal participation than any other
department of the government, in the common interests and feelings of the
people, and, moreover, possessing a constitutional control and decision on all
questions of peace and war, are pecul^arly the guardians of the public peace,
liberty, and welfare.

We regard, with the most lively apprehension, all those stipulations in the
said treaty, which, being of a political nature, have a tendency, directly or
indirectly, to involve us in the political intrigues of European nations, to
infract the treaty of alliance with France, and to give occasion for, and
produce the sad spectacle of war, between that magnanimous republic, and the
republic of the United States; stipulations with which, in our judgment, the
said treaty unhappily too much abounds -- And we cannot be less apprehensive,
under those direct and manifest encroachments on the constitutional powers of
congress and the rights of the people, which, in the exercise of an assumed
power on the part of the president and senate, have been made by the said
treaty, in the following instances:

1. In the regulation of commerce with a foreign nation; 2. In the regulation
of trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes; 3. In regulating the territory
of the United States, and of individual states; 4. In establishing duties and
imposts; 5. In establishing a rule of naturalization; 6. In constituting a
tribunal of appeal, paramount to the supreme judicial court of the United
States; 7. In changing the tenure of, and establishing a rule to hold, real
estates; 8. In defining piracies, committed upon the high seas, and declaring
the pun^^hment thereof; 9. In depriving free citizens of the privilege of the
writ of habeas corpus, in the case of piracy, as defined and punished by the
said treaty; and, Lastly; in attempting, in various other instances, to
restrain and limit the legislative authority of congress.
Wherefore, solemnly protesting against the exercise of power by the president
and senate, in any of the foregoing cases, without the concurrence of congress,
as manifestly tending to absorb all the powers of government in that department
alone; to establish, as the sole rule of legislation over all the great foreign
and domestic concerns of the United States, the mere will and absolute
discretion of the president and senate, in conjunction with a foreign power;
and finally to overturn and effect a total change in the present happy
constitution of the United States. We, your petitioners, most earnestly pray,
that the representatives of the people, in congress assembled, will, in their
wisdom, adopt such measures, touching the said treaty, as shall most
effectually secure, free from encroachment, the constitutional delegated powers
of congress, and the rights of the people, and preserve to our country an
uninterrupted continuance of the blessings of peace.

Defense of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 216.]

No. XXXIII. -- Concluded.
NEVERTHELESS, from the number of modern treaties, which exclude from that list
naval stores, and moreover from the manifest interest of nations, truly
considered, to ^^^row the rights of war in favor of those of peace; this clause
of the treaty, which takes a different route, is to be regretted as pursuing
the rigor of the law of nations -- Still, however, it cannot be objected to,
as a departure from the law; and agreeing with the course observed by Great
Britain antecedent to the treaty, it does not place our trade in these articles
upon a worse footing than it was, independent of the treaty.

The period of the negotiation was most unpropitious to a change for the better
-- in the midst of any maritime war, a belligerent nation, enjoying a naval
superiority, was like to have been tenacious of a right which she supposed
herself to possess (...) intercept naval supplies to her enemy -- But in a war,
in which it was more than ordinarily possible that the independent existence of
a nation might depend on the retaining a naval superiority, it was to have been
foreseen that she would not cons^^^ to relinquish such a right. The alternative
was, to insert the article as it stands, or to omit it wholly.

Had it been omitted, the condition of naval stores would have been the same as
with it. But our merchants would th^^ have continued to be exposed to uncertain
risks, which is always a great inconvenience. It is desirable, in similar cases,
to (...) a fixed rule. Merchants can then accommodate their speculation to the
rule; and causes of national contention are avoided.

It is in this view to be regretted, that the cases when provisions may be
treated as contraband, could not have been agreed upon; but as this was
impracticable, the next best thing has been done, by establishing the certainty
of compensation in all such cases. This gives one important species of
security, obviates one source of contention. And if really there may be other
cases than the universally admitted ones, in which provisions can fairly be
deemed contraband (as that designated by the a^t of congress of May 1777) the
securing of compensation wa^ truly a point gained by the article.

But while I confess, that the including of naval stores, among contraband
articles, is an incligible feature of the treaty, I ought to declare, that its
consequences to the interests of the United States, as it regards the trade in
those articles in time of war, do not appear to me important -- War between
other nations, when we are at peace, will always increase the demand for our
bottoms, so as to require much additional building of vessels, and probably in
that way to produce a more beneficial species of employment of the naval stores
our country affords, than that of their exportation for sale.

The adversaries of the treaty are eagle-eyed to spy out instances in which it
omits any favorable minutes which are found in our other treaties; but they
forget to balance the account by particulars which distinguish it favorably
from those treaties. Of this nature is the omission of horses from the list of
contraband, and still more the salutary regulations with regard to vessels and
their cargoes going to places besieged, blockaded, or invested. I do not
discover that these useful provisions or their equivalents, are in either of
our treaties with France, Holland, or Sweden.

It has been said, in reference to this article, "whenever the law of nations
has been a topic for consideration, the result of the treaty accommodates Great
Britain, in relation to one or both of the republics at war with her, as well
as in the abandonment of the rights and interests of the United States," -- And
the following examples are given, to each of which will be annexed a reply.

I. "American vessels, bound to Great Britain, are protected, by sea-papers,
against French and Dutch searches; but when bound to France or Holland, are
left exposed to British searches, without regard to ships' papers." The truth
of this proposition depends on another, which is, that the sea-papers are to be
absolutely conclusive; but reasons have been given for doubting this
construction, which, it has been remarked, does not obtain in practice. And it
is certainly a violent one, inasmuch as it puts it in the power of the neutral,
to defeat the rights of the belligerent party, in points of great consequence
to its safety.

II. "American provisions, in American vessels, bound to the enemies of Great
Britain, are left by the treaty to the seizure and use of Great Britain; but
provisions, whether American or not, in American vessels, cannot be touched by
the ^nemies of Great Britain." The construction of the treaty, upon which this
difference is supposed, has been demonstrated to be erroneous. -- The
difference, therefore, does not exist.

III. "British property, in American vessels, is not subject to French or Dutch
confiscation. -- French or Dutch property in American vessels, is subject to
British confiscation." This was the case before the treaty, which makes no
alteration in the matter. -- Moreover, it is counterbalanced by this
circumstance; -- That American property, in British vessels, is subject to
confiscation by France or Holland; but American property, in French or Dutch
vessels, is not subject to confiscation by Great Britain.

IV. "Articles of ship-building, bound to the enemies of Great Britain for the
equipment of vessels of trade only, are contraband. -- Bound to Great Britain,
for the equipment of vessels of war, are not contraband." This, also, was the
case before the treaty, which, consequently, has not in this particular more
than the former, produced any benefit to one party, to the prejudice of the
other. I forbear to dwell upon the article of horses, as falling under a
contrary discrimination; -- nor shall I insist on the additional circumstance,
that all American goods not generally contraband, if going to a place besieged,
blockaded, or invested by French or Dutch forces, are liable to confi^cation by
France or Holland; if going to a place besieged, blockaded, or invested by
British forces, are not liable to confiscation by Great Britain.

Differences of these several kinds are the accidental (...) of the varying
views of different contracting powers, and (...) slender grounds of blame or
praise of the respective contracts made with them.

The form of the criticisms last stated, leaves little doubt that it was
designed to insinuate an intention in this article to fa^^^ the Monarchs of
Great Britain, at the expense of the Republics of France and Holland. The
candor of it may be judged of by the two facts, first, that it makes no
alteration, i^ this view, in the antecedent state of things; and secondly, that
the relative situation of Holland, as the enemy of Great Britain, is subsequent
to the adjustment of the article.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXIV.
THE remaining articles of the treaty principally relate (...) those maritime
regulations, that are usually inserted in modern treaties between commercial
nations -- and on that consideration, as well as from their evident utility in
enabling us to distinguish with precision between what is, and what is not
lawful, in relation to those points -- they are entitled to our approbation;
still however even some of these customary articles, whose object and meaning
are so well understood, have been deemed exceptionable.

The first paragraph of the nineteenth article, in order to prevent injuries by
men of war, or privateers, enjoins (as before noticed) all commanders of ships
of war and privateers, and all other citizens or subjects, of either party, to
forbear doing any damage to those of the other, or from committing any outrage
against them: and decleres, that if they act to the contrary, they shall be
punishable, and moreover bound in their persons and estates to make full
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, of whatsoever nature the same may
be.

These prohibitions are conformable with the laws of (...) United States: If
under color of authority, those to whom the same does not relate, shall
receive injury, the act, according to its circumstances, is an offense, for
which the offender is not only answerable to his own country, but moreover to
the injured party, to whom he is bound to make full and complete reparation.

The open and explicit views of the parties, and their mutual engagement to put
this law in execution against all offenders, will be a salutary check upon the
too frequent irregularities that occur in the course of war between maritime
nations. The paragraph is a copy of a similar one contained in the fifteenth
article of the commercial treaty between France and Great Britain, concluded in
1786, and agrees with the fourteenth article of our treaty with Holland. In
order to guard still more effectually against the injuries to which the
citizens and subjects may be exposed from the private ships of war of each
other, the next paragraph stipulates, that all commanders of privateers, before
they receive their commissions, shall be subjected to give security, by at
least two responsible sureties, who have no interest in the privateer, in the
sum of fifteen hundred pounds sterling, or six thousand six hundred and
sixty-six dollars; or, if the privateer is manned with more than one hundred
and fifty men, in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, or thirteen
thousand three hundred and thirty-three dollars, to satisfy all damages and
injuries committed by such privateers, her officers, or any of her men, against
the tenor of the treaty, or the laws and instructions for the regulation of
their conduct; and in case of aggression, the commission of such privateer
shall be re-called and made void.

This particular regulation has been frequently introduced in modern treaties,
and exists in this precise shape in the last treaty of commerce beeween France
and Great Britain; I have found no instance where a larger sum has been
mentioned. It has, with little consideration, been made an objection to this
regulation, that the amount of the bonds are not adequate (...) compensate or
satisfy the damages that may be committed by these privateers.

The preceding part of the article gives the injured party a remedy against the
persons and estates of the aggressors; (...) bonds are not required for the
exclusive purpose of being the fund, to which the injured may have recourse for
satisfaction; but principally for the purpose of excluding from the command of
privateers, those dissolute and irregular characters, who are not ^^^trained by
either moral or political ties, and for whose good behavior, responsible and
disinterested men would not become bondsmen. The same principle is developed in
the civil administration of every nation. In cases of pecuniary trust, it is a
common and useful precaution, to require surety for the faithful discharge of
the office; and the principal advantage of this regulation is to secure the
employment of virtuous and upright officers. The amount of the bonds required
on these occasions is sufficient for this purpose, though inferior to the
property confided to them.

Thus the treasurer of the United States, who has the custody of millions,
gives bonds for only one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, the collectors of
New York and Philadelphia for fifty and sixty thousand dollars; sums very far
short of the public money of which they are in the receipt, yet sufficient to
secure the public against characters of doubtful integrity. The adequacy of the
sums, in the particular case, is moreover ^^^denced by the law and practice of
our own country. In the resolution of congress, of the third of April 1776,
which, (...) far as regards this point, remained in force throughout the
American war, congress required that the commander of ev^^y privateer, before
his commission should be delivered to him, should give bonds, with sureties, to
the president of congress, in the sum of five thousand dollars, if the vessel
was of or under one hundred tons; and of ten thousand dollars, if the vessel
was upwards of one hundred tons, to observe the rules and instructions
prescribed for their government. These sums are one quarter less than these
required by the article before us.

The last paragraph requiring the judges of the admiralty courts to furnish
formal and du^y authenticated copies of their proceedings in cases of the
condemnation of vessels or cargoes, belonging to the citizens or subjects of
the parties, is pursuant to that reasonable course of proceeding, which ought
always in this and similar cases to prevail.

The twentieth article, which is in prevention of piracy, has the sanction of
numerous precedents. A pirate is the common enemy of all mankind. -- All,
therefore, should unite in refusing him assistance and refuge, and in the
establishment of such regulations relative to the sale of his plunder, as, by
shutting against him every market, may thereby annihilate the motives to his
piracy.

The twenty-first article stipulates, that the citizens and subjects of the
parties, shall do no acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor
accept commissions or instructions so to act from any foreign state being an
enemy to the other party. -- That the enemies of either nation shall not be
allowed to invite, or endeavor to enlist, in their military service, any of
the citizens or subjects of the other; and the laws, prohibiting such offenses,
are to be punctually executed. The article farther stipulates, if any citizen
or subject of either party, who has accepted of a foreign commission to arm a
privateer against the other, it shall be lawful for the said party to treat and
punish the said citizen or subject, having such commission, as a pirate.

The general tenor of this article is in comformity with the spirit of our
preceding laws on this subject; it is moreover in perfect unison with the
duties of neutrality; those duties which a just regard to the principles of
integrity, as well as our enlightened pursuit of our own interest, require us
faithfully to perform.

Two objections have been offered against this article; one, that it precludes
such of our citizens as, with a view of acquiring military knowledge, would
otherwise engage volunteers in foreign service -- the other, that it makes
every citizen and subject, of either party, who has accepted a foreign
commission to arm a privateer against the other, and who shall be taken in
possession of such commission, liable to be punished as a pirate.

In respect to the first objection, if, by a rigorous construction, the case is
included within the prohibition, it should be remarked, that it is applicable
only to such engagements as commence and are made in time of mutual war. If we
have citizens, who, with the view of military education, are inclined to engage
in foreign service, though from past experience there is not much reason to
conclude that the examples would be numerous, they have full scope, as I
understand the article, in the periods of peace, to enter into any of the
regular armies of Europe, that they may prefer; and being thus engaged, they
are free to make the campaigns of war against Great Britain, if that is their
passion, without injuring this article. The prohibition seems to be against
engaging in the military service of a nation, previously in the condition of
"enemy" to one of the parties.

The second objection has even less plausibility than the first; the
disingenuous means that have been used to excite a rep^^bation of this clause
of the article, manifest the want of truth and patriotism of those who have
employed them: passion and the spirit of opposition have asserted, that the
provision before us is so extensive as to place the subordinate officers and
private men, on board of a privateer, within the predicament of her commander;
nay, that all persons, citizens, or subjects, of either nation, who would
accept commissions, or enter, in any capacity, in a foreign army or navy,
would, in consequence of this stipulation, be liable to be treated and punished
as pirates. It is sufficient, after noticing these attempts to impose upon the
public, to observe that the stipulation expressly confines the punishment, in
question, to the commanders of privateers, who, contrary to the laws of the
land, and the clear and equitable obligations of the members of a neutral
nation, shall be taken with such commission; and that it does not extend to the
under officers or crew, much less to such persons, as contrary to the preceding
inhibition of the article, should accept commissions in a foreign army or navy.
In respect to such misdemeanors in all cases (except that of equipping and
commanding a privateer, which will expose the commander, when taken, to be
punished as a pirate) the offense is cognizable only by the nation within whose
jurisdiction the offense is committed, or of which the offender is a citizen,
or subject; and, by our laws, is punishable only by fine and imprisonment.

A perversion of the sense of the clause, stipulating, that "the law against
all such offenses and aggressions shall be punctually executed," has been
attempted, though nothing can be be more innocent or unexceptionable. Its plain
meaning is, that each party, in the cases falling within its jurisdiction,
shall faithfully put in execution its own laws against the offenses and
aggressions, in contravention of the article. A stipulation between the
governments, to execute laws on a certain subject, can mean nothing else than
that each shall execute its own laws on that subject, in the cases appertaining
to its jurisdiction.

Though most of the objections preferred against the treaty are marked with
that illiberal spirit which characterizes the party who have unceasingly
labored to bring into discredit the government of the country, yet few of them
have been less veiled than this which condemns a stipulation intended to curb
and restrain the few dissolute and daring characters, who, from the least
worthy of all motives that lead to military enterprise, might otherwise engage
in this piratical warfare.

What virtuous citizen would feel himself justified in accepting such command?
What must be the morals of those instructors, who contend for a freedom to
commit, what humanity and honor forbid? Every treaty that we have concluded
with other nations, is enriched with this stipulation; not only our own
treaties but those between other nations contain it. How is it that we no where
discover a trace of disapprobation, either on the part of our statesmen, or
from an enlightened people, against a series of treaties, formed by different
public ministers, and ratified by a succession of congress, each of which
contains a provision that the crime of accepting a foreign commission to arm
and command a privateer, against a nation with whom we are at peace, shall be
treated and punished as piracy? Is it that our virtue has become less severe?
our morality more indulgent? or is it that our predecessors were less vigilant
in defending the rights of the citizens, than the ostentatious patriots of the
present day? But it is time to dismiss an objection entirely destitute of
integrity and decency.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXV.
THE twenty-second article bears upon its face its own justification -- It is
pursuant to those maxims which enlightened moralists recommend, and just
nations respect. It prescribes a course of conduct the most likely to procure
satisfaction for injuries, and to maintain peace, and is therefore entitled to
the approbation of all good men and real patriots -- It is particularly
valuable to a weak nation, or a nation in its infancy, as an additional guard
against sudden and unforeseen attacks of more powerful rivals.

The first paragraph of the twenty-third article, provides for the hospitable
reception of the public, or national ships of war of the parties, in the ports
of each other; and engages that the officers of such ships shall be free from
insult, and treated with decorum and respect.

The practice which our government has adopted in relation to these points,
independent of parties, is agreeable to (...) provision. See Mr. Jefferson's
letter of September 9th, 1793, to Mr. Hammand (...) so his letter, of the same
date, to Mr. Van Berckel.
And though the stipulation will be of less i^^^^^ance to us than it would be,
were we possessed of a respec^^^^ naval force, yet it may be useful -- By our
treaty with France, our ships of war have a right to enter their ports only in
(...) of urgent necessity, and not freely and for mere conve^^^^e.

With Spain and Portugal we have no treaties, and ^^^^quently not an
ascertained or perfect right to use their (...) -- Our navigation must be
protected from the Barbary powe^^ (...) force or by treaty. It is questionable
whether the latter mo^^ (...) prove effectual without the support of the
former; con^^^^ have therefore resolved to equip a small naval force, for (...)
special object of protecting our trade against the Alge^^^^, and the other
Barbary powers. Some port convenient to (...) scene of its cruising will be of
essential advantage to the e^^^ency and success of its employment: not only the
po^^^ Great Britain, but likewise the port of Gibraltar will, by (...) article
of the treaty, be open to us; and our frigates will (...) there entitled to a
hospitable reception, and their o^^ic^^ (...) that respect which shall be due
to the commissions which (...) bear.

The other paragraph of this article, provides, in case (...) ^merican vessel
by stress of weather, danger from ene^^ (...) other misfortune, should be
obliged to seek shelter in any ^^^tish port, into which, in ordinary cases,
such vessel could (...) claim to be admitted, that she shall be hospitably
received ^^mitted to refit, and to purchase such necessaries as (...) want;
and, by permission of the local government, to (...) part of her cargo as may
be necessary to defray her expe^^^^^ Our treaty with France contains a similar
provision; but the astrictions with which it is guarded are less than those of
the article before us.

The twenty-fourth article stipulates, that it shall not be ^^^^ful for any
foreign privateers, commissioned by any nat^^^^^ war with either of the
parties, to arm the vessels, or to (...) exchange their prizes in the ports of
either of the parties; (...) that they shall not be allowed to purchase more
provisions (...) shall be necessary to carry them to the nearest port of the
(...) on from whom they received their commission; and the ^^^^ty-fifth article
stipulates that the ships of war and private^ (...) either party may carry
whithersoever they please, the (...) and goods taken from their enemy; and that
such prizes, on their arrival in the ports of the parties, shall not be
searched, seized, detained, nor judicially examined touching the validity of
their capture, but may freely depart -- and furthermore, that no shelter or
refuge shall be given in the ports of one of the parties to such as have made
prizes upon the citizens or subjects of the other. Though the law of nations is
explicit, that one nation having formed a particular stipulation with another,
is not capable, by a subsequent treaty with a third nation, to do away, or
annul its former stipulations, but that the elder treaty, in such case, remains
in full force, notwithstanding such posterior and contradictory treaty; yet, in
order to remove all cavil on this point, and to maintain a ^^rupulous regard to
good faith, even in appearance as well as in reality, and especially in
relation to our treaty with France, the article further declares "that nothing
in the treaty contained shall be construed, or operate contrary to former and
existing public treaties with other sovereigns or states," and adds, that
neither of the parties, while they continue in friendship, will form any treaty
inconsistent with this, and the preceding article -- this last clause has been
censured as an undue restraint; while it is in fact a mere redundancy; as long
as a treaty between two nations continues in force, it is against good faith
for either to form a treaty with another nation inconsistent with it -- if the
treaty is once disclosed, by whatever means, no treaty with another nation can
be inconsistent with it -- The clause, therefore, only converts into an express
promise, what without it is an implied one, that the parties will not
contravene their stipulations with each other by repugnant engagements with a
third party -- The disingenuity on this point has gone so far as to torture the
clause into a positive stipulation against any treaty with another power
conferring peculiar advantages of commerce upon that power. It is a sufficient
reply to this, that the clause is expressly confined to the twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth articles; determining nothing as to the other articles of the
treaty. The general principle of this last objection has been sufficiently
discussed elsewhere.

The article concludes with a mutual engagement, that neither of the parties
will permit the ships, or goods, of the other to be taken within cannon shot of
the coast, nor in any of the bays, ports, or rivers of their territories; and
in case of such capture, the party, whose territorial rights are violated,
shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain full satisfaction for the vessels or
goods taken. This stipulation is conformable to the duty and practice of
nations who have entered into no special engagements requiring the same, and
agrees with a common p^^vision in public treaties.

Hitherto we have prudently avoided granting to any nation a right to arm their
privateers or to fell their prizes in our p^^ts; our laws are explicit in
prohibiting such equipments; and (...) exclusion thereof, contained in the
twenty-fourth article, i^ agreeable to the declared policy of the country. We
have engaged in our treaty with France to prohibit her enemies from selling
their prizes within our ports; but not having engaged to permit France to sell
her prizes therein, we were free (...) agree with Great Britain, that her
enemies shall, likew^^^ be prohibited from selling their prizes within our
territory. (...) clause in the twenty-fifth article denies all refuge to the
(...) of war and privateers that have made prizes upon either of (...) parties;
and the last clause of the twenty-fourth article stip^lates, that foreign
privateers, enemies to either of the pa^^^^^ shall not be allowed to purchase
more provisions than su^^ti^^^ to carry them to the nearest port of the nation
from whom (...) received their commissions.

These clauses will operate only against such nations (...) not, by an elder
treaty, secured a right of reception (...) ports of the parties -- Still,
however, it is alleged that (...) articles violate our treaty with France. It
has already been (...) served that the treaty contains a clear and explicit
agree^^^^ of the parties, excepting from its operation all former exist (...)
public treaties -- Out treaty with France is an antecedent (...) existing
public treaty, and consequently excepted, in all its (...) from the operation
of the treaty before us -- Whatever right (...) privilege, therefore, is
secured to France in virtue of (...) treaty, she will continue to enjoy,
whether the same res^^^^ the reception of her public ships of war, privateers
or pri^^^ in our ports, or the exclusion therefrom of those of her e^mies.

Could there be a doubt on this point, the practice of oth^^ nations, and
especially that of France, on the very point, wo^^ effectually remove it. --
The fifteenth and thirty-sixth article (...) the commercial treaty of Utrecht,
between France and G^^^ Britain, contain the same stipulations as the
twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth articles of the treaty before us. That treaty
was in existence and force, at the time of forming our treaty with France, yet
France found no difficulty in the insertion of the same stipulations in her
treaty with us. She could not have considered their insertion in the treaty
with us as a violation of her treaty with Great Britain, otherwise good faith
would have to strained her -- The war that soon after took place between France
and Great Britain, dissolved the treaty of Utrecht. Our treaty with France
remained in force; yet, in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty-six,
France and Great Britain entered into a commercial treaty, the sixteenth and
fortieth articles of which renew the stipulations contained in the fifteenth
and thirty-sixth articles of the treaty of Utrecht.

If France was free, first to form these stipulations with us, in 1778,
notwithstanding her prior and existing treaty with us, we must be equally free
in a treaty with the same, or any other power, to agree to similar
stipulations. Both were free, and neither violates their former engagements, by
assenting, as we have done, to these stipulations in a posterior treaty.

It is further alleged, that these articles are injurious to the interest of
the United States, because they prohibit, in certain cases, foreign privateers
to rendezvous in our ports, and to sell within our territory, the prizes they
may have taken. -- If it is desirable to render out principal sea ports and
cities scenes of riot and confusion, if it is politic to divide our citizens,
by infusing into their minds the hostile spirit with which the nations at war
are animated against each other, if we are prepared to see the prostration of
public authority, and to behold the laws trampled upon by armed banditti, if we
are ready to invite our citizens to abandon their regular and useful
employments, and to engage, as adventurers, even against each other, in the
pursuit of plunder, then is the objection well-founded, then is the restraint
pernicious, then is the stipulation worthy of condemnation -- But if to
establish the reverse of all this, is the effort and aim of every wise and
prudent government, the stipulation in question demands the approbation of all
virtuous citizens.

But were none of these consequences to be apprehended from the free admission
of the privateers of all nations engaged in war, and the permission to sell
their plunder, it would, notwithstanding, be against the interests of the
United States to allow the same. It is a sound commercial principle, that the
interest of buyers, as well as sellers, is best promoted by a free competition.
-- The great number of the sellers of foreign manufactures and productions,
afford the best market for the buyers -- The great number of buyers of our
productions, afford the best market for the sellers -- foreign privateers are
precarious sellers, and buyers only for their own consumption -- They drive
away and banish from our markets, both buyers and sellers. When our coasts are
lined with foreign privateers that rendezvous in our ports, the merchant ships
of all nations, not excepting our own, will be liable to interruption, and
discouraged from coming to our markets; and these of the belligerent powers
will be generally excluded -- Our markets might, perhaps, derive supplies from
the prizes that such privateers should take, so as, in some degree, to
compensate for the deficiency that would proceed from the exclusion of foreign
merchantmen; but this supply would be uncertain, irregular, ill-assorted, and
partial, while the principal commercial detriment would (...) without
mitigation, that of a partial or total destruction of foreign competition in
the purchase of our agricultural and other productions.

If, moreover, it is the duty, as well as the interest, of (...) United States,
to observe an exact and scrupulous neutrali^^, amidst the wars of other
nations, one of the most efficaciou^ means of effecting that purpose, will be,
to remove every ^^^^tation that might lead our citizens to an opposite course
-- ^o allurement would be more likely to seduce them from their duty than that
which is offered by the expected gains of priva^^^^ (...) -- no avenue of
political mischief should, therefore, be clo^e carefully closed.

If these articles are exceptionable, in any respect, it is that in imitation
of the analogous articles in our treaty with Fra^^^^ they allow the privateers
of the parties, in cases not incou^^^ out with former treaties, to rendezvous
in, and their p^^^^ to be brought into, each others ports and harbors: It
wo^^^ in my judgment, have been the true policy of the United S^^^^^ as well as
with the view of maintaining an impartial and ^^cided neutrality in the wars of
Europe, from a participation (...) which our remote situation, with due
prudence, is an exe^^tion; as likewise, in order to promote, in the most
advanta^^ous manner, our national prosperity, totally and for ever to (...)
excluded all foreign privateers and prize^ from our ports and harbors.

But having entered into these stipulations with France, (...) which she has
the use of all our ports against all other nations we having the use of her
ports only against those nations (...) have not an elder treaty with her, it
would have manifested a^^ unwise partiality to have refused to enter into
similar stipulations with other nations who might desire them.

The twenty-sixth article provides, in case of a rupture between the parties,
that the merchants and others of each nation, residing in the dominions of the
other, may remain and continue their trade during good behavior? in case,
however, their conduct should become suspicious, they may be remoted, and a
twelvemonth after the publication of the order of removal is to be allowed for
that purpose: But this term is not to be granted to such persons as act
contrary to law, or are guilty of any offense against the government: all such
persons may be forthwith removed or sent out of the respective dominions of the
parties. The residue of the article is calculated to ascertain the condition of
the parties, when the rupture shall be deemed to exist -- each nation remains
the exclusive judge of the foreigners among them, and will be able to decide
from their behavior, how far their residence may be compatible with the public
safety. In case of suspicion only, that their residence will prove detrimental,
they may order them to depart, reasonable time being allowed them to collect
their effects -- On the one hand, the article affords to the parties perfect
security against the irregular and suspicious conduct of foreigners, who may be
among them on the breaking out of war, and, on the other, consults with that
liberality which the modern usage of nations sanctions, the safety and
convenience of those, who, under the faith of the respective governments, have
chosen a residence in the dominions of the parties. -- Our treaties with
France, Holland, and Sweden, secure to the merchants of the respective parties
a limited period, after the commencement of war, within which they may collect
their effects, and remove; and the article before us relative to this subject,
is a transcript of the second article of the treaty of commerce, of 1786,
between France and Great Britain -- The objection, therefore, to there being a
certain term within which they cannot be removed upon bare suspicion lies
against our other treaties and against almost all the treaties of Europe for
many years -- The pretense to order away upon mere suspicion would defeat all
the stipulations, that allow a certain term to collect, fell, and remove debts
and effects; and for that reason could not be supported.

The remainder of the article which gives an option to each party, either to
request the recall, or immediately to send house, the ambassador of the other
without prejudice to their mutual friendship and good understanding, is a
valuable feature -- The power "immediately to send home," without giving
offense, avoids much delicate embarrassment connected with an application to
recall -- It renders it easier to arrest an intriguing minister in the midst of
a dangerous intrigue, and it is a check upon the minister by placing him more
completely in the power of the government with which he resides. -- These last
circumstances are particularly important to a republic, one of the chief
dangers of which, arises from its exposure to foreign intrigue and corruption.

The twenty-seventh article, which provides for the delivery of all persons,
charged with murder or forgery committed within the jurisdiction of one party,
and who have taken refuge within the territories of the other, is a regulation
of peculiar worth between nations whose territories are contiguous (...) each
other -- Without such regulation, the case, with which the perpetrators of
these atrocious crimes, might escape punishment, especially on the frontiers,
by passing out of one jurisdiction into the other, would, in a great measure,
destroy the security against these offenses, that arises from the fear and
certainty of punishment -- The provision, that such delivery shall not be made
unless upon the exhibition of such evidence of criminality, as, according to
the laws of the place where the fugitive shall be found, would justify his
apprehension and commitment for trial, if the crime had there been committed,
will prevent vexatious requisitions, and is a caution due to the rights of
individuals.

The twenty-seventh, and concluding article, establishes, that the first ten
articles of the treaty, shall be permanent; that the remaining ones, except the
twelfth, which, with the twenty-fifth, constitute the body of the commercial
part of the treaty, mall be limited in their duration to twelve years; and
reciting that the twelfth will end, by its own limitation, at the end of two
years after the termination of the present European (...) further establishes,
that, within the last mentioned term, and in time to perfect the business by
the expiration of that term, the discussion of the subject of the twelfth
article shall be renewed, and if the parties cannot agree on such new
arrangement, concerning it, as may be satisfactory, that then all the said
remaining articles (in other words, all but the first ten) shall cea^^ and
expire together. This article, which is an entirely independent one, obviates
the doubt, affected to be entertained, whether the exception in the
ratification, with regard to the twelfth article, did not do away the
stipulation by which the continuance of the treaty, except the first ten
articles, beyond the term of two years, after the expiration of the war, is
made to depend on a further arrangement of the West India trade. This separate
article is positive and conclusive, absolutely an^^ulling the treaty at that
time, if such an arrangement be not made, and thereby places it in the power of
either party so as manage the matter as to put an end to all the commercial
part of it, except what relates to inland trade and navigation with the
neighboring British territories, at the end of the short period of two years
from the termination of the existing war. This alone is sufficient to confound
all the high-charged declamations against the tendency of the treaty to ruin
our trade and navigation.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXVI.
IT is now time to fulfill my promise of an examination of the constitutionality
of the treaty. Of all the objections which have been contrived against this
instrument, those relating to this point are the most futile -- If there be a
political problem capable of complete demonstration, the constitutionality of
the treaty, in all its parts, is of this sort -- It is even difficult to
believe, that any man in either house of congress, who values his reputation
for discernment or sincerity, will publicly hazard it by a serious attempt to
controvert the position.

It is, nevertheless, too much a fashion with some politicians, when hard
pressed on the expediency of a measure, to entrench themselves behind
objections to its constitutionality -- Aware that there is naturally in the
public mind a jealous sensibility to objections of that nature, which may
predispose against a thing otherwise acceptable, if even a doubt, in this
respect, can be raised -- They have been too forward to take advantage of this
propensity, without weighing the real mischief of the example. For, however it
may serve a temporary purpose, its ultimate tendency is, by accustoming the
people to observe, that alarms of this kind are repeated with levity and
without cause, to prepare them for distrusting the cry of danger, when it may
be real: Yet the imprudence has been such, that there has scarcely been an
important public question, which has not involved more or less of this species
of controversy.

In the present case, the motives of those who may incline to defeat the
treaty, are unusually strong for creating, if possible, a doubt concerning its
constitutionality.

The treaty, having been ratified on both sides, the dilemma plainly is between
a violation of the constitution, by the treaty, and a violation of the
constitution, by obstructing the execution of the treaty.

The VIth. article of the constitution of the United States, declares, that
"the constitution and the laws of the United States, made in pursuance thereof,
all treaties made, or which shall be made under the authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme law of the land, any thing in the constitution or
laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding." A law of the land, till
revoked or annulled, by the competent authority, is binding, not less on each
branch or department of the government than on each individual of the society
-- Each house of congress collectively, as well as the members of it
separately, are under a constitutional obligation to observe the injunctions of
a preexisting law, and to give it effect. -- If they act otherwise, they
infringe the constitution; the theory of which knows, in such case, no
discretion on their part -- To resort to first principles for their
justification, in assuming such a discretion, is to go out of the constitution
for an authority, which they cannot find in it -- it is to usurp the original
character of the people themselves -- it is, in principle, to prostrate the
government.

The cases must be very extraordinary that can excuse so violent an assumption
of discretion. They must be of a kind to authorize a revolution in government;
-- for every resort to original principles, in derogation from the established
constitution, partakes of this character.

Recalling to view, that all but the first ten articles of the treaty are
^^able to expire at the termination of two years af^^r the present war; if the
objection to it in point of constitutionality cannot be supported -- let me
ask, who is the man ha^^^ enough to maintain, that the instrument is of such a
nature (...) to justify a revolution in government?

If this can be answered in the affirmative, adieu to all the securities which
nations expect to derive from constitutions of government. They become mere
bubbles, subject to be blo^^^ away by every breath of party -- The precedent
would be ^^^tal one -- Our government, from being fixed and limited, (...)
become revolutionary and arbitrary -- All the provisions which our
constitution, with so much solemnity, ordains "for for^^tic tranquillity,
providing for the common defense, prom^^^ the general welfare, and securing the
blessings of liberty to ^^selves and posterity," evaporate and disappear --

Equally will this be the case, if the rage of party spirit (...) meditate, if
the momentary ascendency of party, in a participle branch of the government,
can effect, and if the people can be so deceived as to tolerate -- that the
pretense of a violation of the constitution shall be made the instrument of its
actual violation.

This, however, cannot be -- There are already convinc^^ indications on the
very subject before us, that the good se^^ of the people will triumph over
prejudice and the acts of p^^^ -- that they will finally decide according to
their true intere^^ and that any transient or partial superiority, which may
exist, if abused for the purpose of infracting the constitution, will consign
the perpetrators of the infraction to ruin and disgrace. But alas! what
consolation would there be in the ruin of a party for the ruin of the
constitution?

It is time to enter on the momentous discussion. The question shall be
examined in the four following views -- 1. In relation to the theory of the
constitution -- 2. In relation to the manner in which it was understood by the
convention who framed it, and by the people who adopted it -- 3. In relation to
the practice upon a similar power in the confederation -- 4. In relation to the
practice under our present constitution, prior to the treaty with Great Britain
-- In all these views, the constitutionality of the treaty can be vindicated
beyond the possibility of a serious doubt.

1. As to the theory of the constitution -- The constitution of the United
States distributes its powers into three departments, legislative, executive,
judiciary. -- The first article defines the structure, and specifies the
various powers, of the legislative department -- The second article establishes
the organization and powers of the executive department -- The third article
does the same with respect to the judiciary department -- The fourth and fifth,
and sixth articles, which are the last, are a miscellany of particular
provisions.

The first article declares that "all legislative power granted by the
constitution shall be vested in a congress of the United States, which shall
consist of a senate and a house of representatives."

The second article, which organizes and regulates the executive department,
declares that the "executive power shall be vested in a president of the United
States of America;" and proceeding to detail particular authorities of the
executive, it declares that the "president shall have power, by and with the
advice and consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the
senators present concur." There is in no part of the constitution any
explanation of this power to make treaties, any definition of its objects, or
delineation of its bounds -- The only other provision in the constitution
respecting it, is in the sixth article, which provides, as already noticed,
that all treaties made or which shall be made under the authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme law of the land; -- and this notwithstanding any
thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary.

It was impossible for words more comprehensive to be used than those which
grant the power to make treaties. They are such as would naturally be employed
to confer a plenipotentiary authority -- A power "to make treaties," granted in
these indefinite terms, extends to all kinds of treaties, and with all the
latitude which such a power, under any form of government, can possess -- the
power "to make" implies a power to act authoritatively and conclusively,
independent of the after-clause which expressly places treaties among the
supreme laws of the land. The thing to be made is a treaty.

With regard to the objects of the treaty, there being no specification, there
is, of course, a charte blanch. The general proposition must, therefore, be,
that whatever is a proper subject of compact, between nation and nation, may be
embraced by a treaty between the president of the United States, with the
advice and consent of the senate, and the correspondent organ of a foreign
state.

The authority being general, it comprizes, of course, whatever cannot be shown
to be necessarily an exception to it.

The only constitutional exception to the power of making treaties is, that it
shall not change the constitution; which results from this fundamental maxim,
that a delegated authority cannot alter the constituting act, unless so
expressly authorized by the constituting power. An agent cannot new-model his
own commission. -- A treaty, for example, cannot transfer the legislative power
to the executive department, nor the power of this last department to the
judiciary; in other words, it cannot stipulate that the president, and not
congress, shall make laws for the United States, that the judges, and not the
president, shall-command the national forces.

Again, there is also a national exception to the power of making treaties, as
there is to every other delegated power, which respects abuses of authority in
palpable and extre^me cases. On natural principles, a treaty, which should
manifes^^^ betray or sacrifice the private interests of the state, would be
null. But this presents a question foreign from that of the modification or
distribution of constitutional powers. It applies to the case of the pernicious
exercise of a power, where there is legal competency. Thus the power of treaty,
though extending to the right of making alliances offensive and defens^^^,
might not be exercised in making an alliance, so injurious to the state as to
justify the non-observance of the contract.

Beyond these exceptions to the power, none occurs that can be supported.

Those which have been insisted upon, toward invalidating the treaty with
Great Britain, are not even plausible. They amount to this, that a treaty can
establish nothing between the United States and a foreign nation, which it is
the province of the legislative authority to regulate in reference to the
United States alone. It cannot, for instance, establish a particular rule of
commercial intercourse between the United States and Great Britain; because it
is provided in the constitution, that congress "shall have power to regulate
commerce with foreign nations." This is equivalent to affirming that all the
objects upon which the legislative power may act, in relation to our country,
are excepted out of the power to make treaties.

Two obvious considerations refu^e this doctrine. One, that the power to make
treaties, and the power to make laws, are different things, operating by
different means, upon different subjects; the other, that the construction
resulting from such a doctrine would defeat the power to make treaties, while
its opposite reconciles this power with the power of making laws.

The power to make laws is, "the power of pronouncing authoritatively the will
of the nation as to all persons and things over which it has jurisdiction:" or
it may be defined to be "the power of prescribing rules binding upon all
persons and things over which the nation has jurisdiction." It acts
compulsively upon all persons, whether foreigners or citizens, and upon all
things within the territory of such nation, and also upon its own citizens and
their property without its territory in certain cases and under certain
limitations. But it can have no obligatory action whatsoever upon a foreign
nation or upon any person or thing within the jurisdiction of a foreign nation.

The power of treaty, on the other hand, is the power by agreement, convention,
or compact, to establish rules binding upon two or more nations, their
respective citizens and property. The rule established derives its reciprocal
obligation from promise, from the faith which the contracting parties pledge to
each other -- not from the power of either to prescribe a rule for the other.
It is not here the will of a superior that commands; it is the consent of two
independent parties that contract.

The means which the power of legislation employs, are laws which it enacts, or
rules which it enjoins; the subject upon which it acts is the nation of whom it
is, the persons and property within the jurisdiction of the nation. The means,
which the power of treaty employs, are contracts with other nations, who may or
may not enter into them -- The subjects upon which it acts are the nations
contracting and those persons and things of each to which the contract relates
-- Though a treaty may effect what a law can, yet a law cannot effect what a
treaty does. These discriminations are obvious and decisive; and however the
operation of a treaty may, in some things, resemble that of a law, no two ideas
are more distinct, than that of legislating and that of contra^^ing.

It follows that there is no ground for the inference pretended to be drawn,
that the legislative powers of congress are excepted out of the power of making
treaties. It is the province of the latter to do what the former cannot do --
Congress (to pursue still the case of regulating trade) may regulate by law,
our own trade and that which foreigners come to carry on with us; but they
cannot regulate the trade which we may go to carry on in foreign countries;
they can give to us no rights, no privileges there. This must depend on the
will and regulations of those countries; and, consequently, it is the province
of the power of treaty to establish the rules of commercial intercourse between
foreign nations and the United States. The legislative may regulate our own
trade, but treaty only can regulate the national trade between our own and
another country.

The constitution accordingly considers the power of treaty as different from
that of legislation. This is proved in two ways, I. That while the constitution
declares that all the legis^^tive powers which it grants shall be vested in
congress, it vests the power of making treaties in the president with consent
of the senate. II. That the same article by which it is declared that the
executive power shall be vested in a president, and in which sundry executive
powers are detailed, gives the power to ma^^ treaties to the president, with
the auxiliary agency of the ^^nate. Thus the power of making treaties is placed
in the (...) of executive authorities; while the force of laws is annexed (...)
its results. This agrees with the distribution commonly ma^^ by theoretical
writers, though perhaps the power of treaty, from its peculiar nature, ought to
form a class by itself.

When it is said, that congress shall have power to regulate commerce with
foreign nations, this has reference to the d^tribution of the general
legislative power of regulating trade between the national and the particular
governments; and serves merely to distinguish the right of regulating our
external trade, as far as it can be done by law, which is vested in congre^^
from that of regulating the trade of a state within itself, whi^^ is left to
each state.

This will the better appear from the entire clause. "The congress shall have
power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states
and with the Indian tribes," which is the same as if it had been said, The
whole powers of regulating trade by law shall reside in congress, except as
(...) the trade within a state, the power to regulate which shall remain with
such state. But it is clearly foreign to that mutual regulation of trade
between the United States and other nations, which, from the necessity of
mutual consent, can only be performed by treaty. It is indeed an absurdity to
say, that the power of regulating trade by law is incompatible with the power
of regulating it by treaty; since the former can, by no means, do what the
latter can alone accomplish; consequently, it is an absurdity to say, that the
legislative power of regulating trade is an exception to the power of making
treaties.

Laws are the acts of legislation of a particular nation for itself. Treaties
are the acts of the legislation of several nations for themselves jointly and
reciprocally. The legislative powers of one state cannot reach the cases which
depend on the joint legislation of two or more states. For this, resort must be
had to the pactitious power, or the power of treaty -- This is another attitude
of the subject, displaying the fallacy of the proposition, that the legislative
powers of congress, are exceptions to, or limitations of, the power of the
president, with the aid of the senate, to make treaties.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXVII.
IT shall now be shown, that the objections to the treaty, founded on its
pretended interference with the power of congress, tend to render the power of
making treaties, in a very great degree, if not altogether, nominal -- This
will be best seen by an enumeration of the cases of pretended interference.

1st, The power of congress to lay taxes, is said to be impaired by those
stipulations which prevent the laying of duties on particular articles; which
also prevent the laying of higher or other duties on British commodities than
on the commodities of other countries, and which restrict the power of
increasing the difference of duties on British tonnage and on goods imported in
British bottoms.

2d, The power of congress to regulate trade is said to be impaired by the same
restrictions respecting duties, in as much as they are intended, and operate,
as regulations of trade -- by the stipulations against prohibitions in certain
cases; and, in general, by all the rights, privileges, immunities, and
restrictions in trade, which are contained in the treaty; all which are so many
regulations of commerce, which are said to encroach upon the legislative
authority.

3d, The power of congress to establish an uniform ^ule of naturalization, is
said to be interfered with, by those provision of the treaty which secure to
the settlers, within the precincts of the British posts, the right of becoming
citizens of the United States, and those which, in certain cases, remove the
disability of alienism as to property.

4th, The power of congress "to define and punish piracies and felonies,
committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of nations," is said
to be contravened by those parts of the treaty, which declare that certain acts
shall be deemed piracy, which constitute certain other things offenses, and
stipulate the reciprocal punishment of them by each.

5th, It is also said that the constitution is violated, in relation to that
provision which declares, that "no money shall be drawn from the treasury but
in consequence of appropriations made by law" -- by those parts of the treaty
which stipulate compensations to certain commissioners, and indemnifications to
Great Britain, in certain cases to be adjusted and pronounced by the
commissioners; and generally, by all those parts which may involve an
expenditure of money.

6th, The constitution is said to be violated in that part which empowers
congress to dispose of, and make all needful rules and regulations respecting
the territory, or other property of the United States, by those provisions of
the treaty which respect the adjustment of boundary in the cases of the rivers
St. Croix and Mississippi.

Lastly, The constitution is said to be violated, in its provisions concerning
the judiciary department, by those parts of the treaty which contemplate the
confiding to the determination of commissioners certain questions between the
two nations.

A careful inspection of the treaty with these objections i^ view, will
discover, that of the 28 articles which compose it, at least seventeen are
involved in the charge of unconstitutionality; and that these seventeen
comprise all the provisions which adjust past controversies, or establish rules
of commercial intercourse between the parties -- The other eleven, which are
the 1st, 10th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, 22d, 23d, and 24th, except the first,
are made up of provisions which have reference to war; the first merely
declaring that there shall be peace between the parties -- And it is a
question, even with respect to all of those, except the 1st, and 10th, whether
they also are not implicated in the charge; in as much as some of their
dispositions have commercial relations. Is not this alone sufficient to bring
under a strong suspicion the validity of the principles which impeach the
constitutionality of the instrument?

It must have been observed that the argument in the last number is applicable
to all the legislative powers of congress, as well as to that of regulating
trade, which was selected, by way of illustration, on the ground of its being
common to all -- Indeed the instance of the regulations of trade is that which
is most favorable to the opposite doctrine -- Since foreign nations are named
in the clause; the true intent of which, however, has been explained.

The same reasoning, too, would extend the power of treaties to those objects
which are consigned to the legislation of individual states; but here the
constitution has announced its meaning in express terms, by declaring, that the
treaties which have been and shall be made under the authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme law of the land, any thing in the constitution or
laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding -- This manifestly recognizes
the supremacy of the power of treaties over the laws of particular states, and
goes even a step farther.

The obvious reason for this special provision, in regard to the laws of
individual states, is, that there might otherwise have been room for question
-- whether a treaty of the union could embrace objects, the internal regulation
of which belonged to the separate authorities of the states. But with regard to
the United States there was no room for a similar question.

The power of treaty could not but be supposed commensurate with all these
objects to which the legislative power of the union extended, which are the
proper subjects of compacts with foreign nations.

It is a question among some theoretical writers -- whether a treaty can repeal
pre-existing laws? This question must always be answered by the particular form
of government of each nation. In our constitution, which gives, ipso facto, the
force of law, to treaties, making them equal with the acts of congress, the
supreme law of the land, a treaty must necessarily repeal an antecedent law
contrary to it; according to the legal maxim that "leges posteriores priores
contrarias abrogant."

But even in those forms of government, in which there may be room for such a
question, it is not understood that a treaty containing stipulations which
require the repeal of antecedent laws, is, on that account, unconstitutional
and null. The true meaning is, that the antecedent laws are not, ipso facto,
abrogated by the treaty -- But the legislature is, nevertheless, bound in good
faith, under the general limitation, stated in another place, to lend its
authority to remove obstacles which previous laws might oppose to a fair
execution of a treaty.

One instance of the inconsistency, prevailing in the arguments against the
treaty, negociated by Mr. Jay, is observable in this point. To get rid of the
infractions of our treaty of peace with Great Britain by certain laws of
particular states, it is stre^uously maintained that treaties control the laws
of states. To impeach the constitutionality of the treaty under consideration,
it is objected, that, in some points, it interferes with the objects of state
legislation. The express provision of the constitution in this particular,
quoted above, has not been sufficient to check the rage for objection.

The absurdity of the alleged interferences will fully appear, by showing how
they would operate upon the several kinds of treaties usual among nations.
These may be classed under three principal heads. 1. Treaties of commerce, 2.
Treaties of alliance, 3. Treaties of peace.


Treaties of commerce are, of course, excluded; for every treaty of commerce is
a system of rules devised to regulate and govern the trade between contracting
nations; invading directly the exclusive power of regulating trade which is
attributed to congress.

Treaties of alliance, whether defensive or offensive, are eq^lly excluded, and
this on two grounds -- 1. Because it is their immediate object to decline a
case or cases in which one nation shall take part with another in war,
contrary, in the sense of the objection, to that clause of the constitution
which gives to congress the power of declaring war; and 2. Because the succors
stipulated, in whatever shape they may be, must involve an expenditure of money
-- not to say, that it is common to s^ipulate succors in money, either in the
first instance or by way of alternative. It will be pertinent to observe
incidentally, in this place, that even the humane and laudable provision in the
seventeenth article, which all have approved, is within the spirit of the
objection; for the effect of this is to restrain the power and discretion of
congress to grant reprisals, till there has been an unsuccessful demand of
justice. Nothing can better illustrate the unreasonable tendency of the
principle.

Treaties of peace are also excluded, or, at the least, are so narrowed as to
be in the greatest number of cases impracticable -- The most common conditions
of these treaties are restitutions or cessions of territory, on one side or on
the other, frequently on both sides, regulations of boundary -- restitutions
and confirmations of property -- pecuniary indemnifications for injuries or
expenses -- It will, probably, not be easy to find a precedent of a treaty of
peace, which does not contain one or more of these provisions, as the basis of
the cessation of hostilities, and they are all them naturally to be looked for
in an agreement which is to put an end to the state of war between conflicting
nations.

Yet they are all precluded by the objections which have been enumerated:
pecuniary indemnifications, by that which respects the appropriations of money;
restitutions or cessions of territory or property, regulations of boundary, by
that which respects the right of congress to dispose of, and make all needful
rules and regulations concerning the territory and property of the United
States -- It is to be observed, likewise, that cessions of territory are almost
always accompanied with stipulations in favor of those, who inhabit the ceded
territory, securing personal privileges and private rights of property; neither
of which could be acceded to on the principles of that objection, which relates
to the power of naturalization; for this power has reference to two species of
rights, those of privilege and those of prope^^^y. And act allowing a foreigner
to hold real estate is so far an act of naturalization; since it is one of the
consequences of alienism, not to be able to hold real estate.

It follows, that if the objections which are taken to the treaty, on the point
of constitutionality, are valid, the president, with the advice and consent of
the senate, can make neither a treaty of commerce nor alliance, and rarely, if
at all, a treaty of peace. It is probable, that on a minute analysis, there is
scarcely any species of treaty which would not clash, in some particular, with
the principle of those objections; and thus, as was before observed, the power
to make treaties, granted in such comprehensive and indefinite terms, and
guarded with so much precaution, would become essentially nugatory.

This is so obviously against the principles of sound construction, it, at the
same time, exposes the government to so much impotence in one great branch of
political power, in opposition to a main intent of the constitution -- and it
tends so directly to frustrate one principal object of the situation of a
general government, the convenient management of our external concerns, that it
cannot but be rejected by every discerning man who will examine and pronounce
with sincerity. It is against the principles of sound construction; because
these teach us, that every instrument is so to be interpreted, as that all the
parts may, if possible, consist with each other, and have their effect. But the
construction which is combated would cause the legislative power to destroy the
power of making treaties. Moreover, if the power of the executive department be
inadequate to the making of the several kinds of treaties, which have been
mentioned, there is, then, no power in the government to make them; for there
is not a syllable in the constitution which authorizes either the legislative
or judiciary departments, to make a treaty with a foreign nation. And our
constitution would then exhibit the ridiculous spectacle of a government
without a power to make treaties with foreign nations: a result as inadmissable
as it is absurd; since, in fact, our constitution grants the power of making
treaties, in the most explicit and ample terms, to the president, with the
advice and consent of the senate. On the contrary, all difficulty is avoided,
by distinguishing the province of the two powers, according to ideas which have
been always familiar to us, and which were never exposed to any question till
the treaty with Great Britain gave exercise to the subtilties of party spirit.

By confining the power to make laws within its proper sphere, and restricting
its actions to the establishment of rules for our own nation and those
foreigners who come within our jurisdiction -- and by assigning to the power of
treaty the office of concerting those rules of mutual intercourse and
connection, between us and foreign nations, which require their consent as well
as our own; allowing to it the latitude necessary for this purpose, a
harmonious agreement is preserved between the different powers of the
government: that to make laws, and that to make treaties; between the authority
of the legislative and the authority of the executive department -- Hence,

Though congress, by the constitution, have power to lay taxes, yet a treaty
may restrain the exercise of it in particular cases. For a nation, like an
individual, may abridge its moral power of action by agreement; and the organ
charged with the legislative power of a nation may be restrained in its
operation by the agreements of the organ of its federative power, or power to
contract: let it be remembered, that the nation is the constituent, and that
the executive, within its sphere, is no less the organ of its will than the
legislature.

Though congress are empowered to make regulations of trade, yet they are not
exclusively so empowered -- But regulations of trade may also be made by
treaty; and, where other nations are to be bound by them, must be made by
treaty.

Though congress are authorized to establish a uniform rule of naturalization,
yet this contemplates only the ordinary cases of internal administration, in
particular and extraordinary cases, those in which the pretensions of a foreign
government are to be managed -- a treaty may also confer the rights and
privileges of citizens; thus the absolute cession and plenary dominion of a
province or district, possessed by our arms in war, may be accepted by the
treaty of peace, on the condition, that its inhabitants shall, in their persons
and property enjoy the privileges of citizens.

The same reasoning applies to all the other instances of supposed infraction
of the legislative authority: -- with regard to piracies and offenses against
the laws of nations; with regard to expenditures of money, with regard to the
appointment of officers, with regard to the judiciary tribunals, with regard to
the disposal and regulation of the national territory and property -- In all
these cases, the power to make laws and the power to make treaties are
concurrent and coordinate -- The latter, and not the former, must act, where
the cooperation of other nations is requisite.

As to what respects the commissioners agreed to be appointed, they are n^^, in
a strict sense, officers. They are arbitrators between the two countries.
Though in the constitutions, both of the United States and of most of the
individual states, a particular mode of appointing officers is designated --
Yet, in practice, it has not been deemed a violation of the provision to
appoint commissioners or special agents for special purposes, in a different
mode.

As to the provision, which restricts the issuing of money from the treasury,
to cases of appropriation by law, and which, from its intrinsic nature, may be
considered as applicable to the exercise of every power of government, it is,
in no sort, touched by the treaty. In the constant practice of the government,
the cause of an expenditure, or the contract which incurs it, is a different
thing from the appropriation for satisfying it. Thus the salary of a public
officer is fixed by one law, the appropriation for its payment by another. So,
the treaty only stipulates what may be a cause of expenditure. An appropriation
by law will still be requisite for actual payment.

As to the disposal and regulation of the territory and property of the United
States, this will be naturally understood of dispositions and regulations
purely domestic, and where the title is not disputed by a foreign power. Where
there are interfering claims of foreign powers, as neither will acknowledge the
right of the other to decide, treaty must directly or indirectly adjust the
dispute.

So far then it is from being true, that the power of treaty can extend to
nothing upon which, in relation to ourselves, the legislative power may act --
that it may rather be laid down as a general rule, that a treaty may do between
different nations whatever the legislative power of each may do with regard to
itself. The exceptions to this rule are to be deduced from the unfitness and
inconvenience of its application to particular cases, and are of the nature of
abuses of a general principle.

In considering the power of legislation in its relations to the power of
treaty, instead of saying, that the objects of the former are excepted out of
the latter, it will be more correct, indeed it will be entirely correct, to
invert the rule, and to say, that the power of treaty is the power of making
exceptions, in particular cases, to the power of legislation. The stipulations
of treaty are, in good faith, restraints upon the exercise of the last
mentioned power. Where there is no treaty, it is completely free to act. Where
there is a treaty; it is still free to act in all the cases not specially
excepted by the treaty. Thus, congress is free to regulate trade with a foreign
nation, with whom we have no treaty of commerce, in such manner as they judge
for the interest of the United States; and they are also free so to regulate it
with a foreign nation with whom we have a treaty, in all the points which the
treaty does not specially except. There is always, therefore, great latitude
for the exercise of the legislative power of regulating trade with foreign
nations, notwithstanding any treaties of commerce which may be formed.

The effects of a treaty to impose restraints upon the legislative power, may,
in some degree, be exemplified by the case of the compacts which the
legislature itself makes, as with regard to the public debt. Its own compacts
are, in good faith, exceptions to its power of action. Treaties with foreign
powers, for obvious reasons, are much stronger exceptions.

CAMILLUS.

No. XXXVIII. -- AND LAST.
THE manner in which the power of treaty, as it exists in the constitution, was
understood by the convention in framing it, and by the people in adopting it,
is the point next to be considered.

As to the sense of the convention, the secrecy with which their deliberations
were conducted, does not permit any formal proof of the opinions and views
which prevailed in digesting the power of treaty -- But from the best
opportunity of knowing the fact, I aver, that it was understood by all, to be
the intent of the provision to give to that power the most ample latitude -- to
render it competent to all the stipulations, which the exigencies of national
affairs might require; competent to the making of treaties of alliance,
treaties of commerce, treaties of peace, and every other species of convention
usual among nations; and competent, in the course of its exercise for these
purposes, to control and bind the legislative power of congress -- And it was
emphatically for this reason, that it was so carefully guarded; the
cooperation of two-thirds of the senate, with the president, being required to
make any treaty whatever -- I appeal for this, with confidence, to every member
of the convention -- particularly to those in the two houses of congress. Two
of these are in the house of representatives, Mr. Madison and Mr. Baldwin: It
is expected, by the adversaries of the treaty, that these gentlemen will, in
their places, obstruct its execution -- However this may be, I feel a
confidence that neither of them will deny the assertion I have made -- to
suppose them capable of such a denial were to suppose them utterly regardless
of truth. But, though direct proof of the views of the convention on the point,
cannot be produced; -- yet we are not wholly without proof on this head.

Three members of the convention dissented from the constitution; Mr. Mason,
Mr. Gerry, and Mr. Randolph. Among the reasons for his dissent, published by
Mr. Mason, we find this clause, "By declaring all treaties supreme laws of the
land, the executive and senate have, in many cases, an exclusive power of
legis^ation, which might have been avoided by proper distinctions with respect
to treaties, and requiring the assent of the house of representatives where it
could be done with safety." -- This shows the great extent of the power, in the
conception of Mr. Mason: in many cases amounting to an exclusive power of
legislation; nor did he object to the extent, but only desired that it should
have been further guarded, by certain distinctions, and by requiring, in
certain cases, the assent of the house of representatives.

Among the objections to the constitution, addressed by Mr. Gerry to the
legislature of Massachusetts, we find one to have been, "that treaties of the
highest importance might be formed by the president, with the advice of
two-thirds of a quorum of the senate." -- This shows his idea of the magnitude
of the power; and impliedly admitting with Mr. Mason, the propriety of its
extent, he seems only to have desired that the concurrence of the senate should
have embraced two-thirds of the whole body, instead of two-thirds of a quorum.
But how small and how insignificant would the power of treaty be, according to
the doctrine lately promulgated, with regard to its constitutional limit?

As to the sense of the community in the adoption of the constitution, this can
only be ascertained from two sources, the writings for and against it, and the
debates in the several state conventions -- while it was under consideration.

I possess not, at this moment, materials for an investigation, which would
enable me to present the evidence they afford -- But I refer to them, with
confidence, for proof of the fact, that the organization of the power of
treaty, in the censtitution, was attacked and defended with an admission on
both sides, of its being of the character which I have assigned to it -- Its
great extent and importance -- its effect to control, by its stipulations, the
legislative authority, were mutually taken for granted, and, upon this basis,
it was insisted, by way of objection -- that there were not adequate guards for
the safe exercise of so vast a power; that there ought to have been
reservations of certain rights, a better disposition of the power to impeach,
and a participation, general or special, of the house of representatives in the
making of treaties.

The reply to these objections, acknowledging the delicacy and magnitude of the
power, was directed to show that its organization was a proper one, and that it
was sufficiently guarded. The Federalist No. XLII. has these passages, "the
power to make treaties and to receive and send ambassadors, speak their own
propriety -- Both of them are comprised in the articles of confederation, with
the difference only that the former is disembarrassed by the plan of the
convention, of an exception by which treaties might be substantially frustrated
by regulations of the states." This plainly alludes to the proviso which has
been cited and commented upon. "It is true that when treaties of commerce
stipulate for the appointment of articles, the admission of foreign consuls may
fall within the power of making commercial treaties." And in number LXIV. are
these passages, "the power of making treaties is an important one, especially
as it relates to war, peace and commerce; and it should not be delegated but in
such a mode and with such precautions as will afford the highest security, that
it will be exercised by men the best qualified for the purpose, and in the
manner most conducive to the public good." There are few who will not admit,
that the affairs of trade and navigation should be regulated by a system
cautiously formed and steadily pursued, and that both our treaties and our laws
should correspond with, and be made to promote it." "Some are displeased with
it (that is, the power of treaty) not on account of any errors or defects in
it, but because, as the treaties, when made are to have the force of laws, they
should be made only by men invested with legislative authority;" "others,
though content that treaties should be made in the mode proposed, are averse to
their being the supreme law of the land." It is generally understood that two
persons were concerned in the writings of these papers, who, from having been
members of the convention, had a good opportunity of knowing its views -- and
were under no temptation at that time, in this particular, to misrepresent them.

In the address and reasons of dissent of the minority of the convention of
Pennsylvania to their constituents, "they state, that they had su^gested the
following propo^^^n, ^^^ng others for an (...) to the constitution, "That no
treaty which shall be directly opposed to the existing laws of the United
States in congress assembled, shall be valid until such laws shall be repealed
or made conformable to such treaty." This shows that it was understood that the
power of treaty in the constitution extended to abrogating even pre-existing
laws of the United States, which was thought exceptionable; while no objection
was made to the idea of its controuling future exercises of the legislative
power -- The same address states, in another place, that the president and
senate "may form treaties with foreign nations, that may control and abrogate
the constitution and laws of the several states."

In the 2d volume of the debates of the convention of Virginia, which is the
only part I possess -- there are many passages that show the great extent of
the power of treaty in the opinion of the speakers on both sides -- As
quotation would be tedious, I will content myself with referring to the papers
where they will be found (viz) 91, 99, 131, 137, 143, 14^, 150, 186. It will,
in particular, appear, that while the opposers of the constitution den^ed the
power of the house of representatives to break in upon, or control the power
of treaties, the fri^^ is of the constitution did not affirm the contrary, but
merely contended, that the house of r^pres^ntatives might check by its inft^^^
the president and senate -- on the subject of ^^^ties.




The manner of exercising a similar power under the confederation shall now be
examined.

To judge of the similarity of the power, it will be useful to quote the terms
in which it was granted. They are these, "The United States in congress
assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive right and power of entering into
treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made,
whereby the legislative power of the respective states shall be restrained from
imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners as their own people are subject
to, or from prohibiting the importation or exportation of any species of
commodities whatsoever." (Article IX.)

It will not be disputed that the words "treaties and alliances" are of
equivalent import, and of no greater force than the single word "treaties." An
alliance is only a species of treaty, a particular of a general; -- and the
power of "entering into treaties," which terms confer the authority under which
the former government acted, will not be pretended to be ^^ronger than the
power "to make treaties," which are the ^^rms constituting the authority under
which the present government acts; it follows, that the power, respecting
treaties, under the former, and that under the present government, are ^^milar.

But though similar, that under the present government is more comprehensive;
for it is divested of the restriction in the provision cited above, and is
fortified by the express declaration, that its acts shall be valid
notwithstanding the constitution or laws of any state. -- This is evidence, (as
was the fact) of a disposition in the convention to disembarrass and reinforce
the power of treaty. It ought not to pass unnoticed, that an Important argument
results from the proviso, which accompanies the power granted by the
confederation, as to the natural extent of this power. The declaration that no
treaty of commerce shall be made restraining the legislative power of a state
from imposing such duties and imposts on foreigners as their own people are
subject to, or from prohibiting the importation or exportation of any species
of commodities whatsoever is an admission, 1. That the general power of
entering into treaties, included that of making treaties of commerce, and 2.
That without the limitation in the proviso, a treaty of commerce might have
been made which would restrain the legislative authority of the state in the
points interdicted by that proviso.


Let it not be said, that the proviso, by implication, granted the power to
make treaties of commerce, under which congress afterward acted; for besides
that this is inconsistent with the more obvious meaning of the clause, the
first article of the confederation leaves to the states individually every
power (...) expressly delegated to the United States in congress assemb^^^ The
power of congress, therefore, to make a treaty of commerce and every other
treaty they did make -- must be vindicate^ on the ground that the express grant
of power to enter into treaties and alliances is a general, which necessarily
included as particulars the various treaties they have made, and the various
stipulations of those treaties.

Under this power, thus granted and defined, the alliance with France was
contracted: guaranteeing, in the case of a defensive war, her West India
possessions, and when the casus foederis occurs, obliging the United States to
make war for the defense of those possessions, and consequently, to incur the
expenses of war.

Under the same power, treaties of commerce were made with France, the
Netherlands, Sweden, and Prussia -- Besides that every treaty of commerce is
necessarily a regulation of commerce between the parties, it has been shown in
the antecedent comparison of those treaties, Articles 2d, 3d, and 4th of treaty
with France, 2d, 3d, and 20th of treaty with Russia, 2d, and 3d of treaty with
Holland, 3d and 4th of treaty with ^^^edon.
with that lately negociated, that they produce the specific effects of
restraining the legislative power from imposing higher or other duties on the
articles of those nations than on the like articles of other nations, and from
extending prohibitions to them which shall not equally extend to other nations
the most favored; and thus abridge the exercise of the legislative power to
tax, and the exercise of the legislative power to regulate trade.

These treaties likewise define and establish the same case of piracy, which is
defined in the treaty with Great Britain. Moreover, the treaty with France, as
has been elsewhere shown, with regard to the rights of property naturalizes the
whole French nation.

The consular convention with France, negociated, likewise, under the same
power, grants to the consuls of that country, various authorities and
jurisdictions, some of a judicial nature, which are actual transfers to them of
portions of the internal jurisdiction and ordinary judiciary power of the
country; the exercise of which our government is bound to aid with its whole
strength. It also grants exemptions to French consuls from certain kinds of
taxes, and to them, and French citizens, from all personal service; all which
are extremely delicate interferences with our internal policy and ordinary
jurisdiction.

Under the same power, the treaty with Morocco was formed, which, besides
various other regulations relative to war, and ^^^ral relative to trade,
contains the rule, that neither party (...) make war without a previous demand
of reparation; in re^^raint of the general discretionary power of congress to
de^^^ war.

Under the same power, the treaty of peace with Great Bri^^^ was made -- This
treaty contains the establishment of a boundary line between the parties,
which, in part, is arbitrary, and could not have been predicated upon precise
antecedent right. It also prohibits the future confiscation of the property of
adherents to Great Britain: declares that no person shall, (...) account of the
part he took in the war, suffer any future (...) or damage in his person,
liberty, or property, and provides for the release of such persons from
confinement, and the discontinuance of prosecutions against them.

It is difficult to conceive a higher act of control, both of the legislative
and judiciary authority, than by this article. These provisions are analagous
in principle, to those stipulations which, in the second and ninth articles of
the treaty under examination, have given occasion to constitutional objection.

Under the same power, various treaties with Indians, inhabiting the territory
of the United States, have been made; establishing arbitrary lines of boundary
with them: which determine the right of soil on the one side and on the other.
Some of those treaties proceed on the principle of the United States having
conquered the Indian country, and profess to make gratuitous concessions to
them of the lands which are left to their occupation. There is also a feature
of importance common to these treaties, which is the withdrawing of the
protection of the United States from those of their citizens, who intrude on
Indian laws, leaving them to be punished at the pleasure of the Indians.

Hence it appears, that, except as to the stipulations for appointing
commissioners, the treaties made under the confederation, contain all the
features, identically or by analogy, which create constitutional objections to
the treaty before us: They restrain, in certain instances, the legislative
power to lay taxes; they make numerous and important regulations of trade; they
confer the benefit of naturalization as to property; they define cases of
piracy; they create causes of expenditure; they direct and modify the power of
war; they erect, within the country, tribunals unknown to our constitutions and
laws, in cases to which these are competent -- whereas the treaty with Great
Britain only provides for the appointment of arbitrators in cases to which our
tribunals and laws are incompetent; and they make dispositions concerning the
territory and property of the United States.

It is true, that some of the treaties made under the for^^^ government, though
subsequent to the proposing of the articles of confederation to the states,
were prior to the final adoption of these articles; but still it is presumable
that the treaties were negociated with an eye to the powers of the pending
national compact. Those with Great Britain, Sweden, Russia, and Morocco, and
the convention with France, were posterior to the completion of that compact.

It may, perhaps, be argued, that a more extensive construction of the power of
treaty, in the confederation, than in one present constitution, was
countenanced by the union in the same body of legislative powers with the power
of treaty. But this argument can have no force, when it is con^ide^^^ that the
principal legislative powers with regard to the objects embraced by the
treaties of congress, were not vested in th^^ body, but remained with the
individual states -- Such are the power of specific taxation, the power of
regulating trade, the power of naturalization, etc.

If in theory the objects of legislative power are excepted out of the power of
treaty, this must have been equally, at least, the case with the legislative
powers of the state gove^^ments as with those of the United States -- Indeed
the argument was much stronger for the objection, where distinct governments
were the depository of the legislative power, than where the same government
was the depository of that power and of the power of treaty. -- Nothing but the
intri^^i^ force of the power of treaty could have enabled it to penetrate the
separate spheres of the state governments. The practice under the confederation
for so many years, acquiesced in by all the states, is, therefore, a conclusive
illustration of the power of treaty, and an irresistible refutation of the
novel and preposterous doctrine, which impeaches the constitutionality of that
lately negociated -- If the natural import of the terms used in the
constitution were less clear and decisive than they are, that practice is a
commentary upon them, and fixes their sense. For the sense in which certain
terms were practiced upon in a prior constitution of government, must be
presumed to have been intended, in using the like terms in a subsequent
constitution of government for the same nation.

Accordingly, the practice under the present government before the late treaty,
has corresponded with that sense.

Our treaties with several Indian nations regulate and change the boundaries
between them and the United States -- And in addition to compensations in
gross, they stipulate the payment of certain specific and perpetual annuities.
Thus a treaty in August, 1790, with the Creeks (article 5) promises them the
pearly sum of one thousand five hundred dollars -- And similar features are
found in subsequent treaties with the Six Nations, the Cherokees, and the North
Western Indians -- This last has just been ratified by the unanimous voice of
the senate. It stipulates an annuity of 9500 dollars -- and relinquishes to the
Indians, a large tract of land which they had, by preceding treaties, ceded to
the United States.

Hence we find that our former treaties under the present government, as well
as one subsequent to that under consideration, contradict the doctrine set up
against its constitutionality -- in the important particulars of making
dispositions concerning the territory and property of the United States, and
binding them to raise and pay money. These treaties have not only been made by
the president, and ratified by the senate, without any impeachment of their
constitutionality, but the house of representatives has heretofore concurred,
and without objection, in carrying them into effect, by the requisite
appropriation of money.

The consular convention with France stands in a peculiar predicament. It was
negociated under the former government, and ratified under the present; and so
may be regarded as a treaty of both governments, illustrative of the extent of
the power of treaty in both. The delicate and even the extraordinary nature of
the provisions it contains, have been adverted to. Though all reflecting men
have thought ill of the propriety of some of them, as inconveniently breaking
in upon our interior administration, legislative, executive, and judiciary;
only acquiescing in them from the difficulty of getting rid of stipulations
entered into by our public agents under competent powers, yet no question has
been heard about their constitutionality. And congress have, by law, assisted
their execution by making our judicial tribunals, and the public force of the
country, auxiliary to the decrees of the foreign tribunals which they authorize
within our territory.

If it should be said, that our constitution, by making all former treaties and
engagements as obligatory upon the United States, under that constitution, as
they were under the confederation, rendered the ratification of the convention
a matter of necessity -- the answer is, that either the engagements, which it
contracted, were already conclusive, or they were not -- if the former, there
was no need of a ratification; if the latter, there was no absolute obligation
to it. And, in every supposition, a ratification, by the president, with the
consent of the senate, could have been predicated only upon the power given in
the present constitution in relation to treaties; and to have any validity,
must have been within the limit of that power.

But it has been heretofore seen that the inference from this instrument is no
less strong, if referred to the power under the confederation, than if referred
to the power under the present constitution.

How happens it, that all these invasions of the constitution, if they were
such, were never discovered, and that all the departments of the government,
and all parties in the public councils should have co-operated in giving them a
sanction? Does it not prove that all were convinced, that the power of treaty,
applied in our exterior relations to objects, which, in the ordinary course of
internal administration and in reference to ourselves, were of the cognizance
of the legislative power? and particularly that the former was competent to
bind the latter in the delicate points of raising and appropriating money? If
competent to this, what legislative power can be more sacred, more out of its
reach?

Let me now ask (and a very solemn question it is, especially for those who are
bound by oath to support the constitution) Has it not been demonstrated that
the provisions in the treaty are justified by the true and manifest
interpretation of the constitution -- are sanctioned by the practice upon a
similar power under the confederation, and by the practice in other instances
under the present government?

If this has been demonstrated, what shall we think of the candor and sincerity
of the objections which have been erected on the basis of a contrary
supposition? Do they not unequivocally prove, that the adversaries of the
treaty have been resolved to discredit it by every artifice they could invent?
that they have not had truth for their guide, and consequently are very unfit
guides for the public opinion, very unsafe guardians of the public welfare?

It is really painful and disgusting to observe sophisms so miserable as those
which question the constitutionality of the treaty, retailed to an enlightened
people, and insisted upon with so much seeming fervency and earnestness -- It
is impossible not to bestow on sensible men, who act this part, the imputation
of hypocrisy -- The absurdity of the doctrine is too glaring to permit even
charity itself to suppose it sincere -- If it were possible to imagine that a
majority in any branch of our government, could betray the constitution, and
trifle with the nation, so far as to adopt and act upon such a doctrine -- it
would be time to despair of the republic.

There would be no security at home, no respectability abroad. Our
constitutional charter would become a dead letter. The organ of our government
for foreign affairs would be treated with de^is^on whenever he should hereafter
talk of negotiation or meaty. May the great Ruler of nations avert from our
coun^^ so grievous a calamity! It is very probable, that a treaty with Algiers
is now on its way to the Uni^^l States, which may be expected to contain
similar stipulations with that with M^^occo -- This treaty, which will have
cost the United States no trifling sum, and will be of very great value to our
trade, must equally fall, on the doctrine which I oppose.


CAMILLUS.

To the Editor of the American Remembrancer.
THE following Remarks on the treaty lately concluded between the United States
and Great Britain, were written very soon after that instrument was made known
to the public, and before the ^^tification of it, by the president of the
United States, took effect. The writer had not seen any of the voluminous
productions in defense of the treaty, which have appeared, in the different
gazettes of the United States, under the signatures of Camillus, Curtius, A
Citizen, etc. etc. And even had he seen them, he would not have thought it
necessary, or in^^^^out on him, to answer or detect all the sophistry and
fallacious arguments and statements they contain. In the course of this
investigation, he has c^ndidly endeavored to weigh the real merits of, and
objections to, the treaty, with the impartiality of a person actuated neither
by party zeal, nor any worse motive, but by a steadfast attachment to the United
States alone, the principles of the revolution, and the prosperity of the
government.

REMARKS ON THE Treaty of Amity, Navigation, and Commerce, Concluded between
Lord Grenville and Mr. Jay, on the Part of Great Britain and the United States,
respectively.
BY A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES.
Sic vos non vobis.

-- Virgil. Not for yourselves, ye merchants, shall ye toil.
Not for yourselves, ye farmers, plough the soil,
Not for yourselves, ye soldiers, laurels gain,
Not for yourselves, ye sailors, brave the main.
-- Anonymous: "By presenting many propositions at once, which are to be voted
for in the lump, they hide what is destined to promote their own private views,
or give a color to it by joining it with things which they know will take hold
of the mind of the people."

De Lolme on the British Constitution.
THE treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, lately concluded in London
between Lord Grenville and Mr. Jay, on the part of the king of Great Britain
and the United States, respectively, is one of the most important subjects ever
agitated in America since she became an independent nation; it seems, indeed,
to have engrossed the public mind more than any other, the adoption of the
federal constitution, only excepted. -- Reason, prejudice, and passion, equally
prompt to the discussion of it, and every individual enlists himself u^^^ the
banners of one or the other. This renders a temperate enquiry into its merits,
without regard, either to the original framers, or its subsequent advocates or
enemies, an object of the first importance. I shall, therefore, leave it to
others to discuss, whether the late envoy extraordinary entered upon, and
concluded it, in pursuance of general or particular instructions, either from
the president of the United States alone, or by and with the advice and consent
of the senate; or whether, he pursued the di^tates of his own better judgment,
without any authority whatsoever. If, however, there should appear any thing in
the treaty to condenm, decen^y, and established precedent, will require, that
it should be considered as the act of the minister, only; more especially as
the sanction of the supreme executive magistrate of the United States has been
hitherto with h^ld, as we have every reason to believe.

But, before entering into a discussion of the articles of the treaty, it may
not be improper to advert, not only to existing circumstances at the time it
was concluded, but to some antecedent events, which may be presumed to have had
some operation upon the minds of the nations, whose mutual friendship is, by
this instrument, proposed to be conciliated, and perpetually cemented. For a
treaty (so far as relates to a free republic at least) ought to be considered
as the act of the nation, and not merely of the government, only; or, in other
words, of the parties who conclude, sign, and ratify them. To this end, due
attention should be paid to the prevailing sentiment of the nation, so as to
remove every obstacle to that cordiality, and unfeigned friendship, which
treaties of amity are intended to promote.

It is just twenty years since the United States of America, stimulated by the
tyrannical usurpations of the present king of Great Britian, declared the good
people of these states absolved from their allegiance to that prince, and that
all political connection with Great Britain ought to be totally dissolved. A
cruel civil war was waged against them during a period of eight years, the
calamities of which were heightened by every wanton act of depredation,
oppression, and insult, that rapacity, cruelty, and a vindictive spirit could
prompt men to com^^^. Our slaves were excited to rebel against us; the savages
(...) our frontiers were basely stimulated to add, to the sangui^ary measures
of the British enemy, their own more inhuman mode of warfare. Our towns were
wantonly consumed to ^^es, and our country every where laid waste. Our property
was seized for the use of the armies of our enemies; or destroyed, without
compensation, and without compunction or restraint: Thousands of our negroes,
the cultivators of the soil in the southern states (and forming the greater
part of the moveable property of their masters) were enticed or forced away
from their service -- Eighty thousand of our fellow citizens are supposed to
have fallen victims to the offended majesty of that vindictive monarch, whose
name was more execrated among us, than ever Nero's was at Rome. Inability to
prosecute the war longer, produced a peace; but it was peace without
forgiveness, without friendship, and without sincerity. During the long course
of hostilities, every sentiment of regard and of mutual confidence had been
extinguished on the part of both nations, and the peace concluted between them,
was rather calculated to perpetuate, than to extinguith the remembrance of
their mutual ani^^^sity. The citizens of the middle and southern states
complained that their ^^^ticular interests had been overlooked, or sacrificed,
by some of the articles of the treaty. The northern states found their trade
abridged, by the very instrument which they supposed would have secured its
unlimited extension. Thus even the treaty of peace had no other recommendation,
in the eyes of the people of America, than the termination of hostility. His
Britannic majesty, on the either hand, appears not to have entered into it with
good faith. The western posts, which were to have been delivered up "with all
convenient speed," were forcibly detained in the possession of his troops; and
the negroes and other property taken from the people of America, were, in
direct violation of the treaty, carried away without compensation. An equal
disposition to evade, or violate some of the articles of the treaty was
attributed to several of the states, and mutual complaints and recriminations
took place between the two nations. The restraints imposed upon our West India
commerce by his Britannic majesty; his supposed ill offices toward us, in
exciting the depredations of the Barbary states upon our commerce; and in
fomenting discontents among the Indian nations, and even stimulating and aiding
them in acts of hostility against us, occasioned those wounds to inflame and
fester anew, which had been, at best, imperfectly cicatrised.

The aversion of his Britannic majesty to enter into any commercial treaty with
the United States, had manifested itself, in the rejection of all overtures
made for that purpose by the present vice president of the United States, who
was sent thither to effect such a negoci^^^ (...) p^^ long after the conclusion
of the peace. -- The adoption of the federal constitution removed all those
obstacles, which, it was pretended, prevented the court of Great Britain from
entering into negociations with us. It did more. -- It removed every barrier to
the full and complete execution of the treaty of peace, on the part of the
United States, by rendering that treaty a part of the supre^^ law of the land:
the federal courts, in their decisions, manifested the most unequivocal
disposition to give to the treaty the most favorable construction on behalf of
British creditors. -- It was the expectation of all, that the energy of the
federal government would not fall to extort from his Britannic majesty an equal
compliance with the treaty on his part.

The constitution, at the time of its adoption, was regarded as the guarantee
of a free trade with the West Indies, and with every other part of the world;
it soon became matter of wonder and of dina^^s^action, that it had not produced
these effects. It was finally made known that the executive of the United
States had taken measures to discover the sentiments of the British court on
the subject of a treaty of commerce, and that the proposition still continued
to be treated with disrespect. -- In the mean time, France was engaged in a
revolution, the principles of which were supposed to bear so great an analogy
to our own, that every American felt himself interested in her success. -- Our
prayers were continually offered up in her behalf, and it was concluded that
the cords of amity would be drawn as closely as possible between the two
republics. -- His Britannic majesty was not long in joining the alliance formed
among the enemies of the new republic. America soon found herself made a party
in the war, by her sufferings: the spoliations on our commerce are well known;
they have been felt through every part of the United States. Not only our
vessels with their cargoes were seized and confiscated, because engaged in
commerce with the enemies of his Britannic majesty; but our citizens were
abused in their persons, imprisoned or impressed into the service of a
sovereign whom they detested, under pretext that they were his subjects.
Innumerable acts of piracy were committed by a swarm of privateers which
infested our coasts; nor was the insolence practiced by his Britannic majesty's
sea officers inferior to the depredations of the privateers. Stimulated by
resentment, and a desire of retaliation, some of the citizens of America took
commissions from, or entered into the service of, their sister republic. They
were prosecuted for exercising a natural right, not repugnant to any treaty, or
known law of the land. These prosecutions were, by the sufferers and their
friends, considered as an act of supererrogation in our government, founded on
a partiality to British interest, in opposition to that of France. Every act of
concession or conciliation on the part of the United States, seemed to give new
life and vigor to the arrogance, insolence, and depredations of the British
ships of war and cruisers. The Indians, whose hostile disposition toward us
was supposed to be the effect of British perfidy, prosecuted the war against us
in a style altogether new, and gave reason to presume that they were not only
aided with arms, ammunition, and warlike stores, by the British government, but
that they were actually assisted by the officers and militia, if not by the
regular troops of that nation. CONGRESS, to whom it belongs to decide upon a
just cause of war, and to regulate commerce, roused by so many reiterated acts
of aggression, had resolved upon some cautionary measures to secure
indemnification for injury, and to retaliate upon a nation from whom so many
vexations were daily received. The representatives of the people concurred in
the measures proposed, by a great majority -- the senate were divided -- the
vice president held the balance in his hand, and the scale preponderated
against the representatives of the people. At this moment of effervescence in
the public mind, the late envoy extraordinary was appointed; the object of his
mission was supposed to be a demand of reparation of injuries, and a compliance
with the terms of the violated treaty of peace.

From this short recapitulation of preceding events, it will appear, that the
public mind was by no means prepared to enter, with cordiality, into a state of
amity with a nation whose government had, for twenty years, incessantly
persecuted the United States, either by open acts of hostility, or the
insidious arts of secret animosity. It was, therefore, reasonably expected,
that a treaty, whose object was to bind the two nations in amity with each
other, would contain within it every thing necessary to soften asperity -- to
subdue resentment -- to satisfy claims, and to conciliate affection. To
determine how far this expectation has been fulfilled by the present treaty, it
will be necessary, not only to state what it contains, but also, what it does
not contain. I shall begin with the former; and, in order to do it with the
more regularity, I shall take it article by article.

The preamble states the motives to the treaty to be, the defire "of
terminating the differences between his Britan^^^ majesty and the United
States, in such a manner, as, with out reference to the merits of their
respective complaints and pretensions, may be best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good under-standing." Such a preamble would either lead us to
expect the most liberal concessions in favor of the United States, or a total
dereliction of their complaints by the envoy extraordinary. On the part of his
Britannic majesty such a waver might be considered, if not a mark of great
magnanimity, at least, of great condescension, whilst his ships of (...) and
privateers were in the full career of plunder on the commerce of our
unresisting citizens. Nor can it be altogether denied, that his majesty, as
well as the United States, had some cause to murmur at the events of his reign:
-- He had lost an immense territory, which he had regarded as his hereditary
right, jure divino, and had spent above an hundred millions sterling of his
subjects' money in the attempt to retain it in subjection to him. He might be
compared to an unlucky sportsman whose overcharged gun had bursted, burnt his
singers, given him a sound douse in the chaps, and knocked out half a dozen of
his teeth, in attempting to shoot a partridge: -- and America to the poor bird
itself, which had got a grievous wound, in spite of the unskilfulness of the
awkward marksman. Considering, however, the presumable object of the mission of
the envoy extraordinary, it appears somewhat unaccountable upon what grounds he
could-suppose himself authorized to relinquish the discussion of the complaints
of the United States, unless indeed he apprehended that his Britannic majesty's
choler might be so far roused by it, as again to reject a negotiation, and
compel him to return to America re infecta: Whilst the treaty was in discussion
before the senate, a certain gentleman, high in office, who was once ambassador
at the British co^^^, was h^^rd to declare, that be could have procered a
b^^ter treaty, but de^^^^^d doing so because he thought it not sufficiently
advantage^ to America.
or, perhaps, he was sensible, that in the adjustment of such a variety of
claims as America was entitled to insist on, the business might be so far
procrastinated as to lessen the glory of the achievement; or, perhaps, retard
his return to his nauve country, in time to accept that accumulation of honor
which there awaited him. But let us now proceed to examine the treaty, some of
the articles of which I shall pass over without observation, as being either of
little moment, or customary in similar treaties; whilst upon some others I may
wish to detain the reader's attention.

1. Of eight and twenty articles which the treaty contains, the first ten are
declared to be permanent; the remainder are of limited duration. The first
stipulates, in the ordinary form, that there shall be peace, "and true and
sincere friendship between his Britannic majesty and his successors, and the
United States, and between the people, respectively, without exception of
persons or places." -- To render this article effectual, it will be necessary
that the subsequent articles should contain all such things as "are calculated
to produce mutual satisfaction and good understanding between the nations:"
otherwise, this article will ever remain in the same state of inexecution, as
those relating to the negroes and the western posts, in the treaty of peace.

II. The second article stipulates that his Britannic majesty will withdraw all
his troops and garrisons from all posts and places within the United States, on
or before the first day of June, 1796. This, by the treaty of peace, ought to
have been done, at least, a dozen years ago; and it appears somewhat strange
that the immediate performance of it was not made a condition, precedent to any
further negotiation, except for reparation for the spoliations on our commerce,
etc. for how can we be assured that his Britannic majeste will observe more
good faith in the performance of this treaty, than the former, if an excuse can
be found to evade it? The only difference that this part of the second article
makes between our present and former situation is, that the detention of the
posts, hitherts is evidently sanctioned by the present treaty; and all
compensation for former breaches of faith, and aggressions in this respect,
most generously waved, on the part of the United States; it must be confessed,
however, that this article furnishes an interpretation of the words " with all
convenient speed," in the former treaty; which, in all future negociations,
with his Britannic majesty, may be understood to mean a dozen years.

The same article provides that the settlers and traders, within the precincts
or jurisdiction of the western posts, may continue to reside there, without
being compelled to become citizens of the United States, or to take any oaths
of allegiance to the government thereofs, or remove and dispose of their lands
and other property, at their election. This, as it respects traders, and other
transient persons, is just and proper: as it relates to landholders it will be
made the subject of future remark, when we examine the ninth article.

III. The third article contains a variety of stipulations, some of which
appear to be reciprocally liberal, whilst others manifest a spirit of
accommodation and concession, on the part of the United States, which very few
are likely to feel, in any degree, equal to the envoy extraordinary. -- If it
be true that the most important stations for carrying on the fur trade, etc.
are within the territories of the United States, which, I am told, is the case,
Great Britain will be no small gainer by that equal intercourse, which this
article permits upon the lakes and the waters thereof, as also the free use of
the Mississippi, It may, with no small propriety, be asked, on what part of the
eastern side of the Mississippi his Britannic majesty possesses any territory?
I know of none; and it might, perhaps, puzzle the envoy extraordinary himself
to point it out.
and the portage places in the territories of the United States and Great
Britain, respectively. But the total exclusion of American vess^^^ from the
seaports, harbors, creeks, and rivers of the British American territories on
the Atlantic, gives to this article a very disadvantageous turn for the
commercial interests of the United States; thereby securing to the British
nation a decided and perpetual pre-eminence over them in the trade with the
north-western parts of the American republic; since all articles for
exportation to foreign parts, must either go down the St. Lawrence and be
exported to Britain, in British ships, or be brought over land to the head
waters of Hudson's river, or some other less convenient communication with the
Atlantic ports of the United States -- Foreign goods must be transported to the
western territories in like manner. The communication from the lakes to Quebec,
by the river St. Lawrence, is so much easier than to New York, by the river
Hudson, Mothing appears more questionable than that policy, which lays open the
navigation of our rivers to those maritime powers with whom we may be eventuall
engaged in war. Experience might have taught us this truth in the course of our
war with Great Britain.
and the advantages (if I am rightly informed) in every respect so much
greater, as to preclude all competition on the part of the United States. Hence
it seems probable that Great Britain will continue to monopolize the trade on
the lakes, and finally, the whole trade of the American north western
territory. Other causes than those already mentioned will contribute to promote
this. British traders are already settled at the most advantageous stations for
carrying on commerce, and probably have possessed themselves of all the land at
those places, which the preceding article secures to them for ever. An American
going there to settle would find himself under all the disadvantages of
attempting to establish himself in a foreign country, and exposed to all the
ill offices which jealousy could suggest.

I shall not here enquire how far the United States had a right to insist on
the free navigation of the river St. Lawrence, at least for their vessels bound
from one part of the United States to another, reserving that question for
another place; but it is observable, that while our vessels are totally
excluded from the Atlantic ports of Canada, etc. the vessels of those countries
may freely navigate our rivers The writer, for want of a correct map, and
description of those parts of the United States is unable to descend to such
particulars as would illustrate this part of his subject.
as far as the highest ports of entry for foreign ships, in any part of the
United States. This want of reciprocity will be excused by the advosates for
the treaty, by a general reference to colonial laws; to which I shall offer an
answer in its proper place.

Commercial regulations, not founded in experience, can never be adopted with
too much caution. They ought never to find a place in a perpetual treaty; for
whatever inconvenience or disadvantage result from them, it cannot be removed
without hazarding a war; since it can never be expected that a commerical
nation, tenacious of her interests, will ever resign an advantage that is once
secured by a perpetual treaty. Such a nation is the British.

IV. and V. As these articles relate altogether to an amicable adjustment of
some doubts respecting our boundaries, I presume they are proper enough for
that purpose. See this subject properly discussed, in the American
Remembrancer, vol. IL page 116.


VI. The sixth article recites, that it is alleged, by diverse of his majesty's
subjects, that debte, bona fide contracted before the peace, still remain owing
to them by the citizens of the United States, "and, that, by the operation of
various lawf^^ impediments since the peace," the recovery has been delay^^^ and
the value and security of the debt lessened. It stipul^^^, therefore, for the
appointment of a board of commissioners, part British and part American, to
examine all complaints referred to them, "and to take into consideration all
claims, whether of principal or interest, or balances of principal and
interest, and to determine the same respectively, according to ^quity and
justice;" they may also examine all persons that may come before them, and
receive in evidence written depositions, books, (...) papers, or copies or
extracts thereof, duly authenticated; and their award shall, in all cases, be
final and conclusive, both (...) to the justice of the claim, and the amount to
be paid to the creditor; which amount the United States undertake to cause
(...) be paid in specie, on condition of such releases, or assigum^^ to be made
by the creditor, as the commissioners may direct.

I have been greatly at a loss to suppose a case to which this article can
apply; at length, however, I think I have stumble^ upon two, perhaps a third --
but I am not presumptuous enou^^ to insist that I am right in either. The
first, I have supposed (...) be the case of a debt confiscated or sequestered
during the was, where the debtor has pleaded such confiscation or sequestration
in bar of the plaintiff's claim. When this question was discu^^^ in the federal
court of Virginia, the chief justice of the United States gave it as his
opinion, that the treaty of peace annualled (...) the acts of sequestration
passed by the several states, though, (...) that time sovereign and
independent, and avoided all acts done (...) pursuance thereof. The political
morality of the states was highly imp^^ched for their conduct in confiscating
and sequest^ring British property, ^ebts, etc. It seems at this day forgotten,
that on the 27th of November. 1^7^, (...) ^^^ly ^^^mende! that (...) states, as
appears by ^^eir jo^rral^, of that date.
A majority of the court were of a differ^^^ opinion. Whether it was the
intention of the envoy extraordinary to restore to the opinion of the chief
justice that weight, which it had lost on the occasion alluded to, I will not
pretend to decide; but if my conjecture be just, the British claimant ^^algre
the decision of a constitutional court of judicature may now rest secure of his
claim, without any abatement. The second case applicable to this article, I
presume, will arise from the operation of an act of the legislature of
Virginia, passed in the year 1787, repealing all acts of assembly which
prohibited the recovery of British debts, with a suspending clause, until the
British posts in the United States should be delivered up, and measures taken
for the further fulfillment of the treaty, by delivering up the negroes of the
citizens of that state, taken away contrary to the seventh article of the
treaty of peace. How far this legal impediment might operate to delay the debt
of a British creditor, or to lessen its value, or security, I cannot presume to
say; yet I should conclude that the adoption of the federal constitution a few
months after, did very effectually remove this legal impediment. The third
case, I am in^^ined, from the special wording of this article, to suppose,
refers to those cases where suits have been brought, and a verdict been given
for the defendant; or the principal debt recoverted either without interest (if
any such case has happened) or with a deduction of interest during the war. In
these letter cases, the chief justice of the United States had instructed the
jury to give interest without any deduction. They uniformly disregarded the
instruction; it was necessary to provide some remedy in this, as well as in the
first mentioned case, and it is probable that the opinion of the chief justice
of the United States will be paid due respect to, by the commissioners to be
appointed in virtue of this article. The liberality of the envoy extraordinary
in this article, evinces, at the same time, the most serupulous regard to the
punctual adherence to the spirit of treaties, on the part of the United States,
and his extreme politeness and generosity in passing over in silence those
causes, which gave rise to the legal impediments thus happily removed. Nothing
renders a treaty more respectable than such exalted instances of magnanimity in
the framers of it. Since this pamphlet was transcribed for the press, I have
had an opportunity of conversing with an intelligent and well-informed
gentleman, who has suggested that an additional, and even the pri^^^ipal object
of the sixth article, prob^bly is, to enable. British reditors to obtain
c^^mpensation from the government of the United States, for the depreciation of
money ^^^lu^^^ily received by themselves or their agents, during the war; which
payments, according to the g^n^ral laws of the land, as well between citizens
as others, were to b^ rat^d according to the no^^nal amount, without any regard
to the actual depre^^^i^tion of money at the time of payment. And further, to
reviv^ and e^^ablise ^ll ^^^us on the part of British subjects, against
citizens of the United States, at the commencement of the revolution ^ar, the
recovery of which was suspended, ^^^ing the continuance of the war, by the
creditors themselves, being then considered or declared alien enc^^ies, and, as
such, incapable of suing in our courts. This legal impediment having lessened
the value, or diminished the security of their debts, they now claim as
indemnification, for the same, against the United States. If these conjectures
^e well-founded, and I see no reason to doubt them, how much better was it to
have been a TORY, at that time, than a WHIG!!! How many American w^igs lost
their debts, nay, their whole estates, by the operation of those very laws,
which eventually will have s^^card the debts of th^^r ^^^mies! This article, it
is supposed, was made a precede^t condition to the adnu^lion of the seventh,
relating to compensation to be made for spoliations upon our commerce, to which
this ^^^poise was previo^sly secured. -- When we recollect that nine-tenths of
these last-mentioned claims, on the part of British creditors, rest upon no
other evidence than old mercantile ledgers and journals, often most
maccurately, and not always (...) fairly kept; that the commissioners are not
bound to proceed upon legal testimony (...) evidence, only, but according to
circumstances; that they may receive copies or extracts, even of books and
papers, without producing either the original or a full copy; that the debtor,
in these cases (unless he be made a party defendant, as in case of a s^it) will
not appear (even if called upon, and, in most instances, cannot be found) to
contest the justice of the claim; and that there is an equal chance that a
majority of these commissioners will be British; there can be little reason to
doubt that the operation of this article will be fully a^^quate to countervail
(if I may be permitted to borrow a diplomatic phrase from another part of the
treaty) all the advantages which we are slattered with the hopes of, from the
seventh article. Add to this, that every conjecture, respecting the intende^
operation and effect of this article, authori^e^ the conclusion, that this
court of commissioners is to be para^^^ to the ^^^stituti^^^l ^^^ts, both of
the several states, and of the federal government; that it may examin^ matters
of fact without the aid of a jury; and may re-examine matters ^f fact t^ied by
a jury, contrary to the rules of the common law, and contra^^^ to the (...) of
the ^atified (...) to the ^^^stitution.


It has been hinted that this court of commissioners (a part of whom, as was
before observed, are to be British) who are thus to liquidate legal claims by
one individual against another, is an encroachment upon the functions of the
federal judiciary, and a violation of the constitution. The question is
delicate and important; there is, moreover, an obscurity in this article, which
makes it difficult to ascertain its real import. It may not be improper to
notice some parts of it, with a view to the discussion of this question. --
1st, The award of the commissioners shall be final in all cases, both as to the
justice of the claim, and the amount to be paid the creditor, 2d, The United
States undertake to cause the sum awarded to be paid, etc. on condition of such
releases or assignments to be given by the creditor, as the commissioners may
direct -- Is it meant that the award shall be final and conclusive between the
creditor, and the original debtor? If so, he must be made a party defendant,
and that, I presume, by regular process: he must be heard in his defense; he
ought to have compulsory process to procure the attendance of witnesses; the
truth of the facts put in issue are to be tried and determined by the
commissioners. IT BELONGS TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS TO DO ALL THESE THINGS;
and the trial of matters of fact put in issue must there be by a JURY. Again,
the United States undertake to cause the money awarded to be paid. How? By
process of execution against the defendant's body or estate? Or, out of the
treasury of the United States, trusting for reimbursement to the assignment
from the creditor? How are they to recover in virtue of this assignment? By
harrassing the debtor with a new suit, or is he bound to all intents and
purposes by the award of the Commissioners? These things are difficult to be
understood, and still more difficult to reconcile to that clause of the
constitution, which declares that the judiciary power of the United States
shall be vested in one supreme court, and such inferior courts as congress may,
from time to time, establish; that the judges shall hold their offices during
good behavious; that they shall take an oath to support the constitution of the
United States; and that the jurisdiction of these courts shall extend to all
cases in law and equity arising under the constitution, or laws of the United
States, and treaties made, or which shall be made under their authority. The
great tenderness of the envoy extraordinary for the case of British creditors,
seems to have made him forget that he presided in one of those courts, whose
jurisdiction extends to all cases arising under treaties; a circumstance which
can only be attributed to his being so much engrossed by his new office, as not
only to forget the functions and duties of that which he had left behind, but
even the constitution of his country.

VII. The succeeding article relates to the compensation to be made to the
citizens of the United States, for the spoliations and depredations committed
on our commerce, and to the subjects of Great Britain for such captures as have
been made within the jurisdiction of the United States, or by vessels armed
therein. For this purpose a similar board of commissioners, with nearly similar
powers, are to sit in LONDON, who are to decide the claims referred to them
according to justice, equity, and the laws of nations; and the British
government undertakes to pay the sum awarded to the claimants in specie,
without deduction. But it would seem that the commissioners are not to take
cognizance of any cases, but such wherein adequate compensation cannot be now
actually obtained in the ordinary courts of justice; with a further exception
of such cases, where the losses have been occasioned by the manifest delay,
negligence, or wilful omission of the claimants.

Of all the injuries to which mankind are exposed, those committed on the high
seas are most easily perpetrated, and most difficult to be prevented, or
punished. The conduct of privateersmen differs in nothing from that of pir^es,
except in the circumstance of obtaining a previous license to exercise their
nefarious practices. That of the commanders of ships of war but too often
partakes more of the insolence of a bashaw than the courtesy of a soldier of
honor. The spoliations committed on the property of the citizens of America by
these two classes of men, must have been often attended with circumstances of
inconvenience to the suffers, far beyond the apparent amount of the injury
offered. I have known a profitable voyage defeated, and the vessel finally
lost, by being plundered of a few sail-needles, and twine, to the value of less
than four dollars. The detention of an hour, or being turned out of her course
for a day, may prove equally fatal to a merchant ship. These are injuries for
which no reparation in damages, estimated merely according to the value of the
thing taken, or the time of detention, can make adequate satisfaction; acts of
depredation and violence committed by persons unknown, to whose residence we
are strangers, or whose residence is at too great a distance to follow them in
hopes of satisfaction, are frequently submitted to, from despair of obtaining
any compensation. Thus is will happen that a thousand instances of oppression
will remain unatoned for, from the nature of the injury itself, and the place
where offered. The immense distance is which the claimants must repair, to
prosecute their claims, whother by original action, by appeal, or by reference
to this bou^^, of commissioners, will be found, in three cases out of fou^^, ^n
insurmountable obstacle to the full attainment of justice. (...) the
commissioners been appointed to sit in any part of th^^ United States, or even
in one of the West India islands, instead of London, the probability of
reparation to the sufferers would have been much increased. Let the operation
of this article be ever so favorable to the claimants, there must always remain
a very considerable balance unsatisfied. The liberality of the United States in
the case of captures made within their jurisdiction, etc. seems to have been
more readily accepted, than copied by the British negociator.

VIII. and IX. Article the eighth relating solely to the compensation to be
made to the several boards of commissioners, I shall pass it over without
observation. The ninth, however, deserves no small attention -- It is thereby
agreed, that British subjects and American citizens who now hold lands in
America, and Great Britain, respectively, shall continue to hold the same, and
may grant, sell, or devise the same to whom they will, in like manner as if
they were natives; and that neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall be
regarded as aliens, so far as may respect the said lands, and the legal
remedies incident thereto.

According to the principles laid down in Calvin's case [Co. rep. part 7.] when
two countries, which have been under allegiance to the same prince, separate,
all those of either country born before the separation takes place, may hold,
or inhetic lands in that country from which they are thus separated. Upon this
principle the treaty of peace secured to the owners of lands in America, being
British subjects, all their possessions in lands at that time held by them. And
the reasonalbe construction seemed to be, that they should have their whole
lives to dispose of them, or to become American citizens; if they did neither,
the lands would be liable to escheat at their death, for defect of heirs,
unless some ante-natus, or some American citizen, could establish his claim
therero, either as heir, or devisee. For it was held, that the common law,
which excludes aliens from inheriting, was not altered, or intended to be
altered, by that article. And the reasons for that opinion were not without
weight in the minds of those who maintained them; since they conceived that the
principle of excluding aliens from holding lands was founded in found policy;
adopting herein one of the reasons of the common law of England, "that the
nation might in time be subject to foreign influence." -- In giving the most
liberal construction to the treaty of peace, they did not apprehend it was
meant to contravene a principle so long established among their ancestors, and
so generally understood. As to acquisitions of lands, made by British subjects,
in America, since the peace, the question, whether these are within the reason
of the case of ante-nati, has not occurred: whenever it does, it is not
impossible that a distinction may be taken between a title acquired by descent
or devise, and one by actrual purchase, since the commune vinculum has been
broken. But the treaty now under discussion has totally subverted the
wholesome muxims of the common law, and of sound policy, both in the second and
the ninth article, by virtue of which the subjects of Great Britain, though
equally aliens as the subjects of China, may hold and transmit to their latest
posterity, "according to the nature and tenure of their respective estates and
titles therein," lands lying in the United States, "and held by them at
present" -- The second article very liberally grants to British subjects all
their usurped possessions in lands within the jurisdiction of the western
posts. How far this undefined term may extend, it is difficult to conjecture,
whether one, five, or fifty miles. The same gentleman to whom I am indebted for
the hiat contained in the note on article 6, informs me that the cession of
territory to British subjects, comprehended in the second article, will
probably amount to a grent more than equal to the states of Virginia and
Kentucky, in extent, and of the most valuable lands in the United States.
The claim of jurisdiction, made by Governor Simcoe last summer, extended, if
(...) ^^istake not, a good way within the limits of Vermont, and not less than
twenty miles from his nearest post. At this rate the cession of soil made to
the subjects of Great Britain may be very extensive, and if they have been
granted to hold by feal^y to the crown of Great Britain, the ninth article
confirms the tenure. How far this article may tend to revive the proprietary
rights of Lord Fair fax's heirs or devisees, and the Maryland and Pennsylvania
proprietaries, any be worthy of more censideration than I have been able to
bestow upon the subject.
It does more; it exempts their lands from the operation of those laws which
would limit the d^ration of estates, if such be the nature of their estates
therein. It will be said that this article is reciprocal; nothing can be more
fallacious: it is probable that the subjects of Great Britain at this day own
ten thousand times as much land in America, as is owned by American citizens in
England. Under the sanction of this article, though not within the strict
wording of it, it is probable that the quantity of lands holden by British
subjects in America will be ten times as great, in a few years, as at present,
so that America will, in great measure, be tenanted by the vassals of British
landlords. The settlements now making in some part of the state of New York by
an English gentlement, whose name, I think, is Pulteney, upon an estate
containing about half a million of acres, may serve as an evidence of the
probability of this conjecture.
The high price of lands in England will, probably, induce many land-holders
there to exchange their property for more extensive estates in America; nor
will there be wanting temptations to the monopolizers of that article to
engross as large a portion of the soils as of the funds of the United States.
What influence this may have over the body politic it is not hard to
conjecture; especially if his Britan^^^ majesty himself, who is reported to be
a considerable stockholder in the American funds, should feel the same
inclination to speculate in lands: he might, probably, in a few years engross
so large a portion of them, as to revive his claim of supreme lord of the
United States of America.

X. The tenth article stipulates that there shall be no sequestration or
confiscation of debts, or property in the funds, or in public or private banks,
in any event of war between the two nations. -- One of the reasons upon which
this article was probably founded, was slightly touched upon above -- His
Britannic majesty, it is said, either allured by the prospect of higher
interest, or alarmed for the security of his immense property in the European
banks, has lately condescended to become a creditor of the United States. The
word subjects is dropped in this article, and the more comprehensive term
individuals, is substituted for it: this being nomen generalissimum, may be
supposed to extend to the king himself; for the rule that the king is not bound
by any law, unless he be specially named therein, does not apply to those laws
where he is to derive a benefit from general words. As this article, therefore,
was not so much calculated to bind, as to benefit him, it was unnecessary, and
would have been indecent to name him specially. His majesty's example has,
there is great reason to believe, been followed by a number of his subjects --
I know a gentleman who purchased half a million of dollars in the three per
cents, in one day, for persons residing in London. The effect of this article
will probably be a considerable increase of British stockholders.

But this article deserves further consideration in another point of view. When
Great Britain, in the course of the late war, began to exercise every act of
depredation upon the property of the people of America, as well as cruelty upon
their persons, the states, then sovereign and independent, by way of
retaliation, thought proper to sequester and confiscate British property in
America. This was done at the "earnest recommendation" of Congress, November
27, 1777. -- See their journals.
And when his Britannic majesty's ships of war and privateers, commenced their
present system of spoliation and aggression on the commerce of the citizens of
America, the house of representatives in congress, by a very large majority,
resolved to sequester British property in the United States, in order to secure
some indemnification to their suffering constituents. This measure, as was
formerly mentioned, was lost in the senate by the casting vote of the
vice president. The precedent was alarming, and might be renewed when the
vice president might not hold the balance in his own hands. The chief justice
of the United States had judicially declared (though that opinion was overruled)
that the states had no right to confiscate or sequester their enemies'
property; the envoy extraordinary made no difficulty in giving a diplomatic
sanction to these opinions, nor did he hesitate to remove all the horrors which
his Britannic majesty may be supposed to have felt, on the score of his money
in the funds and banks of the United States. -- If national justice were always
administered without regard to the right of the strongest, very far should I be
from condemning an article intended to secure private property, and to confirm
private confidence. But, every stipulation that abridges the exercise of
defensive measures by a weak nation, how repugnant soever such measures may
appear to the ordinary rules of justice, in civil cases, is, in fact, the
subjection of such a nation, and all its rights, to the insolence, injustice,
and rapacity of the stronger. -- If a state of war between two nations will
justify seizing the property of their respective people, by violence,
wheresoever it can be found, will not the same cause justify us in indemnifying
ourselves at the expense of our enemy in any other mode? And if the relative
force of the two nations renders this impossible by other means, by what
refinement in political morality are we forbidden to avail ourselves of such
means of retaliation or indemnification as the nature of things permits?
Suppose Great Britain still obstinately to persist in her depredations on our
commerce, and detention of the western posts; suppose her to renew the war
which she formerly waged with such fury and cruelty against America; what act
of retaliation could America commit, or how recompense herself for her losses,
but by confiscating the property of British subjects, or by carrying the war
into Canada? If humanity were to decide which of these measures ought to be
preferred, she would probably determine very differently from the envoy
extraordinary. -- She would tell us, that if satisfaction could be obtained
without the effusion of human blood, that mode should be first adopted, rather
than to carry havoc, devastation, and murder among a people whose only fault
consisted in their being the subjects of our enemy, and our nearest neighbors.
-- Could we draw the lion's teeth and pare his nails, (...) might treat on
terms of mutual reciprocity and equality: (...) till this can be effected, the
stipulation in this article must (...) mind us of that league between the
wolves and the shee^ whereby the latter surrendered the dogs, their only
defense, as hostages to the former. The balance of trade, already too great in
favor of Great Britain, will hourly accumulate: and if British subjects can
hold lands, and possess property in our funds and banks, without danger of
loss, we may rest assured that these advantages will be turned to their proper
account. -- The moment a man becomes a debtor, beyond his ability to pay, his
independence is totally lost. It is the same with nations that are, at the same
time weak and poor. Our commercial intercourse with Great Britain being renewed
upon the most beneficial footing for her, will render the United States, with
the aid of this article, and the preceding, a nation of debtors both public and
private, to her merchants, her monied men, her ambitious land-holders, and even
to her sovereign himself.

The preceding articles, it will be remembered, are all permanent. If once
ratified, they will be irrevocable; for the advantages thereby secured to Great
Britain are so great, that she must be struck with blindness, indeed, should
she ever agree to rescind one of them. -- The seventh, the only one which
promises any thing for America, except admission into the western posts, has
been shown to be inadequate to a full and complete indemnification of the
citizens of the United States, for the injuries they have sustained. Nor has
Britain yielded any thing in any one of them, for which she has not gained a
full equivalent and something more. -- But though it requires very little skill
in political arithmetic, to see on which side the balance lies, it may require
ages to calculate the amount.

XI. and XII. Though no temporary advantage can ever be deemed an equivalent
for permanent disadvantages, such as we have just noticed, it might have been
reasonably expected that the succeeding articles of the treaty would have
procured some recompense to the United States for such important concessions.
It is, however, doubtful whether any one of the remaining articles stipulates
for a single advantage on our behalf, for which we do not sacrifice thrice as
much as it is worth. -- The eleventh article stipulates "that there shall be
reciprocal and entire perfect liberty of navigation and commerce under certain
limitations and restrictions," not one of which is either a limitation or
restriction upon Great Britain, but altogether upon the United States. For
example -- ships of any burden, belonging to Britain, may freely enter any of
the ports of the United States, and bring or carry away any commodities they
please, and whither they please; whilst the freedom of navigation and commerce,
by American citizens, is restricted to vessels not exceeding seventy tons
burden, if bound to the British West Indies; all American vessels whatsoever
being totally excluded from the British seaports on the continent, by the
third article already mentioned. This license to trade with the British
Islands, is by some persons represented as very important, even under this
restriction. From the nature of the case it can only extend to the article of
provisions, when they are not prohibited; for by the laws of England, neither
tobacco, nor any other production of the United States, except provisions,
lumber, naval stores, and horses, can be imported into the islands from the
United States, even in British bottoms. Vessels of seventy tons burden are too
small for the lumber trade. -- The demand for naval stores and horses in the
British islands, is not likely to form any very important branch of commerce
with them: the admission of salted provisions is altogether arbitrary, or, if
you please, ^^cretionary, depending upon the supplies which can be fur^^^ed
from Great Britain and Ireland; the treaty does not (...) the case in this
respect -- they may still be admitted or rejected they have been often
admitted, and as often prohibited, with the last ten years; sometimes the
admission has been (...) sined to British bottoms; at others, extended to all
vessels ^^^^soever, without limitation as to their burden. I appeal to the
^^peated proclamations authorizing the importation of provisi^^^^ foreign
bottoms, which have appeared in the gazettes of all (...) islands, and of the
United States, for a dozen years, post, to prove this fact. It is a most
important fact, and shows that (...) existence of the British sugar colonies
depends upon the United States of America. For the policy of Great Britain,
ever (...) the peace, has been to exclude the citizens of America. (...) their
vessels from any intercourse or commerce with her (...) colonies; a relaxation
from this policy has never been p^^^^^^ but by the most cogent necessity; the
frequent repetition (...) proclamations, inviting our vessels into their ports,
pro^^^ ^^^cogent necessity to be very frequent, also; which fully au^^^^^ this
conclusion, that those colonies could not be subsisted without (...) of the
United States. This being the case, it was in our power ^^^tate our own terms,
instead of submitting to such as are at (...) degrading and destructive to our
commercial interests. -- We (...) be told that the conduct of Britain is
agreeable to the (...) law of all nations. But this law presupposes that the
(...) country is capable of supporting her colonies without the (...) any
foreign country whatsoever. This is not the case with (...) Britain -- She
must, therefore, submit to reasonable terms (...) a nation abounding with those
things, without which her (...) cannot exist, or sacrifice her colonies. This
would be equal (...) wise, inhuman, and unjust on her part. The necessity of
intercourse between the United States and her colonies (...) therefore,
altogether on her part, though the submission ^^^striction is upon ours, only.
A decrepid veteran without (...) weapon for his defense, dictating terms of
submission to (...) bust young soldier with arms in his hands, would scarcely
^^^hibit a more extraordinary instance of successful arrogance (...) of abject
condescension. -- The commerce with the sugar (...) was one of those strong
holds of negotiation, on the p^^^ (...) the United States, which ought never to
have been aband^^^ The envoy extraordinary could not have been ignorant of
(...) nor of the sentiments of a large majority of that body to (...) in
conjunction with the senate and the president, it belongs, by (...)
constitution, to regulate commerce with foreign nations. His zeal for
negotiation seems to have made him lose sight of every other object: and no
doubt, from the expedition, with which this important treaty was concluded,
every obstacle, which might for a moment retard its completion, was instantly
waved on the side of the American negociator.

Not less extraordinary is the stipulation contained in the succeeding clause
of the same article, which declares, that during the continuance thereof, the
United States will prohibit and restrain the carrying any melasses, coffee,
cocoa, or cotton, in American vessels, either from the sugar islands, or the
United States, to any part of the world, except the United States. Never was a
more humiliating concession proposed or acceded to, in a commercial treaty. The
interdiction extends not only to the produce of the English sugar islands, but
to similar productions from any other part of the globe. This was a decided
stroke at the commerce between America and the possessions of every other
nation in the West Indies, whether French, Dutch, Spanish, Danish, or Swedish!
Britain supposing the produce of her islands sufficient for the consumption of
the United States, or rather, determining, if possible, to limit their
consumption to what her islands can supply, thus secures a monopoly by
interdicting the exportation of any surplus of their productions, or similar
productions of other countries; and moreover, lays a foundation for the right
of searching all our vessels, and, upon the slightest pretext, detaining or
carrying them into her own ports for adjudication, if it should appear that
they have on board any of these articles beyond reasonable sea-stores. Surely
by some strange effect of magic, the envoy extraordinary had lost ali memory of
events subsequent to the year 1763, and conceived himself bound to receive as
law, whatever the British secretary of state was pleased to dictate to him! Or
was this concession the result of his fears for the fate of the French
colonies, that they would either be desolated, or become an appendage to Great
Britain? Or did he conceive that such a restricted commerce as he has
stipulated for with the British colonies, clogged with restrictions upon our
commerce with all other parts of the globe, was more valuable than all our West
India trade put together? Surely the productions of those islands must have
been rendered precious beyond measure in the eyes of the envoy extraordinary
when he consented to this article!

There is yet another light in which this article must be placed, to give us a
full view of its merits. Congress, that is, the house of representatives and
senate, with the concurrence of the president of the United States, are the
consitutional org^^^ for the regulation of commerce. Here, the envoy
extraordinary undertakes to regulate it by means of the president and senate,
only, without reference to the house of representatives; thus taking upon
himself to new-model the constitution, or to dictate a law to congress. For
either the president and senate must regulate commerce, pursuant to this
article, without the concurrence of the house of representatives, or that house
in bound, ^olens volens, to pass a law pursuant to this article Whether that
house will manifest the same compliance with the opinions of the envoy
extraordinary, as he apears to have shown to those of the British secretary of
state, remains to be seen hereafter.

XIII. Weary of concessions without consideration -- of compliances without
ostensible motives -- and of humiliations (...) degrading even for colonies, I
turn my eyes toward that gleam of liberality which appears, on the part of
Great Britain, in the 13th article, by which some conveniences have been
p^^cured for our citizens trading to the East Indies. Yet even hers,
restrictions evince the jealousy of that nation; no American citizen being
permitted to reside in any of her territories in that quarter of the globe, in
which she has acquired so extensive a^ influence; whilst British subjects may
be lords of manors in the United States from generation to generation. The 15
th article, expressly reserving to the British government "the right of
imposing such a duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of duty
now payable on the importation of Europo^^ and Asiatic goods when imported into
the United States in British or in American vessels," has, in truth, frittered
away the commercial advantages to have been expected from this article, to
nothing more than a grant of the ordinary rights of hospitality.

XIV. and XV. Tho 14th article, relating wholly to the intercourse between the
British European territories, and the United States, reciprocally, secures
those rights which a^ common between civilized nations in peace. But the 15th
article virtually extends to Great Britain all the commercial advantages
granted by America to the most favored nations. The favors of the United
States, like those of a lady of pleasure, have been granted to so many, as to
be from henceforth beneath the solicitation of any. -- The first grant of them
to France gained a cordial return of affection: The last grant will probably
annihilate the recollection, as well as the value, of the first. To detach the
United States from the affectionate attachment to that nation, which gratitude
and a variety of concurrent causes had produced, as it has been the constant
desire of Great Britain, was, unquestionably, one of the great objects of the
present treaty, as we shall have occasion to observe hereafter.

XVI. and XVII. The former of these articles relating only to the appointment
of consuls, I shall pass it over. The latter stipulates, that vessels captured
or detained on just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or
contraband goods, shall be brought to the nearest, or most convenient port for
adjudication. The alternative leaves to the captor the right of determining
between the nearest and the most convenient port; and the latter will, in all
cases, be determined by the convenience of the captor, instead of the party
arrested. It sanctions the right of stopping, searching, detaining, and
carrying out of the course of her voyage, any vessel belonging to citizens of
the United States, during any war that Britain may be engaged in; that is, upon
a general average, about one half her time and ours. It might have been
expected that the envoy extraordinary in his great ambition to meliorate the
laws and usages of nations, would have insisted, that free ships should make
free goods; that the commerce of a neutral nation should not be interrupted by
those at war, except in the case of contraband good carrying to an enemy; that
no search should be permitted upon the high seas, under any pretext whatsoever;
that no ship of war, or privateer should approach within cannon shot; nor chase
nor turn any neutral vessel out of her course; nor send more than two or three
men to enter on board of her; and that full faith and credence should be given
to the sea letters with which such vessels might be furnished. Examples of
similar stipulation might be found in our treaties with France, Holland,
Sweden, and Prussia; and even his majesty of Morocco has condescended to insert
some of them in his treaty with us. But his Britannic majesty's ships of war
and privateers are not to be restrained from any measures which their
suspicions may lead them to pursue, if they "forbear doing any damage or
committing any outrage;" words of such latitude of import, as to sanctify a
thousand injuries and provocations, such as were touched upon under the seventh
article, for which no compensation can ever be obtained; or even expected,
without pursuing the offender half over the globe. Upon what ground, we may
ask, was this distinction made? Are the officers and crews of his Britannic
majesty's ships of war and privateers so remarkably observant of the rights of
neutral nations, and the laws of courtesy, that we should trust them more than
any others? The envoy extraordinary must surely have forgot, that to put a stop
to their insolence and rapacity was one of the most important objects of his
mission.

XVIII. Concession following concession fills up almost the whole that remains
to be considered of this ill-favored treaty. Ship-timber, tar, hemp, sails,
sheet-copper, and generally whatever may serve directly for the equipment of
vessels, unwrought iron and fir plank excepted, are by this article added to
the list of contraband goods, though expressly excepted by former meaties with
other nations. Upon what principle was this new concession made to Great
Britain, in preference to all other nations? Was it, because these articles are
deemed of the first necessity to France during the present war? Did the envoy
extraordinary recollect that most of these are staple commodities of the United
States? That to make them contraband amounts to an actual prohibition of the
exportation of them in our own vessels, whenever Great Britain chooses to go to
war? Will nor the powers at war with Great Britain, challenge an equal right to
consider these articles as contraband, and seize and confiscate them in their
turn, if destined for our new, favorite ally?

The same article admits, that provisions and other articles in general not
contraband, may, in certain cases, become contraband, according to the existing
law of nations. Until the present war with France, the right of interdicting
commerce between a neutral nation and an enemy, was, by the modern h^^ of
nations (a term for which the envoy extraordinary in his judicial capacity
always affected great respect) confined to the single case of a place besieged,
or blockaded. The rights of neutral nations in respect to their commerce, and
the s^^se that our government entertained of them two years ago, are admirably
shown, in a letter from Mr. Jefferson, when secretary of state, to Mr. Pinckney
not then minister at the court of Great Britain, dated September 7, 1793. See
the papers accompanying the president's message of December 5, 1793, page 147.
True it is, that England, and the United Provinces, something more than a
century a^^, agreed to notify to all states, not at war with France, that they
would attack, and previously declared every ship bound to, or ^^^ing out of the
harbors of that kingdom, lawful prize. This p^^^dent was copied by the enemies
of France in the present (...) Sweden and Denmark, on the former occasion, as
well as on th^^^ter, entered into a treaty for maintaining their rights, and
obtaining satisfaction, and they obtained it accordingly on both occasion
America, on the contrary, kisses the rod, and crouches beneath the lash of the
insolent dictatress of nations. The effect of this submission will probably
amount to a total prohibition of the trade of America, with all nations against
whom Great Britain is engaged in a war. There is not in all Europe, and
sca^^^ly in the world, a country so little capable of being put into a state of
siege, or blockade, as France. Yet we have seen her formally declared to be in
that state; we have, in consequence, seen our commerce with her prohibited, our
vessels seized, their cargoes converted to the use of the captors; and our
envoy extraordinary has given his sanction to all these proceedings;
stipulating only, that in future cases, a reasonable mercantile profit (of
which the owner has no right to judge) shall be allowed for the cargoes thus
diverted from that channel, which the prospect of a beneficial voyage had
induced the merchant to pursue; and that the vessels shall be paid their
freight. Even the governors of the little West India Islands belonging to Great
Britain, assume the right of circumscribing, and prohibiting the commerce of
America, by (...) laring all the French islands, in a state of blockade, whilst
they have not force enough to protect their own governments. And such a
proclamation, as appears by a late case, has been considered by the court of
delegates in England, upon a appeal from Bermuda, to be a sufficient ground to
render a vessel liable, though her voyage had been begun and her passage almost
finished, before it issued.
How degraded must that nation be, whose commerce may be interdicted by the
proclamation of a colonial governor, or a military commander in the service of
a foreign nation!

XIX. The nineteenth article stipulates, that the commanders of ships of war
and privateers shall forbear doing damage, or committing any outrage on those
of the other party; and if they act contrary, they shall be punished and make
reparation. I have before noticed the probable effect of this stipulation; it
may prevent some few enormous injuries, but will not in the least check lesser
abuses. That insolence, and those less atrocious acts of vexation and
oppression, which the bashaws of the sea, and those licensed pirates,
privateersmen, are so prone to commit, will still continue to be exercised with
all the wantonness of conscious security, and impunity. A cruiser belonging to
one of the British islands, stops a ship bound to Europe; searches her; rifles
her; insults the captain; abuses his seamen; impresses some of them, under
pretext that they are British subjects; and after all these atrocities, permits
the ship to proceed. What satisfaction can be obtained in such a case? Shall
the master of the merchant ship alter his voyage, and go to the port to which
the privateer belongs, to obtain reparation? The idea is absurd. He must submit
to the ill treatment he has received, and consider his deliverance from the
hands of such ruffians, as ample recompense for his sufferings. Had the envoy
extraordinary condescended to look into our treaty with France, or Holland, he
might have found an additional article, more effectually calculated to give
security to commerce, as well as to the persons of those engaged in pursuit of
it, (...) ^^^viding, "That if the ships of one of the parties shall (...) with,
either sailing along the coasts, or on the high fo^^^ any ship of war or
privateer of the other, the said (...) war or privateers, for the avoiding any
disorder, shall rem^^^^ of cannon shot, from the merchant ship; but may send a
(...) board and may enter her, to the number of two or three men (...) to whom
the master shall exhibit his passport; and thereupo^ merchant ship may pursue
her voyage, so as it shall not be ^^^^ful to molest, or search her in any
manner, or to give her (...) or to force her to quit her intended course." One
such a^^ was worth a thousand, stipulating for indemnification from ^^^vers, or
the punishment of rascals whose vagrant life effect^^^ screens them from the
pursuit of justice. Why then was (...) an article omitted in a treaty with
Great Britain? We (...) seek the cause in that spirit of concession and submi^^
which breathes through every article of this coup d'essai of (...) envoy
extraordinary.

XX. The reciprocal exclusion of pirates, and punishm^^^ such as may receive,
harbor, or assist them, for which (...) article stipulates, is among the few
unexceptionable arti^^^ (...) this treaty.

XXI. How far the first part of this article, prohibitin^ (...) people of
either party from accepting commissions from th^^ ^^^mies of the other, may be
contrary to sound policy, I with (...) undertake to decide. I rather incline to
the opposite op^^ (...) yet I entertain some doubt of its constitutionality, in
one ^^^spect. The prohibition as to privateers corresponds who (...) treaties
with other nations; and it is most devoutly (...) wished, that the civilized
nations of the globe would ag^^^^ suppress so infamous a practice, as that of
privateering, (...) gether; had the envoy extraordinary introduced such a (...)
into his new diplomatic code, it would have done him no (...) honor than he
expected to derive from the suppression of ^^^siscations, and sequestrations.

XXII. Another article stipulating for due forbearance (...) reprisals, in case
of injuries, forms a proper article in a tr^^^^ of amity -- but alas! what
reprisals has the envoy extra^^^^nary left it in the power of the United States
to com^^^ in case of injuries from Great Britain, even after compens^^^^ shall
be refused.!

XXIII. Secures the rights of hospitally to British ships of war, in all cases,
in American ports, as also to American ships of war (when such things shall
hereafter exist) in British ports; the same hospitality is, in case of
distress, extended to any American vessel, in British ports not otherwise open
to them, under certain regulations and restrictions.

XXIV. and XXV. The former prohibits privateers belonging to an enemy of either
party, from arming themselves, or selling their prizes in the ports of the
other. This is conformable to our treaties with other nations; the letter
stipulates for the admission of ships of war, privateers, and their prizes,
into the ports of the respective nations; but these articles are not to be
construed, or operate contrary to former existing treaties. Similar provisions
are contained in our treaties with France, Holland, etc. It seems to me,
however, to be very questionable, whether good policy would not rather have led
the United States to discountenance, as much as possible, the practice of
privateers, at least, resorting to their ports in any case, but that of
absolute distress. The practice of privateering is a violation of the rights of
humanity, and is pregnant with the destruction of every moral principle among
individuals. The depredations committed by these ^c^nsed pirates, have no
effect upon the final issue of the war: they are attended with ruin and
distress to thousands of innocent individuals, without affecting the strength
of the nation; and the calamities they bring upon peaceable and harmless men,
are often more numerous and destructive, than any of the national operations in
war. If they are admitted into the ports of neutral nations, their presence is
a restraint upon its commerce; for it is well ^^town that the purpose of their
vi^^t, is to act the spy upon their intended prey; for which they often ^e in
wait even at the entrance of the port where they have been hospitably received,
and supplied with the means of pursuing so nefarious an occupation.

The same article also stipulates for the protection of the ships of each party
within cannon shot of the beasts, or within the bays, rivers, or ports of the
other. This acticle is conformable to former teaties; yet I doubt how far the
United States can otherwise comply with it, than by making satisfaction for
what they have no power to prevent.

XXVI. This article stipulates for the security of the persons and effects of
merchants, in the event of war between the two nations; in which case, while
they behave peaceably, and commit no offense against the laws, they may
continue to reside and carry on their trade; but if their conduct should render
them suspected, and the respective governments should think proper to order
them to remove, they shall be allowed twelve months to do so, with an
exception, as to such as shall act contrary to the established laws. There is a
spirit of liberality in this article, highly conformable to that policy which
commercial (...) ought to promote. It is, moreover, in appearance, per^^^
reciprocal. The misfortune is, that America has sc^^^^^ merchant residing
within the British dominions, being ca^^^ from all her colonial territories, by
stut. 12. Car. 2. and (...) the East Indies by the present treaty; whilst our
p^r^^^ towns, nay, every part of our country, swarms with (...) merchants. The
benefit of this article to the citizens (...) United States, in comparison of
those of Great Britain, (...) a cent to an eagle.

XXVII. Murderers, and persons guilty of forgery, a^^^^ be given up, on both
sides. The prevention of moral evil (...) object worthy the attention of
politicians, as well in their ^^^tional compacts, as in their civil
institutions. This a^^ therefore, if it can be reconciled to the federal
constitu^^^^ which is doubtful, must receive our cordial approbation, (...)
together with the 20th and 21st, may be considered as fou^^^ in perfect
reciprocity and equality. Happy should I have (...) bestow the same encomium
upon all the preceding.

XXVIII. The last article provides for the duration (...) former: the first
ten, as we have before observed, me p^^nent; the twelfth is to continue two
years from the end (...) war, in which Britain is now engaged; the (...) to
twelve pears from that period. Happily for the United (...) the article ^^^ited
to the (...) ^^^ation, proved a (...) block to the ratification of the whole.
Should the p^^^ (...) the United States conceive himself to be bound by the
(...) the senate, it has been supposed to ^e in the power of (...) in ratify
the perpetual articles, without ac^^^^ to and amendment of the article objected
to. Whether (...) was for^s^^^ cannot be kno^n. It is, however, pres^^^bl^
(...) the wisdom of the president will guard him against an^^^ which might
commit the United States so far. Whilst ^^^^cle of a treaty is under
discussion, the whole must be (...) as in a state of negotiation and diseusion;
and for this (...) because it is possible the object of the one party in
acceding (...) the other articles, was merely with a view of obtaining (...)
terms, as are insisted ^n in that one article. Viewing the (...) in this light,
and that it is still practicable, in the cou^^ (...) negotiation, not only to
obtain the rescission of some, but (...) amelioration of several of those
articles which the zeal of (...) envoy extraordinary prompted him to accede to:
and, (...) over, to procure the admission of such as appear to be indi^^sably
necessary to constitute a part of the proposed treaty; (...) that the senate
must again act upon the whole treaty so second fo^^^ I shall notice some things
which it does not contain: and which, to a less liberal negociator, might have
appeared, not altogether unworthy of attention.

1. It does not contain any stipulation for compensation on account of the
detention of the western posts, twelve years after they were to have been given
up, by treaty. I have heard that the value of the fur trade formerly carried on
by the citizens of the United States, amounted yearly to near a million
dollars. The British magazines, some few years past, stated the value of the
Canadian fur trade at as many pounds sterling. I cannot presume to be correct
in this, as I write from memory. But if either sum be near the truth, this
article would have amounted to some millions of dollars, in account against his
Britannic majesty. 2. It does not contain any stipulation of compensation on
account of the negroes, and other property belonging to the citizens of the
United States, carried away in violation of the seventh article of the treaty
of peace. The value of this concession (I know not with what accuracy) has been
estimated at two millions of dollars, I have lately been informed, that this
estimate, independent of twelve years interest, is too low. My authority adds,
that this article, after some discossi^^, was entirely given up, by the envoy
extraordinary!!!
more, in favor of his Britannic majesty. 3. It does not stipulute for any
compensation to be made to the citizens of the United States, for the
arbitrary, violent, and insolent detention, imprisonment, and impressment of
their persons (while peaceably engaged in commerce) on board the ships of war,
and privateers of Great Britain, during the present was with France; nor for
the manifold other personal injuries received from them. Were this article to
be estimated and assessed by a jury of freemen, such, as to the honor of the
British nation, have often appeared in their courts of judicature, the damages
would probably be more than commensurate to those which may be awarded for the
spoliations on our commerce. 4. It does not provide for the prevention of such
nefarious acts in future. Whilst Americans speak the same language with the
subjects of Great Britain, there will not be wanting a color for such acts of
violence and oppression. Our treaty with Holland stipulates, "that merchants,
captains and commanders of vessels, public or private, may freely take into
their service, and receive on board their vessels, seamen or others, natives or
inhabitants of the respective countries." The concessions made to Great Britain
would surely have entitled us to expect a similar clause in the treaty with her
-- At any rate, some stipulation which might secure the citizens of America,
whether on the high seas, or on our coasts, and even within our own bays and
ports, that personal liberty which has been so often violated, with impunity,
by British sea officers and privateersmen, during the present war between his
Britannic majesty and France, seems absolutely necessary; otherwise the
citizens of America will, by their sufferings, be made parties in every war in
which arrogance, ambition, revenge, or other motives, may prompt his Britannic
majesty to engage. 5. It does not stipulate that the Indians, inhabiting within
the territory, or on the borders of the United States, shall not receive any
aid or supply, whatsoever, in arms, or other necessaries for war, from the
British government or their merchants, etc. in case of war or hostility between
them and the United States. 6. It does not stipulate that Great Britain
(instead of exciting the Algerines to annoy our commerce, and enslave our
citizens, as we have too much reason to believe she has done) should use her
good offices with them in favor of the United States. 7. It does not stipulate
for the free navigation from the ^ake^ to the Atlantic, through the waters
immediately communicating therewith.
It may be asked -- What right have we to require that Great Britain should
accede to the three last mentioned articles? -- The answer is not difficult:

1st, The Indians within the territories of the United Stat^^ are, in respect
to all other nations, but more especially Great Britain, who formerly claimed,
and has now renounced, th^^ sovereignty over them, subject to the United
States. The Indians themselves, is their several treaties with the United
State^^ recognize their sovereignty, and acknowledge themselves (...) their
protection. As between the United States and all oth^^ nations, the Indians are
to be considered as a tributary, dep^^^^ent people. Consequently the United
States have a right to (...) ^^pulate that other nations shall not aid them
against the United States. They had good reason to suspect Great Britain of
havi^^ lately furnished them with such aid: they had good reason to ^^^pect
pect that the hostilities lately practiced by these people, upon our western
frontiers, had been fomented, nay, even cond^^^ed by the agents of Great
Britain. -- Let the letters of the presend secretary of state to Mr. Hammond,
the British minister, and the message from the president of the United States
to congres^ upon this subject, be my vouchers. Having reason to suspect such
ill-offices to have been done us, we had a right to insi^^ that a nation to
whom we were about to bind ourselvee, by more than ordinary ties of amity,
should, with good faith, engage neither to repeat such ill-offices, nor suffer
them to be repeated by any of her subjects. We had a right to expect an
immediate assent to such a proposition from a nation ready disposed to enter
into a state of amity with us. -- Good policy would, moreover, have dictated
the reservation of the right of prohibiting the importation of arms,
ammunition, and warlike stores, into the United States by way of the lakes,
although such importation was not prohibited elsewhere. Under the existing
article ^o such prohibition can be made, unless it be general. The British
subjects, settled at the ports of the United States, on the lakes, may now
"freely, for the purposes of commerce, import all such articles, and transport
them whithersoever they think proper, and vend them to whomsoever they please,
within the territories of the United States" -- that is, to Indians as well as
others It is not improbable that a few years may show us more clearly the full
effect of this generous considence and indulgence. 2d, If the examples of
France and Holland may be cited as precedents, it will be found that the
treaties with both, stipulate for their good offices with the states of
Barbary. -- The strong ground that there is to suspect his Britannic majesty's
ill-offices, in that quarter, as well as with the Indians, might have suggested
to the envoy extraordinary the good policy of engaging a monarch so remarkable
for his good faith, to desist from his persecutions, and to promise assistance
in procuring the enlargement of our fellow citizens who have been reduced to a
state of slavery by those barbarians. 3d, The navigation from the lakes into
the Atlantic is a concession which appears to stand nearly upon the same ground
as the free navigation of the Mississippi. In a treaty, where, among numberless
advantageous concessions, the free navigation of all our tide-waters is
granted, it might have been reasonably expected that egress and ingress should
have been permitted between the waters of the lakes, and those of the Atlantic.
For without such a communication between the different ports of the United
States on the western waters, and upon the Atlantic, the residents on the
former must be constrained to export all their commodities, which cannot be
brought down the Hudson, or other less convenient routes, to Great Britain; and
that too, in British ships: for the vessels of the United States not being
permitted to enter the St. Lawrence from the sea -- and no vessel being
permitted to trade from Canada, except such as are British, the citizens of
America (if any should ever obtain a settlement on the lakes) must export all
their bulky commodities, in the ships of that nation, to Great Britain or her
colonies only. This, therefore, must operate as a monopoly ^^favor of Great
Britain, in respect to all bulky articles, and giv^^ her a preference in every
other: and though in this case w^^ had not the same power of dictating our own
terms, as in th^^ communication with the West India islands, so able a
negoci^tor as the envoy extraordinary was supposed to be, might assu^edly have
obtained a concession in this place, as a retribution for the favors granted to
Great Britain in the other. This w^^ the rather to have been expected, as the
envoy extraordinary could not but be aware that Spain would avail herself of
(...) good a reason for not yielding to our demand of the free navigation of
the Mississippi. Will not our concessions in this treaty, strengthen the tone
of her refusal? When the envoy extraordinary, then minister for foreign
affairs, endeavored ^^persuade congress to cede the navigation of the
Mississippi (...) Spain for twenty-five years, he contended that the acceptance
of such a concession on the part of Spain, would operate (...) a tacit
acknowledgment of the right of the United States ever after. I will not
controvert this diplomatic inferen^^ though, probably, the court of Spain would
not have been (...) complaisant. -- But in the treaty with Great Britain, we
(...) nothing that could, either immediately or eventually, give (...) the
chance of a similar benefit. On the contrary, the sub^^^^^ is consigned, in
silence, to perpetual oblivion.
From the preceding investigation of this treaty, are we (...) fully justified
in drawing the following conclusion: -- That

As a treaty of AMITY, it is partial and defective;

As a treaty of COMMERCE, it is not reciprocal;

As a treaty of NAVIGATION, it is humiliating;

And it is, in other respects, destructive to the prosport^^^ security, and
independence of the United States; and s^^versive of the CONSTITUTION?

1. It is partial, and defective as a treaty of amity; because while it
provides the fullest satisfaction for the pretended c^^^^^ of complaint, on the
part of Great Britain See remarks on article 6.
, no adequate r^^^ration is obtained for former injuries, and breaches of
fai^^^ toward the United States See remarks on article 7. See also page 303.
, nor any security against a wa^^^^ repetition of them See remarks on articles
7. and 19. See also page 303.
: and because there is not that interchange of good offices secured in this, as
in former treaties between the United States and other nations. See page 303,
304, 305.


2. As a treaty of commerce it is not reciprocal, because it concedes to the
merchants, subjects, and ships of Great Britain, greater privileges than are
granted to the citizens and ship^ of the United States within the territories
of Great Britain. See remarks on articles 3.12.13.26.


3. As a treaty of navigation it is humiliating; because in exposes the vessels
belonging to citizens of the United States, to be stopped, searched, and turned
out of their course upon suspicion, in cases where those of Great Britain
cannot be exposed to similar inconveniences See remarks on articles 12.17.
; and because, by limiting the size of our vessels, in certain cases, it has an
evident tendency to degrade the maritime interest and force of the United
States.

4. It is, in other respects, destructive to the prosperity, security and
independence of the United States; because it cedes to the subjects of a
foreign nation, the right of soil within an undefined extent of territory,
whose value and importance to the United States is conceived to be immense See
remarks on article 9.
: because it admits aliens to hold and inherit lands within the United States,
and to reside therein, whilst they may be subjects, owing allegiance to a
sovereign actually engaged in war with the United States; because it tends to
detach us from our ancient ally, the French nation, by giving a preference to
her most inveterate enemy See remarks on article 18.
: and because it deprives the United States of the right of self-defence, and
the means of retaliation in case of hostility See remarks on article 10.
, or unjust aggression from a nation whose arrogance and injustice we have more
than once experienced.

5. It is subversive of the constitution of the United States; because it
establishes a tribunal imcompatible with the constitution, and assigns to it
jurisdiction in cases expressly vested by the constitution in the judicial
courts of the United States See remarks on article 6. and note thereon.
; and because the decisions of this tribunal are paramount to the judgments of
the constitutional courts; and because it tends to wrest from the whole body of
congress its constitutional powers, and to transfer the same to a part of that
body only; or to subject the measures of one of the component parts of congress
to the absolute control of the other two. See remarks on article 12. last part.


A variety of other observations, equally important, might, no doubt, have
suggested themselves to a person who had full leisure to examine this subject,
and may be met with in the several publications that have already appeared.
Without pretending to abilities extensive enough to embrace the whole, I shall
now hasten to a conclusion.

I am well aware that it will be contended by the advocates for the treaty,
that a refusal to ratify it will bring on a war; or must continue matters
between us and Great Britain, in their present state of unredressed wrongs, and
a passive acquiescence therein. I shall add a few words by way of answer.

1. As to the danger of producing a war. 1st, The refusal (...) enter into a
state of amity, or strict commercial connection, or to form a treaty on any
subject, with a nation with whom (...) are at peace, unless such refusal should
amount to a denial of just compensation for injuries complained of, is no cause
of war between nations. Whenever Great Britain may choose to commence a war
with the United States, she will not want a pretext. At present the treaty
itself is the most unequivocal proof, that she has scarcely the shadow of
complaint; for the cases to which the sixth article can extend, even with all
the latitude which the liberality of the envoy extraordinary has given it, are
not attributable to the want either of national faith or justice, but to the
operation of those means of self-^^sence which the law of nations permits, or
of general laws, founded on the emergencies of the times. The detention of the
western posts, alone, would more than balance the account, in a single year, if
stated according to the principles of justice. As to the captures made within
the jurisdiction of the United States, or by vessels armed therein, Mr.
Jefferso^^ letter shows the readiness of our government to remove ^^cause of
complaint, on that head. 2d, Great Britain derives such immense advantages from
her commerce with America, that nothing short of a state of lunacy could prompt
to ^^terrupt it, for the sake of reparation on either of the before mentioned
accounts. 3d, The immense property which (...) merchants, her monied men, and
even her sovereign holds in the funds and banks of the United States, or have
due to them from individuals, is, until the present treaty shall be ratified, a
further security against those hostile aggressions, to which the fear of
sequestration, or confiscation, gave so sudden and unexpected a check. 4th, She
has her hands so full already, that, much addicted as she is to hostility, she
will, probably, for the present, avoid increasing the number of her enemies.

2. As to the redress of wrongs. This is so partial and inadequate in the
present treaty, that no great injury can accrue from delaying to accept it; nor
does the treaty contain such security against the repetition of them, as should
prompt us, on that account, to accept of the partial compensation that it holds
forth. Much less are the compensation and security provided by the treaty, such
as ought to be accepted in lieu of those claims which are passed over in
silence. The surrender of the western posts, were it not by the terms of this
treaty an object greatly diminished in its importance to the United States, is
an event still so remote (not to add uncertain) as not to justify the
precipitate adoption of a measure calculated to impair the value of the
acquisition, or render it totally useless.

3d, The suspension of the 12th article, by the advice of the senate, having
effectually retarded the final ratification of the treaty, the same train of
negotiation which must be resorted to, for the adjustment of that article, so
as to be acceptable to the senate, may doubtless be recurred to for adjusting
other objectionable points.

No inconvenience, therefore, can reasonably be apprehended from the
non-ratification of the treaty in its present form. Having been communicated to
the people, the executive are now better able to form a judgment of the public
mind, and to weigh objections which perhaps had not before occurred; and the
people of the United States with confidence hope, that the president will not
only attend to their reasons, but pay respect to the general will of that
people, whose affectionate confidence and authority he possesses on the present
momentous occasion. How far these remarks may accord with the general wishes
and sentiments of the people, it remains for him to determine.

When the constitution of the United States was adopted in Virginia, the
convention, among the other amendments, proposed, "That no commercial treaty
shall be ratified without the concurrence of two-thirds of the whole number of
the members of the senate; and no treaty, ceding, contracting, or suspending
the territorial rights or claims of the United States or any of them; or their
or any of their rights or claims to sithing in the American seas, or navigating
the American rivers, shall be made, but in cases of the most urgent and extreme
necessity; nor shall any such treaty be ratified without the concurrence of
three-fourths of the whole number of members of both houses (...) ^^^^tively."
-- North Carolina proposed the same amendment. (...) the present occasion, the
people of the United States will ^^^led to consider, how far some am^^dment to
this part of the constitution is become necessary.

COLUMBUS.
Virginia, August 6, 1795.
PLYMOUTH PROTEST.
WHEREAS at a meeting of the inhabitants of the town of Plymouth, on the 28th
day of October (...) "for the purpose of taking into serious consideration the
t^^^ty entered into by the president, and twenty senators, and the government
of Great Britain," it was hastily determined (...) dispense with the legal
qualifications of voters; in consequen^^ of which determination, a large number
of the inhabitan^^ immediately withdrew themselves, conceiving the meeting to
(...) no longer a legal meeting of the town. Notwithstanding (...), sundry
persons remained, and calling themselves the town of ^^^mouth, proceeded to
pass a resolution, reprobating in str^^^^^ (...) indecent terms, the conduct of
the supreme executive of (...) United States. We, the subscribers, inhabitants
of the to^^^^ Plymouth, holding in just abhorrence such irregular proceeding
(...) think ^t our duty, publicly to manifest our " marb^d and (...)
disapprobation" of the same, for the following reasons: --

First. Because the treaty having received the sanction of (...) constituted
authorities (so far as depends on the decision of (...) authorities) has
become, in the language of the constituti^^^ "the supreme law of the land" --
any attempts, therefore, (...) counteract its operation, is an open and avowed
opposition (...) the general government, and highly alarming to the peac^ (...)
the community; as the insurrection in the western counties (...) Pennsylvania,
probably originated in meetings conducted (...) equal temper and moderation.

Second, Because the persons assembled at this meeting (...) incompetent to
decide on the merits of so complex an in^^^^ment, as the treaty, very few of
them ever having seen or (...) it; and every thing relative to the whole
business, being pre^^^^^ prepared by the original movers of the meeting, who,
in all (...) stances, have been hostile to the federal constitution and (...)
administration of it, from its first establishment.

Third, Because such meetings, and the efforts made to ^^^vene them, by
practicing on the passions of the honest, though uninformed, are, in the
extreme, dangerous in a republican government, having a direct tendency to
introduce the empire of licentiousness, which is only a short prelude to the
more perma^^^^ one of despotism.

Fourth, Because the strictures made on the treaty, in the aforesaid
resolutions, are a mere repetition of certain inflammatory sentiments, which
have been echoed and re-echoed to the public; and while they contain the most
unfounded, indiscriminate censure on illustrious and amiable patriots, whose
important, meritorious services, rendered their country, ought to endear them
to every friend of it, pay the highest eulogium to Stephens Thomson Mason, a
senator of the United States, for a notorious breach of official confidence.

October 30th, 1795. (Signed by Seventy-two Names.)

At a Meeting of the Inhabitants of the County of Westmoreland, (Virginia)
convened, in consequence of writter Invitations circulated through the Country,
for the purpose of taking the Opinion of the People on the Treaty lately
concluded between the United States and the British Nation, September 29th,
1795.
JOSEPH PIERCE, Esquire, Senior Magistrate, in the Chair.

THE treaty was read -- and, after some explanations of its object and
tendency, the following resolutions were entered into, without a dissenting
voice:

Resolved, That we continue to possess undiminished confidence in our
government; and that we sincerely believe its due preservation, in all its
parts, essential to our rights, liberties, and happiness.

Resolved, That we deem it the duty of all good citizens, to check, by every
lawful means, the wicked and cunning machinations employed with industry and
art, by certain individuals, their ^ools, and adherents, to withdraw the
confidence of the people from their government, without which confidence, no
free political system can long endure; and that with deep regret, we have
marked a certain set of men, exerting themselves on every occasion, which, in
the course of things, has presented itself, for the obvious purpose of
destroying a government, established by a majority of freemen, necessary to
each others happiness, and who have experienced a wonderful prosperity under
the practice thereof.

Resolved, That in the late negotiation with Great Britain, its primary object,
the preservation of peace, has been completely effected, which, of itself, is
all-important; and that very considerable additional good has also been
acquired by the surrender of the western posts, which leads to the termination
of Indian warfare, and compensation for the spoliations on our commerce.

Resolved, therefore, That we feel ourselves perfectly satisfied with the
government of the United States in this late transaction; and are fully
persuaded, that the same signal wisdom and love of country which has invariably
marked the conduct of the president, and eminently produced good to his fellow
citizens, will be found to have directed his councils throughout his arduous
administration -- and we do, for ourselves, determine to support and maintain,
with our lives and our fortunes, the constituted authorities of our country;
against foreign and domestic enemies of every sort and description.

JOSEPH PIERCE, Chairman.

PRESIDENT'S ANSWER. JOSEPH PIERCE, ESQUIRE
Sir,
I HAVE received your letter of the 29th ult. covering resolutions of a meeting
of the inhabitants of the county of Westmoreland relative to the treaty with
Great Britain.

The approbation therein given of this measure, and the assurances of
supporting the constituted authorities of our country, cannot but be pleasing
to all who know the value of regular government.

No wish, while I fill the office I now have the honor to hold, can be more
ardent, than that the acts of my administration should give satisfaction to my
constituents. The contrary will always give me pain. I know but one sure method
to merit the first, or to avoid the latter, and that is, to pursue steadily
such measure (of an executive nature) as appear to be most conducive to their
interest and happiness. This, to the best of my judgment, has been my
invariable endeavor; and I cannot but hope that the ratification of the treaty
(agreeably to the advice and consent of the senate) will be viewed in this
light, when it is better understood than it seems to be at present. -- For the
expression, of personal confidence in me, I feel very sensibly.

I am, Sir, with due respect, Your obedient, Go. WASHINGTON.
United States, 9th Oct. 1795.
END OF THE THIRD AND LAST VOLUME.

