DISCOURSES ON THE CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURES: IN WHICH THE TRUTH,
INSPIRATION, AND USEFULNESS OF THE SCRIPTURES ARE ASSERTED AND PROVED.

By the late Reverend BENJAMIN BENNET.

NEW-BRUNSWICK: PRINTED BY ABRAHAM BLAUVELT. 1795.

TO THE READER.
SOLOMON observes that many are the devices of a man's heart, but the counsel
of the Lord, that shall stand. Many have been the devices of men's hearts and
heads, against christianity. From its youth up have they fought against it; but
it is the counsel of the Lord, and therefore has hitherto stood, and if there
be any truth in the divine promises, it will forever maintain its ground. This
is an age when the love and practice of true religion is greatly on the
decline, when iniquity abounds, and when infidelity raises her infernal head,
and refuses to be ashamed. There are many who boldly profess their disbelief of
a divine revelation, and employ all their wit and ingenuity in order to exhibit
the most important doctrines of our holy religion in a ridiculous point of
view. Persons ^f such depraved minds, examine the Scriptures as it were with a
microscope, which confines them to some single point, but does not enable them
to contemplate the beauty and consistency of the whole, or to perceive the
relation which each part has to another. Nay, some of our modern infidels are
so daring and presumptuous as to condemn the whole system of divine revelation
as a cunningly devised fable, declaring at the same time, that the Bible is a
book with which they are very little acquainted. But every good man can say
from his own experience, that the more he examines the Scriptures, with an
humble, an honest, and unprejudiced mind, and with a sincere desire to attain
the knowledge of the truth, the more he will admire them. For they are like
those persons whom an intimate acquaintance endears more and more, whatever
prejudices we might at first sight have conceived against them. He will find
that they afford as much light as our present condition stands in need of, and
much more than we could possibly attain, by the exercise of our unassisted
faculties. The Bible is a book which takes in a vast extent of time. It begins
with the creation of the world, and the formation of man, and ends in eternity,
with the last judgment and the consummation of all things. And yet, through all
this variety of dispensations there is one chain, and regular series of well
connected events. And is it not highly proper, that christians should be firmly
established in the says of these important truths, and be able to give a good
reason for the hope that is in them: especially at a period when the emissaries
of Satan are employing every engine to undermine the grounds of our holy
religion. But from what source does infidelity spring? The answer is obvious;
it proceeds from the depravity of the human heart. When our hearts are
deceitful, when our lives are immoral, we wish to banish from our minds the
idea of the righteous judge of all the earth, who will render unto every one
according to his works. And it is not very difficult for us to persuade
ourselves into the belief of what we earnestly wish to be true. And il has been
frequently observed, that the more vicious the age, the more has infidelity
gained ground. This was the case in ancient Greece and Rome, when the senseless
system of Epicurus was patronised by many of much greater and more eminent
abilities, than any that now espouse infidelity. This was also the case in
Judea, when the sect of the Sadducees prevailed. But perhaps some may be ready
to say, that the great number of deistical books, which have been lately
written in this country, and also imported from Europe, has occasioned the
great degeneracy of the present age. But the truth is, it is the almost total
depravity of sentiment in matters of religion, to which bad writers will be
always ready to accommodate themselves, which has occasioned those infidel
writings, which are so carefully circulated and so eagerly read by those who
deny the Lord Jesus Christ. And is it not high time for the friends of Jesus to
exert themselves in his service, and to employ every mean in their power, for
the support of his religion. And is not this the time, when men of piety, and
learning, and abilities, ought to employ their talents, in the defense of that
gospel, upon which our everlasting all depends. Many publications have appeared
in the present age, which seem to be very properly calculated to answer this
purpose. Some of these, however valuable in themselves ^^e but little known.
This is the case with the volume which is now offered to the public, and it is
hoped that it will be peculiarly seasonable at this time, when our modern
deists are so exceedingly zealous in supporting and propagating the unhappy
cause they have the misfortune to espouse. If these sermons are read with an
unbiassed mind, I doubt not but they will be read with great advantage, which
will certainly be the most effectual way of praising and recommending them. The
Almighty who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, can easily
bring good out of evil. We seem to be sunk into a fatal indolence and
insensibility with regard to the great objects of religion, and some signal
judgments, some extraordinary manifestations of the divine displeas^re, perhaps
may be necessary, to purge the inhabitants of this country, of their dross, and
to rouse us to a serious attention to religion, as when the sky is full of
noxious and pestilential vapors, some violent hurricane, some dreadful bursts
of thunder, are necessary to disperse them, to clear the infected air, and to
restore it to its former serenity. That these awful calamities may be
prevented, may the Lord Jesus Christ, the great king and head of the church, by
his blessed spirit, render these discourses effectual for rebuke, for
correction, and for instruction in righteousness.

DISCOURSE I. The insufficiency of Natural Light, AND The necessity of a
Supernatural Revelation.
2. TIM. iii. 16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


THERE has been a mighty controversy in the world about fundamentals in
religion, points absolutely necessary to be believed by all christians; how
many such there are, and which they are. Now without entering into that debate,
I take it for granted the subject before us, (the divine original of the Bible)
must be reckoned in the number of fundamentals. It is certainly a thing of the
last importance to be well instructed in this matter. I have therefore thought
fit to give you a few discourses upon the inspiration, and great usefulness of
the scriptures. I have heretofore treated upon this subject; but finding that
several of you desire a fuller account of these things, I have determined to
resume the point, and enlarge the plan and scheme; that I may take in the main
matters that concern this important doctrine, the establishing and vindicating
the authority of the Bible: which I reckon the more seasonable in regard of the
peculiar opposition it meets with at this time. To this purpose, I shall
consider the words I have read, All scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. Where we have two things observable.

1. We have here asserted the divine original and authority of the scriptures.
All scripture is given by inspiration of God. That the apostle refers
immediately to the scriptures of the Old Testament cannot be questioned. For,
not to say the New Testament was not (all of it) then written, he speaks of the
scriptures that Timothy had been educated in the knowledge of, from a child
thou have known the holy scriptures, which could be no other than the
scriptures of the Old Testament. But whereas he affirms, that all scriptures
were given by inspiration of God; and it is probable several books of the New
Testament might then be written, these must be included in the general
expression. Besides, when he mentions Timothy's knowledge of the holy
scriptures, and takes notice of their sufficiency to make wise to salvation, he
adds, through faith in Christ Jesus; which seems to lead us to the gospel,
where we have the fullest and clearest revelation of him.

And indeed, whatever evidence the Jews had of their canons being divine and
given by inspiration, we have the same, and greater, for the divinity of ours.
If the scriptures of the Old Testament were by inspiration of God, those of the
New Testament are certainly no less so; and consequently, we may retain the
apostle's general term, including the who^e canon or all the books of the Old
and New Testament, and say, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God.

2. We have the usefulness of these inspired writings asserted here, They are
profitable, says the text, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness. The meaning of these several phrases I shall
enquire into afterward, and show how the scripture is useful for all these
purposes.

In the mean while, two propositions very naturally offer themselves from
hence; which I shall lay down as the foundation of what I design upon this
subject, viz.

(1.) That all scripture, or all the writings of the Old and New Testament,
were given by inspiration of God. And (2.) That the scriptures, or the several
books and parts of the Bible, are of great use and service to the church.
Particularly, they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness.
I shall begin with the first of these, namely, that the scriptures, all the
books of the Old and New Testament, were given by inspiration of God. This is a
point of great consequence, among the fundamentals of the christian religion,
as I said before; and therefore I shall now take occasion to consider it pretty
fully. To most of you, I doubt not, what will be said will be wholly new, and
others may find advantage in a review of the subject, as it tends to refresh
their memories, confirm their faith, and improve their joy.

In speaking to this observation, I shall, (1.) give some account of the
inspiration of the holy scriptures. (2.) Show how it must be understood, that
all scripture is given by inspiration of God. And then, (3.) prove the divine
inspiration of the scriptures, or, as we commonly express it, that the Bible or
scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are the word of God.


I. I shall give some short account of the inspiration of the holy scriptures:
the subject is too copious, and it may be too curious, to be handled largely
here, and is fitter for the press than the pulpit. However, I shall mention a
few particulars for explaining it, as far as such a discourse will allow.

1. I suppose divine revelation lay in some extraordinary, immediate, sensible
intercourse that the inspiring spirit, from whence the afflatus or inspiration
proceeded, had with the minds of those that were inspired: in making impression
or motion on the imagination, and thereby conveying such and such things to the
mind of the person concerned. When we converse with one another by words, a
vibration or peculiar kind of motion is made in the air, which strikes the ear
of the person, and occasions a motion in the brain, whereby thoughts and ideas
are excited, or our thoughts transmitted to the mind of him we speak to* now
when God inspires any he makes such impressions upon, or motions in the brain
immediately, and so transmits his mind and will to the person he inspires.
Indeed this is not easily apprehended by us; nor is it easy to apprehend how my
speaking to you, conveys such or such ideas to your minds. But as we are sure
this is possible and fact, the other certainly may be allowed equally possible.

2. Those that were inspired knew as certainly that they were so and that it
was from God that they received the impressions, as you know that I am now
speaking to you. I grant this is not easy to be conceived or explained by
others, (as I have already said.) But those concerned in it had such a sensible
assurance that it was God who spoke to them, as lest them free from all
suspicion of imposture. This is manifest in the case of Abraham. He heard a
voice from Heaven, which bid him take his son, his only son, whom ^e loved, and
get him into the land of Moriah and there offer him up for a burnt-offering. A
command so surprising and startling, in regard to the matter of it, that had he
not had the utmost assurance it was from God, he would have abhorred the
motion. There was something in the manner of the inspiration, that carried its
own evidence along with it.

3. The inspired were not only assured themselves of their own inspiration, but
were enabled to give satisfaction to others concerning that matter. They felt,
and certainly knew, they were inspired; and could evidence it to others. How
the ancient prophets proved their commission, authority and inspiration, I must
not now enquire; only I would hint in short, that there were three ways, among
others, of proving this, viz. by working of miracles, by foretelling things to
come, things that came to pass afterward, and by the testimony of known
allowed prophets. When God sent any to make a new revelation, they did not
expect men should believe them upon the authority of their own mere word, but
they produced their credentials, the works they did testified concerning them,
as Christ speaks in his own case. Thus we read that God bore Wilness to the
apostles with signs, wonders and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost.
This testimony often attended the doctrine of inspired persons, and always it
may be, when they delivered a new doctrine to the world. In other cases, when
they were only sent to inculcate (...) doctrine already revealed, and call men
to the o^^^vation of a known law, miracles or prediction ^ight not be
necessary. But then such persons ha^^ ^^e testimony of known and approved
prophets; were received by the school of the prophets, or by some or other of
the prophetic character, whose authority had been sufficiently sealed from
heaven. And then,

4. The inspiring spirit did not act and influence all that were inspired in
one and the same manner, but variously. This the apostle hints at Heb. i. 1.
God who ^^^undry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the
fathers by the prophets, has in these last day spoken unto us by his son. He
spoke by the prophets in diverse manners. Some had revelations made to them by
vision in the day, others by dreams in the night: some by a voice formed in the
air, (called a voice from heaven) and others by a more immediate secret
suggestion. In short, God sometimes spoke to their outward senses when awake,
and sometimes to their more inward senses, as I may say in dreams and extacies,
the mind being still informed concerning the meaning of such representations in
both cases. Again,

5. As the spirit communicated himself to them in different ways, so there was
a difference in the kind or degree of inspiration. And here to pass over other
less material distinctions, I shall take notice of that common and well known
one, into an inspiration of suggestion, and an inspiration of direction.

There was an inspiration of suggestion; which was, when the whole matter that
this or that inspired person was to publish to the world, whether by word or
writing, was revealed to him de Novo, and entirely communicated to him from
above. Many of the writers of the Holy Scripture had such an inspiration as I
now refer to, an inspiration of suggestion. The ancient prophets had it i^^
^^^ch of their prophecies as contained predict on ^^ncerning the future state
of the church; as (...) coming of the Messiah, his life, death, and ^he (...).
They had it also in their prophecies concerning the rise and fall of the ^our
monarchies, and in foretelling many other events relating to the church and the
world; and no doubt in describing many past events. So Moses, in giving the
history of the creation, may well be supposed to have had the whole matter, the
entire process of that great work laid before him, and communicated to him, by
the spirit of God. This was also the case of the New Testament writers in many
instances; as in their prophecies concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, the
spreading the gospel, etc. and it is certain John must have this kind of
inspiration in delivering his visions mentioned in the Revelations. He paints
there a scene of things which extends through every age of the church, to the
end of the world; which he could not have done without that sort of inspiration
I am speaking of, or with any less degree of it. The apostles had a like degree
of inspiration in publishing to the world such things as are termed mysteries;
as the calling of the Gentiles, Ephesians. iii. 2, 3, 4, 5; the conversion and
calling of the Jews into the christian church, Romans xi. 25, 26. The
resurrection of the body, 1 Cor. xv. These and the like were mysteries, things
they could have no notion of, till God revealed or suggested them to them by
his spirit. And I reckon they had the same inspiration in expounding many
passages of the Old Testament, and accommodating them to the state of things
under the gospel, applying them to this or that event. In these, and many other
instances, the sacred writers had the inspiration of suggestion, the matter
they delivered and published they had wholly and immediately from the spirit of
God.

But then there was another kind, a lower degree of inspiration, namely, that
of direction. And this I suppose all the sacred writers had in several cases.
As for instance, when the evangelists relate that Judas betrayed his master,
and that Peter denied him, they need not herein be inspired in the former
sense, need not have these points of history suggested to them, as if they had
known nothing of the matter, which observation may be applied to most of the
other historical narrations contained in the scriptures. Where the penmen knew
the things they recorded, it is reasonable to conclude they had no more than
the inspiration of direction: the spirit of God first stirring them up to
write, directing them to make a fit choice what to write, and what not to
write; and then guiding them in the performance. Further,

6. All the penmen of the holy Scripture had that degree of inspiration, that
divine afflatus or assistance that effectually secured them from errors and
mistakes. Some had the higher measures thereof, the whole matter, and it may be
the very words and syllables suggested to them, while others had only direction
and conduct in delivering what they were entrusted with. Yet all of them were
infallible, they delivered nothing but what is true, and what may be depended
upon as true. I might add,

7. That the holy spirit when he inspired the persons who penned the
Scriptures, not only left them possessed of their natural faculties, but to the
free exercise and use of them. They were not like a trumpet that a man speaks
through, nor like the Pagan Oracles, mere passive instruments in delivering
their messages and doctrines. But they had their reason, memory, understanding,
and all their rational powers, which they made use of and employed: And in many
instances were even allowed to indulge their own fancies and phrases.

Thus I have briefly touched and explained the inspiration of the Bible; in the
next place.

II. I am to hint how it must be understood, that all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God. For so says the text, and this is what we are taught to
believe that the whole Bible is of divine original, the word of God. The
question is, How we must understand this? Now certainly it is not meant, that
God himself spoke immediately all the things contained in the Scripture;
sometimes indeed he is introduced and represented as speaking immediately, as
to Job out of a whirlwind, Job xxxviii. 1. and at the giving of the law on
Mount Sinai, Exed. xx. Though some passages in the New Testament make it
probable, that he used the ministry of angels on that occasion, particularly,
Heb. ii. 2. If the word spoken by angels, was steadfast, etc. The matter seems
to have been thus; the Schechinah appearing on the Mount with the usual guard
of attending angels, made use of their ministry in delivering the law to the
people of Israel.

Nor must we suppose that all those who are brought in speaking in the
Scripture, speak from God. The Old Testament contains a great many histories of
the words and actions of bad men. The book of Job relates the words of the
Devil himself, and the mistaken speeches of Job's friends. The evangelists give
you the words of the Scribes, Pharisees, and other avowed enemies of Christ and
his gospel: as likewise does Luke in his history of the acts of the apostles.

So that when the apostle here says, All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, we are to take it thus, that all the writers of the sacred Scripture were
by the spirit of God infallibly assisted to write those things that are
contained in the Bible for the use of the church. In some things they had an
inspiration in the fullest, highest sense, receiving their doctrine wholly from
God. In other things they had only infallible conduct. So that all contained in
the Bible is either a divine doctrine, or a true history. There are several
wicked speeches of bad men, several mistaken speeches of good men, there
recorded. But the history is faithful and true. Nothing is here said to be
done, which was not done; nothing is here feigned; nothing falsely represented.
The whole of it, as it is written for our use, so it is one way or other
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction for instruction in
righteousness. But to insist no longer on this subject, I now proceed to the
main thing intended, which is,

III. To prove the divine authority of the Scriptures; that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, or that the whole canon thereof is of divine
original, the Bible the word of God. Here I shall,

1. Premise some particulars to prepare my way for the proof of the point. 2.
Offer arguments for that purpose. And, 3. Answer the most material objections
against the divine authority of the Scriptures.
1. I shall premise some particulars to prepare my way for what I intend to
suggest for the proof of the point. And

1. Let me premise that the question, Whether the Scripture be the word of God?
is not to be taken for granted, nor the resolution of it expected from the
immediate testimony of the holy spirit. But it is capable of solid evidence,
and may and ought to be submitted to a rational enquiry and trial.

It is not to be taken for granted as a first principle. Such principles there
are (first principles we call them), generally allowed and received:
self-evident maxims agreeable to the reason of mankind; and these are not to be
disputed and proved; but are the mediums by which we prove other things. But
that the Scripture is the word of God, is not a principle of this kind. Indeed
among christians it is a principle allowed and received on all sides. But when
we have to do with unbelievers, or when we are establishing the ground and
foundation of our says, we propose it to examination. And I am satisfied we
may stand the trial here, and submit it to the most critical enquiry that will
proceed without prejudice and partiality. In short, this proposition, that our
Bible is an inspired book, is not to be believed without rational evidence, not
to be admitted purely because others have told us so, because it is received in
the country where we live, or because it pretends to be a revelation from God:
for as much may be said of the Alcoran. But it is to be proved; and upon
evidence to be received and believed. The Christian pretends his Bible is a
revelation from heaven, the Mussulman, or disciple of Mahomet, pretends his
Alcoran is so. Now, I say, in order to determine that question, reasons are to
be offered on both sides; and if the Mohammedan can produce better reasons in
behalf of the Alcoran, than can be produced in behalf of our Bible, the Alcoran
ought to be preserred.

Nor must we depend on the testimony of the spirit for the resolution of this
question, Whether the Scriptures be the word of God. Indeed the divine
veracity, or authority of God speaking in his word, is the reason into which
our faith is ultimately resolved. Whatsoever God says, is true; this is a first
principle and maxim. I therefore believe all things contained in the Scripture,
and what God has revealed, because God is true, and cannot deceive me; here the
faith of a christian rests. But if it be asked, How do I know that God has
spoke these things, or that the Bible is a revelation from God? I must here
seek for rational evidence (as I said before); and not rely purely on God's
testimony, as it is recorded in the word, or expect an immediate testimony from
the spirit, a secret whisper, an inward suggestion, that the Scripture is the
word of God. For this is to resolve says into private inspiration, and make
one inspiration a reason of receiving another, which opens the way to dangerous
delusion.

2. Though the Scripture is to be proved by rational arguments, and received
upon proper evidence; yet the testimony of God's spirit, rightly understood, is
of great use and necessity to us, in order to the discerning the evidence of
Scripture, and resting in it as a divine revelation. By the testimony of the
spirit, I do not mean a particular inspiration to this or that particular
person, but the inlightening sanctifying work of the holy spirit in the hearts
of believers. And concerning this, let me note two or three things. As, that
the testimony of the spirit does not produce the evidence of the divinity of
the Scriptures, but helps us to discern it. It does not give, but show the
evidence, and prepares us to receive it. Thus when God opened the heart of
Lydia, that she attended to the apostle, Acts xvi. 14. she became better
disposed to inquire into and receive the christian revelation, and to take in
the evidence of the truth of it. God writes his law in the hearts of believers,
impresses their minds with it, sanctifies them by his word, produces affections
and inward frames agreeable thereto; and hereby he gives testimony to his word
in their hearts. The entrance of thy word gives light, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. xix. That i^ converts the soul, makes wise the simple, etc. He intimates
that this was the ground and reason of that high value that he and other devout
persons ^ad for it. Thy testimonies are more to be desire^ than gold, you, than
much fine gold: swee^er also than the honey, and the honeycomb, Psalm. xix. 10.
So Psalm. cxix. 140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant ^^^eth (...).
Now when good men find the great usefulness and excellency of the word of God,
that it converts, quickens, conducts, comforts them; when they find an inward
correspondence with it, that it describes their various cases, conflicts and
frames, affords relief and consolation in all their difficulties, is their
light, their monitor and comforter; as they cannot but love it, so they are
better prepared to believe it on this account. And this, I reckon is that
testimony of God's spirit, which helps believers to receive the word of God, as
it is indeed the word of God. It has taken fast hold of them, they feel the
power of the word, and taste its consolation. God has given them his spirit,
and they know of the doctrine that it is of God. But it must be considered,
this is not the evidence of Scripture; but a help to receive that evidence, it
removes prejudices, makes us attentive, recommends the Scripture to the mind;
but it does not exclude other reasons of believing, though it enforces them.

Further, I would note, that this testimony of the spirit of God did (it is
likely) generally attend the preaching of the gospel in the first ages of
christianity, together with miracles, and other extraordinary works. There was
some extraordinary supernatural assistance indeed accompanying the ministry of
the word. Thus Peter's sermon we read converted three thousand at once, Acts
ii. 41. And besides the numerous and speedy conversions remarkable at that
time, the christian religion appeared to have an incommon wonderful efficacy
and power among those that received it. Hence, Lactantius says, Show me a
person that is wrathful and furious, by a few words of the gospel, I will
render him as meek as a lamb; show me a person that is intemperate, unclean,
the christian religion shall render him sober and chaste. And the like he says
in other instances. It pleased God at the first planting of the gospel, and in
order to it, to arm his word with power. There was a glorious effusion of the
divine spirit, which subdued the hearts of men to the belief and obedience of
the Scriptures, and wrought a ge^^^al reformation, even to the astonishment of
the world. Now where any experienced this divine energy of the spirit, going
along with the word and bearing testimony to it, they could never question the
doctrine itself. They found the word of God quick and powerful, and
consequently, could not but believe it was the word of God.

I might add, the same testimony in one or other degree of it, is still
necessary to the saving belief of the Scriptures. We may give a general assent
to this proposition, that the Scripture is the word of God; may be convinced by
clear rational arguments, that it is so. But we shall not believe it, so as to
mind it, relish it, delight in it, and comport with the design of it, (without
which we do not indeed believe it, and receive it as a revelation from God) we
shall not do this, I say, without the spirit influences on our minds,
enlightening the eyes, opening the heart, removing prejudices, and casting down
lofty imaginations.

Though still let me repeat it, that whatsoever the spirit of God does here,
signifies not so much to give evidence, as to discover evidence. His testimony
does not prove the Scripture to be the word of God, but helps us to see the
proof of it. It may indeed tend to satisfy us in particular concerning the
proof; but the proof is distinct from the testimony; at least, this testimony
is but one part of the proof, and cannot be pleaded with others, of whatever
use it may he privately to ourselves. But these things I know require a great
deal more discourse to explain them, and set them in a full light, than at
present I have room for. To proceed to another proposition.

3. The revelation contained in the Scripture, is not inconsistent with, or
opposite to natural religion, (or the dictates of right reason and natural
light;) nor, properly speaking, distinct from it, but includes it, and perfects
it. I reckon the first law or covenant innocent man was under, was made known
in nature, the will of God concerning duty and rewards was visibly therein. Man
in his integrity could not but discern his obligations to his maker, not to
say, that he had the whole law and all his duty written upon his heart, and
found a propensity and inclination thereto. There was no darkness in his mind,
or depravity in his affections, but it was natural for him to love God, to
converse with, and obey him in every instance; and likewise a principle of
love, justice, and benignity to his neighbor was implanted in him. This, which
may be called, ^^e law of nature, was the first law, antecedent to any
supernatural revelation. This was the covenant of innocence, or works revealed
in nature; and I reckon that the positive command not to eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, Genesis ii. 17. was not the covenant itself, or first
law, but added as a test and trial of man's obedience, and as a mark of God's
sovereignty.

Now this law, sounded on the nature of things, and on the relation man stands
in to God, his creator, preserver, and sovereign, is immutable, cannot be
changed, and never ceases. Accordingly it runs through every dispensation of
religion. The patriarchs and Jews were under the obligation of it. And it still
remains as a branch of the gospel dispensation. It was summed up in the
Decologue given to the Jews of old. Christ makes it in part the subject of his
sermon on the mount, where he illustrates and comments upon it; and it is
explained through all the writings of the New Testament. So that should any
ask, Whether the Bible, or the law of nature, be a revelation from God? The
answer must be, that these two are not opposed. The Bible comprehends all the
laws of nature. Whatever is agreeable to reason, and that reason could discover
as matter of duty toward God, our neighbor and ourselves, this the Bible takes
in and establishes. In a word, the Bible contains the most excellent system of
morals in the world. There is nothing valuable in all the writings of the
philosophers, but it is to be found in the Bible; all the laws of justice,
charity, meekness, gratitude, patience, etc. that they have recommended in
their books, are not only set in a better light, but more strongly enforced in
the Bible. Not but that the Bible contains a great deal more than this; but I
thought fit here to remark, that it contains this; and consequently, that our
modern deists, that talk so much of natural religion, have (...) reason to
object against the Bible, as being defective in that point. If they are for
natural religion, they may find it there, and (as I shall show by and by) with
unspeakable advantage, compared with what they can learn and attain without the
help thereof.

4. Had mankind preserved their integrity, the light and purity of their minds,
I do suppose, they would have understood their duty in the whole compass and
latitude of it, without any supernatural revelation. All the precepts of divine
morality, all man's obligations and debts toward God, his neighbor and
himself, would have laid open to him. He would have seen them clearly and
distinctly, and been convinced of the equity and reasonableness of them without
teaching and ar^ument.

Not but that God might, even in that state have given positive laws by special
and supernatural revelation. He gave one such, you know, to Adam in innocence,
concerning the tree of know edge; and you read, Genesis iii. 8. that they heard
t^^ voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden, in the cool of the day^
intimating, that they had been used to converse with him in a sensible manner,
and therefore immediately knew his voice. There would have been a constant
intercourse, no question, between God and man, had not man apostatized, and it
is probable some occasional revelations, especially with reference to positive
duties. But here, I grant, I am talking in the dark, and can only conjecture.
But what I chiefly assert, is, that had not man fallen and lost his original
light and rectitude, all the duties of natural religion (as we call it) had
been obvious and self-evident, and there would have needed no supernatural
revelation, either to discover, or inculcate and enforce them. I add,

5. Such is the state of mankind, having apostatized and fallen from God, such
the weakness and blindness of his mind, and so general the depravity and
corruption of his nature; that a supernatural revelation is new become
exceeding necessary. This I might prove, (I think I might call it demonstrate)
at large. But that I may not be tedious, I shall satisfy myself with just
touching a few heads of arguments. And,

1. Let it be considered, that the law of nature with the rules and maxims of
moral good and evil, however certain in themselves and obvious at first, are
now become less legible to us. Such is the weakness and darkness of the human
mind, so many our prejudices, lusts and passions, that we cannot easily read
the law of nature, nor apprehend the demands of it. Some have magnified that
representation and description, the great philosopher Tully gives us of this
matter, ( Tusc. Quest. lib. iii,) part of which I shall here recite, If we had
come into the world in such circumstances as that we could clearly and
distinctly have discerned nature herself, and been able in the course of our
lives to have followed her true and uncorrupted directions; this alone might
have been sufficient, and there would have been little need of teaching and
instruction. But now nature has given us only some small sparks of right
reason, which we soon extinguish with corrupt opinions and evil practices, that
the true light of nature no where appears. As soon as we are brought into the
world, immediately we dwell in the midst of all wickedness. And then he goes on
to show the influence that our senses and evil examples have upon us, and
concludes, that hereby our very natures are transformed as it were into corrupt
sentiments. Now this being so, the voice of nature or of right reason, is not
heard without extraordinary attention, and such as the most of mankind are
unacquainted with. And indeed what we now call the law of nature, is of so nice
a consideration, and requires so much nice abstract reas^^ing, that none but
men of parts, liberal education, and great study, are capable of deducing the
doctrines of it from their first principles, and of representing them with
proper light and evidence. So that considering the universal depravity of men's
minds, and considering the circumstances of the bulk of mankind, it may I think
be asserted, that the law and light of nature, would have been a very
sufficient rule, and comparatively of little use to us. We that have the Bible
to direct us, and the labors of learned men, who have lighted their torch at
that sun, can talk finely of the law of nature; but without that help, very
few, I am persuaded, would have had any tolerable notions of it. Which will
appear more evidently, if we consider,

2. That the greatest proficients in study, the most profound philosophers,
were at a lo^^, and at great uncertainty as to some of the most important
doctrines in religion. To represent this would require a discourse by itself,
and therefore you can expect only a few hints. They were grossly in the dark as
to the foundation of all religion, the being and perfections of God; as appears
from their notions of these matters, and particularly from this, that they
allowed a plurality of gods, which is in effect to undermine and destroy all
true divinity, and really leave no God. They worshipped creatures, besides, and
instead of the creator, as the apostle charges them, Romans i. 25. and did
service to them which by nature are no Gods, Gal. iv. 8. What a rabble of
deities they had brought into the world, and honored with sacrifices, and all
sorts of religious rites, I shall not now stand to show: only take notice, that
though some great men among them laughed at these superstitions, and contemned
in their hearts the base and vile deities of the vulgar; yet it was a principle
allowed by them, and according to which they themselves practiced, that all
were to comply with the rites established in the country where they lived, and
worship the gods according to the law. So that natural religion as taught by
the philosophers, and universally established in the heathen world, failed in
this fundamental article, the unity of the Godhead, the owning and
acknowledging one only living and true God.

Further, they were ignorant of the origin of the world, and maintained
opinions on this head utterly inconsistent with religion. It was their common
maxim, that nothing could be made out of nothing; and consequently, they held
that matter was 'uncreated,' and the world self-existent. Some of them thought
the world was not made at all, but from eternity, either with or without a
deity, and so was God itself, or with a deity, being co-existent with God, and
a sort of necessary emanation from him; which is said to be the opinion of
Aristotle, and his followers. Others ascribe it to chance, or a fortuitous
concourse of atoms, a^ the Epicureans.

They were equally bewildered in their notions of providence: a numerous sect
of the philosophers, the Epicureans, denied all providence: others, as
Aristotle, and his school, confined it to heaven, leaving all human affairs
without any superintendency of God: others acknowledged a general providence,
but denied it extended to particular persons and their concernment. And even
the Stoics, the most zealous assertors of divine providence, confined it to
the more important affairs of mankind. Now it would be easy to show, that such
a doctrine as this, such principles as generally, and almost universally,
obtained among them on this head, tended not only to lessen, but destroy every
thing that deserves the name of religion. For why should we love, fear, trust,
pray to, or worship a God that concerns not himself about us, on whom we do not
depend, and who neither does us good nor evil.

They were equally at a loss about the Summum Bonum, the great end and
happiness of man. They knew not wherein happiness consisted, and consequently,
must rove in uncertainties, act and live without any particular aim. Some of
them placed happiness in one thing, others in a different; and so strangely
were they divided here, that Varro reckoned up no less than two hundred
eighty-eight opinions about it.

Nor were they at any certainty about the immortality of the soul and a future
state. The greatest part of them were downright infidels as to these points;
and the best of them, after their utmost researches, fluctuated, lived and died
in suspense. Socrates, though he seemed to incline to believe and hope for
another world, speaks doubtfully: and so does Cicero, he owns, he could but
guess; and plainly says, which of the two opinions (that the soul is mortal, or
is immortal) is true, God only knows: and again, which is most probable, is a
very great question.

Now, if the great men among the Pagans, whose business it was to study the
book of nature, and who had carried their inquiries to the highest, fell into
such errors and mistakes, and at best were at such uncertainties; one may
easily infer, the case of the ignorant vulgar would be very deplorable, and
that religion among them would be in a most wretched state. I may add,

3. As those that cultivated natural religion, and made the greatest
improvements in the study of it, thus blundered and run into errors in matters
of the highest consequence; so natural light, in its utmost extent, was
defective. Supposing the law of nature had been understood better by those that
studied it, it is not sufficient to direct men in all the concernments of
religion. In two points particularly it falls short, viz. The right manner of
worshipping God, and the terms upon which sinners may assuredly be accepted
with him. Neither of these two things, which yet are of the utmost moment to
us, does it discover with any satisfaction.

As to the first of these, the right manner of worshipping God; the light of
nature could not of itself be a sufficient direction. I do not ground my
argument or proof of this upon the absurd, cruel, and filthy manner in which
generally they worshipped. For, I grant, natural reason would condemn that; and
we find the wiser among the philosophers, exclaiming against such fooleries
very freely; however, they fell in with them in practice. What a frenzy is it
to imagine, (says Seneca) that the Gods can be delighted with such cruelties,
that even the worst of m^^^ could scruple to authorize or commit. One out of
zeal mutilates himself, another lances and cuts himself; he adds, if this be
the way to please the Gods, what should a man do if he had a mind to anger
them? and again, if this be the way to please them, they deserve not to be
worshipped, or pleased at all. Reason would vote against many of the follies of
their worship, and their wise men were generally ashamed of them. Nor do I
deny, but the philosophers spoke many grave and good things concerning the
worship of God. The love of him, and obedience to him, they concluded was the
most acceptable service, and that a pure heart was infinitely better than all
their hecatombs or most costly oblations. But then, as to the particular manner
and form of external worship, they knew not, neither could the reason and light
of their minds herein direct them. They could not tell, what mode of external
service would be acceptable to God. And hence, even the greatest of them
thought it best to comply with established customs, which they did so as to
involve themselves in the guilt of the most vile and stupid idolatry.

And then, as to the other point, the terms upon which they might hope for, and
have assurance of acceptance with God, and of being received into favor:
reason, or the light of nature could afford them, very little satisfaction.
Here their oracle was silent, and the light of nature utterly failed.

It is considerable to my purpose, that the light of nature could not discover
the origin of evil, whence this evil, was the great puzzle of their divinity;
and it would be no great difficulty, to infer hence, that it could not
sufficiently direct how to get it removed; at least, those that had nothing but
nature for their direction, were at a mighty loss as to both these particulars.
Some of them attributed evil to antipathy, a certain quarrelsome principle,
which they knew not what to make of. Others to the necessary perversity of
matter. Others to a certain malignant spirit. Though the most common opinion
was, that there were two Gods, the one the author of all good, and the other,
the author of all evil. Now such confusion as this, I dare say, must leave them
in the dark, to whom, and how to apply for the removal of evil, the pardon of
it, etc. should they apply to God, the living and true God, as I grant reason
would direct; yet they could not be assured, that he would be propitious to
them, and pass by their offenses. They might indeed infer something encouraging
from the mercy and goodness of God; might build some probable hope upon the
methods of his providence, the kindness, and forbearance discovered in the
constant course thereof. But yet, there are insuperable difficulties remaining
here, in which natural reason cannot relieve us. For instance, as we are
sinners, as all men must own themselves to be, and the heathens universally did
acknowledge it. We stand exposed to the justice of God, deserve punishment, and
God has a right to punish us; and I think natural reason cannot assure us, he
will depart from his right. If it be said he is merciful, and this reason
discovers; I answer, it also discovers, that he is just and righteous; and how
can we be assured that he will exercise mercy against the demands of justice.
Should it be suggested, that reason may satisfy the sinner, that if he repent,
so good and gracious a being, as all men believe God to be, will forgive sin. I
answer, reason cannot give any assurance of this. Repentance we see does not
satisfy human governors, who, as concerned for the honor of their laws and
government, often punish criminals, notwithstanding their repentance, and for
ought reason can tell us, the righteous governor of the world may do so too.

Further, reason cannot assure us, how often God will pardon; whether he will
pardon all sin; whether he will not only pardon, but receive into favor; how he
will pardon, whether absolutely, or upon what terms. That the heathens were at
a loss as to all these things, is evident from the shifts they were put to,
when under apprehension of the divine displeasure. Witness their numerous
sacrifices, and superstitious rites, their offering the fruit of their body for
the sin of their soul, and the like; which were the means they devised for
appeasing the anger of the Deity, and rendering him propitious. In short, the
utmost length that natural light could carry any in this matter, we have I
think exemplified in the case of the Ninevites, Who can tell if God will
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

Upon the whole, they were in so much darkness about the nature of God, about
sin, about repentance, and the methods of applying to God; they had so much to
increase their fears, as well as encourage their hopes; that in these respects
it must be owned, that natural religion, had they attended to its utmost light,
was lame and defective.

It is too soon to infer from hence, the necessity of a supernatural
revelation; that I shall do with more advantage from all the particulars when I
have finished them. Only let me observe as I pass on, how great a blessing we
have in the Bible on this account as well as many others. This clearly shows us
our disease and points out our remedy. This tells us, that God made man
upright, but that he sought out many inventions; and that God is in Christ
reconciling the world to himself. We now know that he will forgive sin, having
published an act of grace and indemnity from heaven, declaring that if we
repent, our sins shall be blotted out, that he will be merciful to our
iniquities, and our sins he will remember no more. This our Bible is full of.
We cannot doubt of it, but have a sure foundation for our faith and hope to
rest upon, and are not left to fluctuate in uncertainties, as the Gentiles did
that knew not God, nor were acquainted with the discoveries of the gospel. The
Son of God came from heaven to procure this favor, and he left stated officers
in commission to proclaim it to the world; for so we read that he commanded,
that repentance, and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke xxiv. 47. We have reason therefore to be
thankful for the Bible, and value it exceedingly. But this will further appear
in the progress of my discourse on this subject. In the mean time to proceed,

4. As it might be probably concluded from the foregoing particulars, that
there would be great disorder, darkness and corruption among mankind that
wanted a supernatural revelation; so it is evident this was the case. The
heathen world as they were the regions of darkness, the dark places of the
earth, so among them were the habitations of cruelty. Their minds were woefully
depraved, their principles corrupt, and their manners vile and abominable. A
short view of the state of heathenism, which you will consider, as the state of
those that wanted the advantage of the Bible, will convince you of this. And as
it may be of use to my present argument, you will not I hope think it unworthy
of your attention.

I have said something, already concerning their principles with reference to
religion; by which it appears how defective their notions were. They were
ignorant of some of the greatest and most important doctrines; others they so
much depraved by a mixture of their own fancies, and in all were at such
uncertainties, that their principles could be of little use, either as to
practice or comfort.

To show this, let me briefly compare their faith with that of christians, as
we have the latter summed up in an ancient creed, which we call the apostles,
containing the chief doctrines of christianity. They were so far from believing
aright in God the Father Almighty, that the generality of them run into the
absurdity of polytheism, believing there were many Gods. And few of them had
any tolerable notion of the Supreme Being, the one true God. They were so far
from owning him as maker of heaven and earth, that many of them thought that
heaven and earth had no maker. And for the rest of their belief, there is an
entire chasm and defect. It is all blank in their creed. They knew nothing of
Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord; of his birth, death, resurrection,
ascension, nothing of the Holy Ghost; the holy catholic church; had no solid
principles on which they could ground the hope of forgiveness of sin; without
which even the best of them must live in continual suspicion and fear. As for
the resurrection of the body, that great article of the christian faith and
hope, their philosophers could not reach it, but rejected it as absurd and
ridiculous when proposed to them. Nor had they any steady belief of the
concluding article, the life everlasting. Some hoped there might be another
state after this; others laughed at the notion as weak and groundless,
possessing men with needless apprehensions; and the best of them were in
suspense between hope and fear. So that, it is evident, if we had wanted our
Bible, we had wanted our creed, wanted these great articles of religion, on
which a christian founds his faith and comfort, and which have so constant and
powerful an influence on practice: we had known little of God, nothing of
Christ, little of heaven, or the way to it.

And as their faith, so their worship, was sadly defective and depraved, as
would appear upon a short view of it, even to amazement. They were mistaken as
to the object of religious worship. For as they had deified in their own
imaginations the vilest creatures, and things, and distributed the divinity
among a multitude of fictitious deities; accordingly, to these they paid their
honors, doing service to them that by nature were no gods. The apostle tells
us, they had gods many, and lords many. They had, indeed, multiplied them to a
prodigious number, and divided them into various classes; as celestial, aerial,
terrestial, infernal, hurtful gods, and kind beneficent gods. The sun, moon,
and stars, were their most ancient deities, to which they had added a vast many
more, deifying almost every thing they thought, they had cause either to love
or fear. Their kings and emperors were usually brought into the class, and
received divine honors. Not to take notice, how much lower the superstition of
the vulgar carried them, worshipping the vilest things. Worshipping the vilest
things] As a Cat, or a Plant. For we are told, that the Egyptians in particular
worshipped such things, and the best apology or excuse, that can be made for
them, is to say, it was only a civil and political worship or regard they paid
to these objects, and had very little of sacred or religious in it, even among
the vulgar. Husbandry being the chief employment and way of living among that
people, they declared by a law, that all those creatures which were of eminent
service in agriculture, destroyers of vermin, or upon some other account in
peculiar esteem with them, should be holy, sacred, and inviolable; so that it
was death to destroy any of them, either designedly, or by accident. For
considering them as instruments of divine providence toward the support of
human life, they treated them as things set apart and sacred to that particular
use and purpose, nor did they consecrate any thing without such a view, as
Cicero tells us, Aegyptii nullam belluam, nisi ob aliquam utilitatem quam ex ea
caperent, consecra^ verunt. De Not. Deor. 1.
Hence Juvenal ridicules them, as making the produce of their gardens, a sort
of gods. O fanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hortis numin^ -- Thus vain
were they become in their imagination. Let me only observe here, that as they
worshipped this confused medley of gods, the devil took the advantage of their
folly, played upon them and abused them by his impostures, and really drew them
to the worship of himself. This the apostle expressly charge^ upon them, The
things which the gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God.
They had various images and altars erected to this or that deity, before these
they worshipped, these they consulted as oracles; and in doing so, they really
worshipped devils, who possessed themselves of their idols, spoke in them, and
received the homage of these wretched people.

And, as this was the common case of the gentile world, it was the case of the
ancient Britons in particular, as history informs us, They were foul idolaters,
says a learned writer, Fuller's Church History; p. 1
who misapplying that great truth, that God is in every thing, made every thing
God, as trees, rivers, hills, mountains. He adds, they worshipped devils, whose
pictures remained in the days of Gildas, within and without the decayed walls
of their cities, drawn with deformed and ugly faces, as no doubt they sometimes
appeared. Their great goddess was Diana, the goddess of the game. They thought
their business was mainly with that deity, because hunting was not their
recreation but their life; and venison the chief of their food. And we are
told, that there is a place near St. Paul's in London, called in old records
Diana's Chamber, where in king Edward the first's time, thousands of the heads
of oxen were dug up, which had been offered in sacrifice to Diana.

Thus were our ancestors carried away to dumb idols, as they were led, 1 Cor.
xii. 2. And this had been our case, had we not been visited with the light of
the gospel, and had the Bible put into our hands; we had been sacrificing our
sheep, and our oxen, and our children to Diana, Apollo, and a hundred more
deities; i. e. to devils, under different names and appearances. The
consideration of which shows us plainly how much we needed a revelation, and at
the same time should excite our gratitude for it. But to proceed,

As the object of their worship was wrong, the manner of it was no less so. To
instance only in two things, viz. the cruelty, and filthiness of their worship.
The cruelty of it, as cutting, lancing and maiming themselves; which was
frequently their practice in religious worship, and thought to be an acceptable
service to their gods; to which I may add human sacrifices, Human Sacrifices.]
There is a curious account of two contradictory dissertations upon the subject
of human sacrifices in l' Histoire de l' Academie Royale des Inscriptions and
Belles Lettres. The Abbot de Boissi produces abundance of testimonies both from
greek and latin authors to prove that they were in use among the most polite,
as well as barbarous nations. That the Phaenicians, Egyptians, Canaanites,
Tyrians, Carthagenians, Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Iconians, and all the
Grecians, both of the continent and the islands; Romans, Scythians, Germans,
Britons, Spaniards, Gauls, etc, were equally involved in that superstition,
which he, with many more, concludes was derived from an imperfect tradition, of
Abraham's intended sacrifice of his son; the attempt of that patriarch leading
the neighboring people really to sacrifice their children. On the other hand;
M. Morin, out of a concern and zeal for the honor of mankind, cadeavers to
vind^cate and clear them from the guilt of so odious, shameful, and inhuman a
practice. To this end, he either rejects, or labors to weaken, the numerous
authorities alleged to prove the fact, saying many plausible things on his
side of the question; from whence he would infer, that if the pagans ever
offered human sacrifices at all, they never sac^ificed any but prisoners of
war, or criminals condemned to die. But, I believe, few will think his reason^
satisfactory; especially since, if travelers may be credited, the practice
obtains among many uncivilized nations, even at this day.
very common among them, and because they thought, the more dear to them and
valuable the sacrifice was, of greater account it would be, and the more
effectual; to appease their gods, they were wont to sacrifice their own
children: some that had no children, used to purchase them of the poor for this
purpose. And it is likely, this practice was taken up by others out of
tenderness to their own offspring. Hence Diodorus Siculus tells us, the
Carthagenians apprehending Saturn might be angry with them, because they
formerly sacrificed the best of their own sons, but of late had sacrificed such
as they bought; they therefore chose out two hundred of the prime of their
children and publicly sacrificed them.

For the other instance, the filthiness, the obscene rites of their worship, it
would be indecent to mention them. Their Floralia and Bachanalia were
celebrated with the utmost vileness, debauchery, and lewdness. But I shall not
enter into so horrid a subject. The apostle seems to give us a caution here,
when he says, refering it may be to their behavior on these occasions, It is a
shame even to speak of those things which were done of them in secret. I shall
only remark, that as abominable as these ceremonies were, they placed a great
deal of religion in them, and held it as an opinion, that to be initiated and
entered into such mysteries, was a means of purging them from their other sins,
and of procuring them a place in their Elysium, the region of happiness. If it
be said, their wise men and philosophers laughed at, and despised such fol^^es;
I answer, it is true. But it must be considered, they were the established
rites reverenced by the bulk of the people, and even those that knew better,
gave them countenance by maintaining, that the gods were to be worshipped
according to the custom and law of every country.

What their morals would be consequent upon such principles, and such a manner
of worship, it is easy to conjecture; and I shall leave it very much to be
infered without deducing the particulars. Try them upon the decalogue, and you
will find them living down all the duties of it, and destroying both tables in
their avowed practices. I have hinted how ill they can stand examination upon
the first table, and might show the same with reference to the second.

They grossly violated the sixth commandment, by authorizing murders in their
gladiatory exercises, by procuring the abortion of children, by exposing
newborn infants, and by laying violent hands on themselves, which they plead
for as matter of honor on several occasions. They as boldly condemned the
seventh commandment by adultery, incest, sodomy, which they allowed, and even
brought into their religion as sacred rites. Tully in a public oration pleads
for fornication. They transgressed the eighth commandment by theft, which many
nations gloried in, rather than accounted it a fault. And the ninth by lying,
which their philosophers recommended as lawful, whenever it might be profitable.

Thus vile and immoral were the heathens, too generally as is evident from
their own books and historians. And I need not tell you, that the New Tastament
constantly represents them in characters agreeable hereunto. See the apostle's
description of them in Romans i. from ver. 21, to the end of the chapter. He
tells us, God gave them up to uncleanness, and to vile affections, and a
reprobate mind; the consequence of which was, that they were filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity, with many other defilements of flesh and
spirit, there specified; and in the same manner the Scripture every where
paints them. I shall only mention one passage thereof more, Ephesians. iv. 18, 19.
where, speaking of the Gentiles, he says, their understandings were darkened,
being alienated from the life of God; he adds, who being past feeling, have
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. This was the general character of the heathen world. They had
corrupted their notions of God and religion, their understandings were
darkened, hearts hardened, and conscience utterly laid waste. So that their
lives were stained with the worst abominations. In a word, it is in them that
description we have, Romans iii. 11, 12. is most literally fulfilled and
answered, there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after
God; they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable;
there is none that does good; no not one: and again, ver. 6. destruction and
misery are in their ways.

Now from hence, I think, I may conclude, the proposition I am upon stands
good, viz. That a special revelation from heaven, was become necessary. You
have seen the insufficiency of natural light, have heard some of the blunders
and errors of those that cultivated it, the defects in principle, and universal
depravation of worship and manners that overspread the heathen world: the
consequence from which is exceeding clear, that there needed help and light
from heaven to retrieve matters, and to restore the knowledge and worship of
the true God.

But here it may be objected, that there were excellent men among the
philosophers, who taught divine and noble doctrines, sufficient to reform the
world, and heal the distempers of it, had they been attended to. Christian
divines often borrow from them, embellish their discourses with their sayings,
quoting their writings with great applause. In answer to this, I grant there
were. Socrates, for instance, seems to be preserved, like Noah in the old
world, in the midst of a deluge of immorality. Some such there were, but few,
here and there one in an age, that overcame vulgar prejudices, and gave
themselves up to the conduct of nature's light, without suffering themselves to
be blassed with their passions. A Socrates in one age, a Tully in another, a
Seneca or an Antonine in another. But as these were over-numbered by libertine
philosophers and poets, who spread the poison among the people; so the notions,
principles, and religion of the country was against them. Socrates lost his
life for standing up for that fundamental point of all religion, the unity of
the godhead. Besides, even these few great men labored under the defects, I
beforementioned. They could not attain to any true scheme of divinity. They
were at an uncertainty, as to some of the more important articles of faith, the
immortality of the soul, a future state of rewards and punishments, etc. And
even their morality was far from being complete. They have not so much as a
name for the great christian grace of humility: what we call so, passed with
them for abjectness, lowness and littleness of mind. And their purest morals
had a dangerous mixture: self-sufficience, pride, and revenge, were not only
allowed, but accounted, a sort of virtue with them. There were great blemishes
in the lives of their best men. Socrates had his Noevi: he did not wholly
abstain from idolatry, nor from a regard to the heathen oracles.

I will only add, that how great and excellent soever these men were, and how
excellent soever their writings; they wanted authority, they were too few to be
much heard, too weak to stem the tide. This they themselves saw, and some of
them are said to have declared their apprehensions, that without a divine and
supernatural assistance, no considerable reformation was ever like to be
wrought in the world; that their reasonings and philosophy would not do, unless
god appeared from heaven, and in a divine manner influenced the hearts of
(...). The general prevailing notions were exceeding corrupt: idolatry was
established; the public rites of their religious worship were scandalous and
lewd; and they found by experience, that their philosophy was too feeble to
subdue sinful passions and headstrong lusts, to persuade men to renounce their
false gods, and false worship, and pursue the maxims of reason and virtue. This
they themselves were convinced of, (some few among them I mean) wherein they
owned a great truth that ought always to be in reputation with christians, viz,
that supernatural help, or what we call grace, is necessary to change the
hearts and reform the manners of men.

It may further be objected, that many of those that receive and profess the
christian religion, are as Sad as the poor Pagans: that as the Jews of old were
exceeding vicious, notwithstanding they enjoyed a revelation from heaven, so
there are multitudes even among christians themselves as scandalous in their
practice, as the heathens were. I must confess this is an objection that may be
urged too plausibly, and give occasion to take up the apostle's complaint in
his days, The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, as it
is written. But notwithstanding, there is no force in the argument, if it be
offered to prove, that a divine revelation is not necessary, or that it is of
no use; that the world needs it not, or has been no better for it. For as to
the Jews, it is utterly false, that they were generally as bad as their heathen
neighbors. It is granted they often apostatized, and were severely punished on
that account. Yet I think it highly probable, that they knew more of God, and
practiced more of religion, than all the world besides. Even when things were
worst with them, they had many eminent and great men, among the lower sort,
that preserved their veneration for God and religion. But, as the objection
more peculiarly concerns christians, several things might be said to it: as,
that there are great numbers that usurp the name of christians, and live in the
christian church, who yet really are no christians, can scarce be said to
receive the Bible. If they have a Bible in their house they seldom look into
it, and make no other use of it, than to cavil at a few passages that fall in
their way. And no wonder, that such are not reformed and bettered by divine
revelation, when they have so little regard to it. But then, as the christian
church justly disowns them, at least the head of it does, and will do so at
last, their behavior ought not to be turned to the reproach of the christian
profession. He is not a Jew that is one outwardly: every man that was baptized,
by the care and procurement of his parents, is not therefore a christian, he
might as well be called a Mohammedan, a Pagan, did he not live in a christian
country. I answer further, that where the christian revelation is received to
purpose, it has glorious effects; enlightening, transforming, and making a
beautiful change in the state of things, which was seen eminently in the first
ages of christianity. The reformation the gospel wrought in the lives of its
professors was so remarkable, that their heathen neighbors stood amazed at it.
Once more, consider the christian church under all its disadvantages from the
infirmities of good men, and the scandals given by hypocrites, and there is no
comparison between that and the Pagan world. Not, but there are some called
christians, as vile and every way as bad, as any of the heathens were, but the
main body of christians are another sort of persons, they have not only better
principles but they practice better; the bad among them are not so bad, do not
run to the same excess of riot, and the good among them are far better.

So that, I think, I may still adhere to the proposition I laid down, that the
state of mankind required a supernatural revelation; that this was necessary to
relieve them amidst their prevailing darkness and depravity. Nor can it be
said, that it has not this tendency, or where it is truly received, has not
this effect, in some measure. I go on now to another proposition, which I shall
insist upon but briefly.

6. That it is reasonable to expect God should give such a revelation. How much
this was wanted you have heard; and that we might expect it may be proved. I
shall only offer two things for this purpose.

1. It may be argued, with some probability, from the attributes of God. His
mercy is such as would incline him to pity his creatures in their deplorable
circumstances, groaping after him in the dark, and led captive by the devil.
His wisdom also encourages the expectation. By the fall, man was so disabled,
and by a course of sin, the world was become so degenerate, a mere mass of
darkness and corruption; that had not God interposed, I cannot see but this
part of the creation must have been lost to all the purposes of religion: all
intercourse between God and man must have been cut off, at least, in a great
measure; God must have abandoned man, and man must have lived without God in
the world. Now God's gracious purpose of redemption being supposed, it seems
reasonable to expect there should be a revelation from him, enabling man to
answer the ends of his creation, to teach him his duty, fit him to fill his
place among the creatures, and prepare him to receive the blessings intended
through a redeemer. And accordingly, 2. Some of the wisest and greatest men
among the heathens had such an expectation. Thus Socrates is brought in by
Plato, expressing his sense that they wanted a divine revelation; and
therefore, having taken notice of the uncertainty they were at, as to some
things, after their utmost inquiries, he tells his disciples, that he thought
it best to wait patiently till such a time, as they should learn certainly, how
they ought to behave themselves toward God and toward man; and then, after
some discourse upon the subject, he intimates his apprehension, that a divine
person will appear and take the mist from before their eyes. This is mentioned
by some, Clark of natural and revealed religion, p. 203.
and I think justly, as a most wonderful passage, and what looks like a hint,
to that celebrated philosopher, of the gospel revelation. All the use I make of
it is this, that as the world exceedingly needed a revelation; so it is evident
hence, that one of their greatest men, the greatest and wisest among them, had
a conviction that they needed it. He saw they were plunged in difficulties, and
could not find the way to extricate themselves, could not attain to a clearness
and certainty in things; and therefore, as he found the necessity of it, so he
had a presage in his own mind, I do not know but it might be from heaven, that
God would o^^ time or other, in an extraordinary manner relieve them.
Thus I have advanced pretty far toward the main point designed, and shall
only subjoin here one proposition more.

7. Supposing it reasonable to expect a revelation from God, and that there is
such a thing in the world, I think it certain our Bible must be that
revelation. Two considerations will support this proposition, viz.

1. That there is no other book that pretends to be a revelation from God, that
can have an equal claim to be so, or that so well deserves to be received as
such. As to the books of nature, or natural law, I have already said the Bible
does not exclude that. The Scriptures contain nothing contrary to natural
religion, but comprise it, explain, and improve it; they take in all that is
valuable and truly deduced from the principles of reason, among the
philosophers. So that there needs be no opposition between the one and the
other. If philosophy be set up as a competitor with the Bible, you have heard
how very defective it is, and enough I think has been said to disgrace its
pretenses.

As to the books of Moses, they are a part of Scripture revelation. There
remains therefore, but one book more of any account in the world, that can be
called a competitor, and that is the Alcoran, the Bible or pretended revelation
of Mahomet and his followers. And if the question be, whether that, or the
christian Bible, be truly a revelation from heaven? we need but compare them
together, and it will be easy to make a judgment. Concerning the Alcoran, let
me remark a few things without enlargement: as that what is valuable in it, is
generally taken from our Bible; and then it is, for the greatest part of it,
such a jargon, a mixture of incoherent nonsense as renders it unworthy of a
wise man, much more of the infinitely wise God. Besides, there are a great many
direct contradictions in it, one revelation inconsistent with another, laws
given, and then revoked, just as occasion required; which show, it could not be
by divine inspiration. Further, it proposes an heaven of sensual delights,
which it neither becomes man to expect, nor God to promise. And in short, all
its success and progress in the world, is owing to the sword and outward
violance; which certainly are characters that sufficiently disparage it. It
follows therefore, either that the Bible is a revelation from God, or there is
no such thing in the world. To which let me add,

2. That the Bible is a revelation, every way worthy of God; such as we might
expect, supposing God should afford mankind so great a favor as a supernatural
revelation. My time is gone, and I have, it may be, staid long enough on these
things; or I might let you see the several general characters of this
revelation, which would make it at least probable that it is from God. Let me
only just mention such as these.

It comprehends, as I said before, all that is excellent in the books of the
moral philosophers. They have indeed their enlargements, their fine sayings,
and ornaments, which are not to be found in the same form in the Bible. But
there is no moral law or duty, no necessary rule of life and practice, in any
of them, but the Bible takes it in. Not to say, that as it delivers all with
greater authority, so it enforces all with higher motives and arguments.

It corrects the mistakes of the philosophers, blots out their errata. It
delivers the precepts of universal benevolence and love, without restraining
that affection as they did to friends only. It recommends justice and charity,
without admitting revenge. In a word, it contains the law of right reason in a
more correct edition than is to be found elsewhere.

Again, it supplies the defects of natural religion, and particularly, as it is
delivered to us in the books of the professed students thereof, the
philosophers. And here, as a conclusion to this discourse, I shall just mention
some points of no small consequence, wherein the philosophers of the heathen
world were at a loss, and in which our Bible gives us abundant satisfaction.

It makes known the great object of all religious worship; assures us there is
a God, and that there is but one God.

It gives us just notions of this God, sets him forth in the several
perfections of his nature; as a spirit of infinite power, wisdom, goodness,
every where present, unchangeable, and eternal. Now as some of the heathens
were grossly ignorant of both these points, so others knew them but very
imperfectly; and yet all acceptable worship, all true religion, depends on them.

The Bible gives us a clear, satisfying discovery of the origin of the world,
and of all things in it. The first verse of the Bible tells us more than we can
learn from all the writings of Plato and Aristotle, and the other wise men of
old: In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth.

It asserts the doctrine of divine providence in the full extent of it, and
lets us know that the same power and wisdom that made the world, constantly
upholds and governs it; watching over all creatures, and superintending their
affairs.

It informs us of the rise of evil in the world, which was the great problem of
heathen divinity, that about which they could never come to any certainty;
acquainting us, that the first man sinning against God, corrupted the human
nature, and hence the fountain being defiled, the streams that issue from it
are defiled also.

It reveals the great design of God, and the scheme for the restoration and
recovery of guilty, lost man. It sets forth a savior, and proclaims
reconciliation in his blood: a point of the highest use and comfort to mankind;
and yet not one word of it in nature, or in the books of the philosophers.

It provides supernatural help for us in the discharge of all our duties. This
it does by the promise of the holy spirit. The heathens, as I have hinted, were
convinced of their wants and necessity here, but knew nothing of a remedy.

It calls men up to a divine, spiritual intercourse and converse with God, as
the life and comfort of their minds. Indeed here lies the true secret of
religion; for which all moral duties and acts of worship fit us, and thereby
prepare us for heaven. And how little the heathens knew of this by the light of
nature, I need not say.

The Bible is full of glorious promises suited to a christian in all the
varieties of his case. And I add to all the rest, it gives him assurance of a
future state of immortality and blessedness.

Now as these are points of the utmost importance to us, and of the highest
consolation; points in which natural religion, and the writings of the
philosophers, leave us in the dark, and at a loss; but wherein our Bible gives
us full certainty; they should, methinks, serve to recommend it to us as most
likely to be a revelation from God. I do not say, they absolutely prove it to
be so; but they may prepare us for the belief of this truth, which is all I
intend by them, making it manifest, that it is such a revelation as we wanted,
and had reason to expect.

DISCOURSE II. THE TRUTH AND CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


HAVING prepared my way to what I design from this subject, shown you how much
we need a revelation from heaven, what reason there is to expect one, and that
if there be such a thing in the world our Bible must be it: I now proceed
directly to prove that it actually contains such a divine revelation. And that
I may do this the more effectually and distinctly, I shall consider three
things of very great importance in the present argument, and all tending to
establish the authority and divinity of the Scriptures.

I. I shall prove that the Bible is true, or that the facts there related are
so. II. That it is inspired. And, III. That our Bible, or the books of the Old
and New Testament, are the books that were originally inspired.
I. I shall prove that the Bible is true, or that the facts therein related are
true, and truly related. And here let (...) propose the following arguments. 1.
That our Bible is of equal credit with any other ancient history; and
consequently, if it be not true, we have no sufficient reason to receive and
believe any ancient book in the world. 2. That our Bible has greater marks of
credibility than any other ancient book. And, 3. That the circumstances of it
considered, it is morally impossible it should not be true.


1. That our Bible is of equal credit with any other ancient book; I do not
say, it has not a superior credit. I shall endeavor to prove by and by that it
has. But it is enough for my present purpose to claim an equal credit in behalf
of the Bible. And what I assert, is, that nothing can be said for any ancient
book, any history wrote before our time, (whether more or less ancient is not
material) but the same may be said for the Bible; nor any thing objected
against the Bible, as to the truth of it, but the same may be urged as strongly
against that ancient history, whatever it is. So that if there be sufficient
reason to receive and believe any ancient history; for instance, Thucydides,
Plutarch, Livy, or Tacitus: to believe that these books were wrote by the
persons whose names they bear, and to whom they are ascribed, and to believe
the facts they relate; there is as good reason to receive the Bible, to believe
the several books of it were wrote by such and such persons who pass for the
writers of them, and to believe the account of things they give, to be genuine
and true. This I dare undertake to prove; and consequently, that no man can
reject the Bible under pretense that it wants evidence; but he must at the same
time reject all other ancient Books, and turn a perfect Skeptic and unbeliever
with respect to all history.

That this may appear, let us examine upon what evidence, what principles and
motives, we receive and believe any ancient books or histories. And you will
allow me to suggest here something in the negative, to hint what is not
necessary in the evidence, and what cannot be thought an objection against
them: as

1. It is not necessary that we ourselves saw the things done which we are to
believe. In this case, there would be no proper believing; for faith or
believing, is, an assent upon the testimony; and what a man sees, he does not
receive upon the testimony of another, but he knows it by means of his own
senses. Nor could we believe any thing that was transacted before our own time,
or at which we were not present.

Nor is it necessary that we should see the historian write his book, and put
his own name to it. For if this was requisite, there are few or no histories in
the world, not to say of ancient times, but even of our own, that we could be
capable of believing.

I the rather mention this to strike at an objection, that I am afraid is
lurking in the minds of many, and is at the bottom of their infidelity, though
they may not speak out. They never saw Moses, Christ, nor the apostle Paul, for
instance, how do they know there were such persons? and that they did or wrote
such things? but I ask, did you ever see Alexander, Julius Caesar, Pompey, or
Henry VIII of England? and yet do you not believe that there were such persons?
he that does not believe there were such persons because he never saw them, has
so far laid aside the nature of man, that he is not ^^^ble of being dealt with
in a reasonable way. (...) he does believe, though he never saw them, then the
not seeing Moses and Christ can be no reason against the believing the
Scripture account of them, that there were such persons, and did such things.

2. Nor should it be any objection against believing an ancient history, that
there have been, and are some false histories in the world. There are cheats
and impostors we know; but it does not thence follow, that there are no honest
men. There is a great deal of trick and juggle, a great deal of falsehood and
knavery in the world; but I hope notwithstanding, that there is some sincerity
and truth; otherwise, all mutual confidence and trust would be destroyed, there
would be no conversing together, society must disband and break up and mankind
either live separate, or put themselves into a state of war; look upon every
body as an enemy, and arm for self-defence.

In short, as bad as the world is, there always have been, and will be some
upright, honest men. While God continues the human race and his government over
mankind, he will preserve some degree of justice, fidelity, and truth so
necessary to the being and order of society. The pretense therefore, that there
have been false histories, only bids us be cautious what histories we receive,
but not that we receive none, according to the apostle's admonition in another
case, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are
of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world. There are many
false histories and false men: we should therefore try them before we believe
them. But as this does not prove there are no true histories, and no honest men
on whom we may with safety depend; so it is no argument against giving credit
to such. Nor.

3. Is it necessary in order to believe an ancient history or ancient book to
be true, that it should be impossible for it to be false. To expect this is the
most unreasonable thing in the world. We do not go upon such evidence in other
matters, but believe and trust without such high security. All trade and
commerce proceeds upon probabilities, and what we call moral certainty. The
merchant believes there are such and such places in the East and West Indies.
It is not impossible but he may be mistaken. But the concurring testimony of so
many persons, gives so strong a moral evidence, that he cannot reasonably
question it. Men depend on their servants, on their fidelity and honesty, and
often they themselves, and all they have in the world, are in their power. They
put their lives in the hands of their physician, and even of their barber.
There is no impossibility in it but they may be undone in all these
dependencies; and yet that is no argument against such trusts, or for being
uneasy therein. It is possible any morsel of meat you take may poison you: but
we do not abstain from eating for all that; it is enough that there is a great
deal of wholesome food, and we have no reason to suspect what we take, though
it is possible it may be pernicious. In a word, as it is the part of a prudent
man not to believe a thing purely because it is possible to be true, so it is
equally his part not to reject any thing because it is possible it may be
false. We are to consider the probabilities of things, the evidences they have,
what evidences are to be expected, what they are capable of, and should be
thought sufficient: For as it is folly and rashness to believe without proper
and sufficient evidence, so it is unreasonable not to believe with it, or when
we have it. It is possible this or that book or history may be false, that any
book or history may be so; but then I say, if we will exercise no faith, no
trust, no dependence but where it is absolutely impossible we should be
mistaken; we must believe nothing, trust no body, we must converse with mankind
no more; but withdraw from the world, or at least live in continual jealousy
and fear.

I would not have this thought impertinent or a digression. I apprehend it to
be full to my purpose: nor would it appear any great difficulty to prove that
most of the objections of our deists and cavillers at Scripture turn upon this.
I do not say they make this a formal objection; but I am persuaded, if they
would examine their own minds, and inquire what it is that st^cks with them, it
would be found this is all that remains to keep their infidelity in
countenance. They may have learned to flourish a little upon other topics of
raillery; but push them home and this will be their last resort. They cannot
pretend to prove the Bible is false, or that they can demonstrate it to be so,
nor pretend that they have less evidence of it, than of other books which yet
they believe. But their evasion is this, these things were done a great while
ago, we neither saw nor knew any thing of them; they may be so, but they may be
otherwise; and we ought to have good proof before we give our faith to we know
not what. I fear this is the case of a great many among us, that call in
question the Bible. But how unreasonable their cavil is, appears from what has
been said. The question concerning the Bible, or any other book, is not,
whether it is possible it may be false; but whether we have sufficient reason
to believe it is true. If so, certainly our unbelievers must be highly faulty,
who so boldly reject it; especially considering the weight and consequence of
the things it proposes. And they are the more inexcusable here because they do
it upon a pretense that will destroy the credit of all history in the world,
turn mankind into Skeptics, make them distrust one another, and distrust
themselves too in every thing.

But to go back to my point, my argument is, that we have equal evidence that
the Bible is true, as that there is any true history in the world; or that any
other ancient book or history is true. And that this may appear, I told you we
^^ust inquire upon what evidence we receive an ancient history, what evidence
is sufficient to make it pass, and actually does make it pass current, as a
true and good history.

And I reckon the credit of ancient books depends upon such things as these,

1. That the persons, who wrote them, had sufficient knowledge of the things
they wrote. 2. That they were men of integrity. The former shows they were not
deceived, and this that they would not deceive. 3. That they wrote at the very
time when the facts, they relate, are said to be done, and might be known,
publicly known, to be done. 4. That their account of things be confirmed by the
co-temporary writers of good credit, by persons that lived at the same time and
had sufficient opportunity to know the facts recorded in the history. I add, 5.
Any ancient book or history receives a mighty confirmation if it treats of
subjects of great importance, in which the interests of mankind are highly
concerned or at least of a part of mankind: so that as it would be carefully
examined by others, it was not contradicted by any, but in the main facts of it
owned and acknowledged by all.
Were it proper to enlarge on the subject in this place, I could show that
these are the characters and principles upon which the credit of all our
ancient books stands. But as this would carry me into a long discourse, which
many of you would account unprofitable speculation, of how great importance
soever it may be, I shall at present omit it and instead of that shall
immediately apply myself to the point before us, shall illustrate the several
particulars I have mentioned, in the instances of the Bible; show that they all
belong to it, and consequently, that we have reason to receive it, as a true
history, a faithful record of things; which is all I am at present contending
for. And,

1. The Bible was wrote, by persons that had sufficient opportunity, of being
fully informed, concerning the things they report; and who could not but know
them. A learned man Stilling sle^t'^ Originae Sacrae.
in a celebrated performance, has abundantly proved this, concerning Moses, who
has given us the history of the origin of the world, the fall of man, the
promise of a savior, the beginning of a church, and the first institutes and
main doctrines of religion. This is a considerable part of the Bible, and
contains an history of about 2500 years, and is the foundation of all the rest.
And how excellently Moses was qualified to write this history, the author I
refer to has shown at large. His inspiration, which we christians believe, and
of which we have the strongest evidence, removes all difficulties at once. But
setting that aside, and consider him only as a common historian, he had a very
exact intelligence of the things he relates, and such as would enable him to
write of them in as authentic a manner as any other common historian in the
world.

As to the four last books that go under his name, the histories of Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, he himself was an actor in all, and had the
chief management of affairs as lawgiver and ruler; every thing was done under
his eye and cognizance. So that this part of the history, excepting the last
chapter of the last book, which gives the story of his death, may be fitly
called the history of Moses's life and times.

As for the first book, that of Genesis, he might learn the contents of it from
tradition, which as the piety and interest of the first patriarchs obliged them
to preserve pure and incorrupt, so their long lives enabled them to do it. All
these facts passed but through a few hands, and could not well be misunderstood
or misrepresented. For instance, can we imagine that the grandchildren of
Jacob could be ignorant of the affairs of their family, of their pedigree, and
whence they came into Egypt? can we imagine a thing so remarkable, which was
attended with so many memorable circumstances, especially the selling of
Joseph, should be forgotten in so little a time? Could Jacob, the father of
these Israelites, Moses conversed with, be ignorant of the country whence his
grandfather Abraham came, especially when he himself married into the country,
and lived so long there in Laban's family? could Abraham, when he was
co-temporary with Shem, be ignorant of the truth of the flood, when Shem from
whom he descended, was one of the persons preserved in the ark? and can we
suppose Shem ignorant of the transactions before the flood, when he was born
near 100 years before the death of Methuselah, who lived a considerable part of
his time with Adam? So that the knowledge of these things would easily be
conveyed down to Moses. For as Adam might carry it down to Methuselah, and
Methuselah to Shem, so it is likely Shem lived some part of Jacob's time, at
least of Isaac's. And how short and easy the passage of such things in the
hands of such men, from Jacob to Moses, any one may collect.

Let me further remark here, that Moses was a person of great wisdom, judgment
and experience, capable of distinguishing truth from falsehood, reality from
imposture. He was this way at least, as well qualified as any other writer. The
Egyptians are famed for their learning in all ancient books. They were indeed,
the great source of learning from whence other nations derived theirs. Now the
Scripture gives this account of Moses, that as he was brought up in Pharaoh's
court, so he was skilled and learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts
vii. 22. It is likely he was eminent for his natural and political knowledge.
He lived and conversed with the most eminent men, it is probable, of every
profession; and that he did not neglect the opportunities he had of improving
himself, the text I mentioned witnesses, which says, he was learned in all
their wisdom.

The use I would make of this consideration is, that Moses was not like to be
easily imposed upon. If you allow him to be honest and upright, as to which I
shall say something presently, there is no reason to suspect him credulous, and
that he would publish any thing, the truth of which he had not reason to know
or believe. For instance, had there been any thing absurd and repugnant to
reason, in the history of the creation, of the fall of man, the flood, the
dimensions of the ark, and the like: such a person as Moses would not have
published them in the manner he does. He was a wise and learned man, of far
greater capacity to know and judge of these things, I do not say than the poor
little cavillers of our age, but than most men ever since of any age.

So that it is evident, Moses who wrote one considerable part of our Bible, had
this first qualification of a good historian in an extraordinary manner. He did
not write of things he understood not, and of which he had not a sufficient
knowledge.

It would be too tedious in such a discourse to go through the Prophets and the
C^^^ub^^n, the writers of the other historical and poetical books of the Old
Testament. Otherwise, such an account might be given of their acquaintance with
the materials they published as would be satisfactory to modest, reasonable men.

But I pass to the writers of the New Testament, the apostles and evangelists,
in whose writings are contained the doctrines of the christian religion; and in
the historical part of them the facts upon which the whole of christianity is
founded. Now though they had not the learning of Moses, they had the
qualification I am insisting upon, as necessary in an historian, viz. a
particular acquaintance with the things they wrote. St. Luke owns this in the
preface to his gospel, Luke i. 1, 2, 3, 4. Forasmuch as many have taken in hand
to set forth in order, a declaration of those things which are most assuredly
believed amongst us; even as they delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word: he adds, It seems
good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write to thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, etc. They did not
write without a perfect understanding of the things they related, as he there
intimates; nor could they want this when they were eyewitnesses of all that
passed. That they were so is plain, since we find it insisted upon as a
necessary part of an apostle's character, that he must have conversed with
Christ. Am not I an apostle? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? says the
apostle Paul, 1 Cor. ix. 1. he was born out of due time, as he tells us, had
not seen Christ on earth; and therefore to supply that defect, Christ appeared
to him in heaven. The apostles were not only select men, chosen of God; but
were eyewitnesses of the majesty of Christ, 2 Pet. i. 16. They had heard and
seen, had looked upon, and their hands had handled the word of life, The great
subject of their testimony, 1 John. i. 1.2. This I say was of absolute
necessity, and therefore when Judas's place was to be filled up, one must be
chosen that had accompanied with them all the time that Jesus went in and out
among them, Acts i. 21. An apostle was a witness of Christ, and that he might
be assured of the matters he was to testify, it was necessary he should
personally converse with Christ, hear his doctrine, see his miracles, and have
a sensible evidence of the truth of all he was to bear witness of.

It would add some strength to this should I show you, what is exceeding
evident concerning them, that these persons were so far from being credulous,
that they were with difficulty brought to believe sev^ral of the main articles
of their doctrine and testimony. They could not tell how to be reconciled to
the notion of their master's death, and could scarce be persuaded of his
resurrection. Thus it is said, when he appeared to them after his resurrection
that they believed not, Luke xxiv. 41. They believed not till he opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. And you read of
Thomas in particular, one of their number; tha^ he declared, he would not
believe, unless he should see in his hands the print of the nails, put his
finger into the print of the nail, and thrust his hand into his side, John xx.
25. An argument that these witnesses were not prepared to report any thing, but
must be convinced of the things before they could believe them themselves and
report them to others.

Now I think it is evident, that the apostles and evangelists, must on this
account be esteemed very authentic and sufficient witnesses. It is a rule in
the civil law, that testimony upon hearsay, is not valid; because, say the
civilians, witnesses are to testify the truth, and not the possibility of
things; which is agreeable to the law of nature, and every where received.
Witnesses are to tell what they themselves have seen and heard, and not what
others report. And thus did the apostles of our Lord.

So that this first and most necessary character is found in the writers of the
Bible. They had sufficient knowledge of the things they wrote.

2. As they were acquainted with the facts they published, so they were persons
of integrity, and may be depended on in the account they give. The former is
necessary that they might not be imposed on themselves, and this is necessary
that they might not impose on others. And in how eminent a manne^ they
possessed this character, might be shown at large, would the time and your
patience allow me to insist on the argument.

As for Moses, he has many characters of great openness, integrity, and
simplicity. We find him spoken of by ancient historians with a very high
encomium, as also by Stephen who represents him as exceeding fair, as learned
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, as mighty in word and deed; and yet these
things he himself passes over, without any mention at all; though he takes very
particular notice of his own infirmaties; as his want of eloquence, and being
slow of speech, Exodus iv. 10; his impatience, Numb. xi. 10; his unbelief, Numb.
xx. 12; his rebelling against the commandment of God, with which God was so far
displeased that he excluded him the promised land, Numb. xxvii. 14; of his
great anger, Exodus xi. 8; and of his being very wroth, Numb. xvi. 5. He takes
notice of his declining the measures God calls him to over and over; ascribes
the new modelling of the government to Jethro's advice; and not to his own
wisdom and policy. In short, he neither spares his people nor himself, but sets
forth their murmurings and apostacies, and his own weaknesses and frailties
with all imaginable freedom. And when he came to die was so far from seeking to
aggrandize his family, that he leaves them in obscurity, and devolves the
government upon Josh^^, a man of another tribe.

I will add one consideration more, which I think a glorious instance of
Moses's integrity, and that he was fully convinced of the truth of what he
wrote, and the justice of the cause he espouses, viz. his forsaking the honors
and advantages of a court, a^^ his turning his back on all the preferment he
mi^^^ have expected there. This the apostle rema^k^ as a proof of his
self-denial, that he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter;
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. And I think it no less a proof of the conviction
he had of the call of God, and that he engaged in the office he undertook upon
principles of religion and sincerity. In a word, there is nothing that looks
like ambition vanity and a selfish design in any of the writings, or any part
of the conduct of Moses; nothing that savours of counterfeit and imposture: but
a great air of simplicity, self-denial and honesty appears in all.

The same I might show with reference to the apostles and writers of the New
Testament. Give me leave to sele^t a few instances. That they were no cheats,
and did not design an imposture, and impose upon the world by fraud, is evident
from a great many particulars in their character and conduct. I will but just
mention three or four things.

1. They were plain, ^^^terate men, no way qualified to manage so great and
high an imposture as they were con^erned in, (...) it must be supposed an
imposture. Their education was low and mean, and some have observed their
employment as ^^shermen, tended to flatten their spirits; for being much on the
water in open boats, and in the night often, they were exposed to cold and
phlegmatic air, that must naturally d^^^ their minds and spirits. Now can we
imagine that such men as these, rude and unacquainted with the world, (...)
strangers. to the arts of politicians, should be capable of carrying on so deep
an intrigue, inventing such stories as the gospel contains, and palming them
upon mankind. That they should undertake it is not reasonable to be supposed;
but that they should succeed in it, as actually they did, against all the power
and learning of the world, exceeds even the wildest imagination that can be
formed.

2. The doctrine they preached to the world was such as shows it could not be a
contrivance of their own; but that they faithfully delivered what they had
received and learned from above. Had it been of their own framing, they would
certainly have suited it more to the genius and gust of mankind. Whereas
nothing was more contrary thereto. They lay restraints upon the darling
passions of all sorts of men; the ambitious, the covetous, and the voluptuous;
and call them to the ungrateful duties of mortification and self denial.
Instead of falling in with the common prejudices of the world, and of their own
countrymen particularly, who expected a pompous triumphant Messiah, they
constantly represent him under the low and ignominious character of one
crucified, than which nothing could be more offensive, being to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. They insist upon the abrogation
and repeal of the ceremonies of the Jewish law, which they knew their nation
would never bear; having the highest zeal for that law, and being persuaded it
must abide for ever. They declare with the greatest freedom against pagan
idolatry, endeavor to demolish the altars of their gods, and pour contempt upon
their sacred rites. They set themselves to oppose the traditions and customs
that were held most venerable, both among Jews and Gentiles; and as was
complained of them, turned the world upside down. Now I would ask any
reasonable person, whether if they had been impostors, had published a history
and a doctrine out of their own heads, they would have laid the beginning in so
unpopular a manner? certainly, had they designed to win proselytes by
inventions of their own, they would have made their inventions more agreeable,
more like to have gained on those they hoped to deceive.

3. There are eminent marks of sincerity in their writings. How freely do they
publish their own faults? their pride, ambition, cowardice, covetousness,
emulation, and the like. They tell you that one of themselves betrayed their
master, that another of them denied him, that all of them forsook him and fled.
They publish a shameful story of themselves, that they contended which of them
should be greatest. And Matthew leaves a censure upon his former life, which
Eusebius observes is mentioned by none but himself, viz. that he had been a
publican and sat at the receipt of custom, a thing of very ill fame at that
time. Peter, supposing that Mark wrote his gospel under his conduct, as is
generally thought, sets forth his denying his master with all the aggravations
of the sin, more than is to be found in the rest of the evangelists; but passes
over very slightly the account of his repentance.

Now these, and the like, are such instances of simplicity, humility, and
honesty, as are never to be found among impostors and writers of false history.
They generally take care to secure their own reputation, and make themselves
the heroes of the story, and to serve their party and their cause at any rate.
But as these writers are free from such blemishes, and thus on all occasions
lay open their own infirmities, it is a good argument they had no cause to
serve but that of truth. I might add,

4. They could propose to themselves no worldly advantage, but fully expected
reproach, persecution, poverty, and all sorts of sufferings, as what would
attend and follow the cause they had espoused. And accordingly it sell out. But
yet,

5. Notwithstanding they persisted in their story even to death, and sealed
their testimony with their blood. Not one of them ever recanted, or ever owned
himself an impostor.

Now to suppose these men were cheats, that they did not themselves believe the
truth of what they published to the world, is I think to suppose human nature
in them different from what it is in all others. One must really change it into
another thing in them, quite different from what we know it and feel it to be
in ourselves, before he can imagine that herein they acted a part and designed
to deceive. For let us suppose them cunning enough to have forged their
history, and hammered the scheme of the gospel out of their own heads, which
yet I think is impossible, and let us suppose them wicked enough to have
undertaken it. Yet I ask, what motive could they have to do it? would they be
at all this pains, and guilty of all this ^^leness, for no other end but to be
undone in this world, and damned in the next? as they must know was their due,
if they believed another state.

What has been said may let us see that the writers of the Bible were qualified
to publish a true history. What follows will more fully prove that their
history is certainly true; otherwise there is no true history in the world. I
proceed therefore to illustrate the next particular requisite in an authentic
historian.

3. They wrote at the time when the facts they relate are said to have been
done; and I add, those facts are of such a nature that it could not but be
publicly known, whether they were done or not. Cheats generally lay the scene
at a great distance, when none alive is capable of dispro^ing them. Thus the
heathen mythologists tell strange stories of things transacted many ages ago,
no body knows when nor where. But the writers of the Bible report things done
in their own times, and fresh in the memory of multitudes to whom they appeal.

That Moses did so, is evident to any one that peruses his history. He wrote
when that generation was alive that was concerned in the main subject of his
book. And he published such things that it is impossible he should have imposed
them upon the people, had they been false. For instance, the ten plagues of
Egypt, their deliverance out of that land, their passage through the red sea,
the drowning of Pharaoh and his host therein, with the many surprising
circumstances that attended that event; the feeding them in the wilderness by
the constant miracle of manna, the issuing water out of the rock at Horeb upon
Moses's smiting it with his rod, the defeat of Amalek, the giving the law at
mount Sinai, the pillar of fire, and of a cloud, which conducted their march
through the wilderness, the destruction of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with
their company, the earth opening her mouth and swallowing them up. Now I would
ask any impartial person, whether there was room for imposture here? could not
this people tell whether they had seen any of the wonders in Egypt, Moses gives
so particular an account of? could they not tell, whether they had passed
through the sea? or had seen the Egyptians drowned therein? whether they had
been fed with manna or not? and heard the thunders of Sinai, and seen the glory
of the Lord there?

I might take notice, could I here expatiate, that there were several
circumstances of these events, which rendered them so remarkable and notorious,
that it is not possible they should be mistaken. Thus when the law was
delivered at Sinai, the people were commanded to prepare themselves for it
three days beforehand; and it is said that all the people saw the thundering
and lightning, and beheld the mountain smoking, which filled them with so much
terror, that they stood afar off, and desired Moses might mediate between them
and the Lord, and that the Lord might not speak any more least they should die.
And we read, that the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and
fire was upon it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout
all their journies, Exodus xl. 38. And so great a regard had they to it, that it
prescribed and determined all their marches whilst in the wilderness. Whether
it was two days or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the
tabernacle, the children of Israel abode in their tents and journeyed not: but
when it was taken up, they journeyed, Numb. ix. 22. So the manna was their
constant supply till the day after they had eaten of the corn of Canaan, and
then it ceased, Josh. v. 12. So long also their garments lasted without any
decay, Deuteronomy. xxix. 5. This Moses relates in his history. Whether it was fact or
no, there were as many witnesses as there were people; their eyes, their ears,
all their senses were witnesses whether these things were so. Had not they been
true, or had they been otherwise than is related, thousands might have stood
forth and discredited the whole story; and supposing them false, I dare defy
any unbeliever in the world to give a reasonable account why they did not.

Let me observe further, as what very much strengthens the argument, that we
find Moses himself making a solemn appeal to them concerning these facts.
Consult the passage, Deuteronomy. xi. from ver. 2, to the 8th, And know you this day:
for I speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not
seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and
his stretched out arm; and his miracles, and his acts which he did in the midst
of Egypt, unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land; and what he
did unto the army of Egypt, to their horses, and to their chariots, how he made
the water of the red sea overflow them; and what he did unto you in the
wilderness, until ye came to this place; and what he did to Dathan and Abiram,
how the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, their households, tents,
and all the substance in their possession in the midst of all Israel. ^^t your
eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord, which he did, You see he appeals
to the people themselves as witnesses, eyewitnesses of what he says, and what
he records; which he could never have done, had he acted the impostor, and
designed to have imposed upon them a narrative of strange things, without any
foundation.

But it may be objected, that the people were not witnesses of all the history
he relates; that in Genesis particularly. They knew nothing of the creation,
the flood, and affairs of the patriarchs. These things were at a great
distance, and Moses might here impose on their credulity.

I answer, that beside the extraordinary character of Moses's sidelity, he gave
such proofs of his divine inspiration, (of which hereafter) that he could not
be suspected. But more directly to the objection, I say, that it was scarce
possible for Moses to forge this part of his history, and make the people
believe it. These things passed through but a few hands, as remarked before,
and the memory of them was easily preserved. Granting there were above two
thousand years from the creation to Moses, yet if Adam, Methuselah and Shem,
lived the far greatest part of them, they ought to be esteemed no more than
three generations. And therefore, allowing for the length of men's lives at
that time, the distance from the flood to Moses, cannot be computed so much as
from the reformation to the present year. Now is it possible that such things
as Moses's history contains, should be invented by an historian at this time,
and the nation made to believe them? could any man in his senses be made to
believe that Henry VIII, was the first king of England, that there was a deluge
in his time that took off all the inhabitants of the island, except seven or
eight persons, or that at the revolution, the Thames was diverted from its
proper channel, and the prince of Orange passed over with his army on dry land.
And yet this, as absurd as it appears, might as easily be believed among us, as
what Moses says of the deluge, and of the children of Israel's deliverance out
of Egypt, by the people of his time, had it not been true. Several hundred
years were no more, by a just computation, considering how much longer men
lived than they do now, than one hundred years is with us, a thousand years,
not much more than a hundred now, in one part of the period, and but about
equal to two hundred in another part of the period. And upon this principle, I
do affirm, it was no more possible for Moses to invent the things of an earlier
date in his history, and bring the people of his age to believe them, than it
would be for a cunning sophister to contrive a legend of prodigious things done
at, or since the reformation, and make them pass current among us.

Some may farther object, that the history we ascribe to Moses, might not be
wrote at the time that is pretended, but might be the invention of later times.
But that there is not the least probability of this. I think I could
demonstrate, was the pulpit the proper place for such an argument, and the
auditory prepared to attend to it. I will only mention a few things, that would
admit of greater enlargement.

1. That Moses was universally owned as the lawgiver of the Jews. That people
themselves universally believed this, and have in all ages paid the utmost
veneration to his memory. Nor did any of the most ancient heathen writers
pretend to deny, there was such a person as Moses, or question, whether he gave
laws to the Jewish nation.

2. The objector cannot give any account when, or by whom, this history, and
these facts related in the five books we ascribe to Moses, were forged. He
cannot tell us the name of this imaginary historian that personated Moses; tell
us when he lived, nor produce any authentic vouchers of the thing he supposes.
So that in reason, the objection ought to be looked upon a mere cavil, and such
as might be made against any other book in the world.

3. It is most absurd to imagine these things should be the invention of later
times, or of any time. For,

1. The whole polity and government of the Jews was founded upon their laws.
Not only their religion, but civil rites depended upon them, their courts of
justice, their private privileges, their several properties, their
inheritances, all depended upon, and were regulated by the laws said to be
given by the ministry of Moses. Now let any one consider, whether it be
possible for any impostor to contrive a body of laws, and when he has done,
impose them upon a whole nation, and persuade them to submit all their rights,
claims and privileges, to the decision of those laws. He that supposes this is
the case of the Jews, supposes a thing altogether singular, and what never came
to pass in any other nation in the world.

2. Many of their laws were of that nature, that one cannot with the least
reason, think they would have received them, had they not been (...) they were
divine. How but thensome a (...) that of circumcision? how costly and
troublesome their sacrifices, with all the numerous precepts about eating,
uncleanness, purgation, washing and the like. These things made their law a
yoke, as the apostle calls it, which they were not able to bear. Their weekly
sabbath, was a very great confinement and restraint, which they never would
have come under upon the motion of a private man, that enjoins such things
without authority. And to add only one particular more, their sabbatical year I
reckon a law of such a nature, that it would never have been established among
them upon the credit of an impostor. The law in short was, that every seventh
year their land was to rest. They were neither to sow their ground, prune their
vineyards, nor to gather any corn or fruits that grew spontaneously that year,
Exodus xxiii. 10, 11. This was a statute that their lawgiver, whoever he was,
obliged them to. The observation of which would have exposed them to the
greatest misery and distress, without the special interposition and blessing of
heaven for their relief. That they might justly apprehend this, is intimated,
Lev. xxv. 20, 21, 22. And if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year?
behold we shall not sow nor gather in our increase. It follows by way of
answer, Then will I command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it
shall bring forth fruit for three years, and ye shall sow the eighth year and
eat yet of old fruit until the ninth year, until her fruits come in ye shall
eat of the old store. Here was you see, a law that cast them entirely upon an
extraordinary providence, for two years. The sixth year was to afford provision
for three years. Now I ask any considerate person, whether he can reasonably
suppose they would have embraced such a law from an impostor? or if they had
not thought it to be from heaven? I ask further, if they did receive it, as it
is certain they did, was this security given them, of an extraordinary blessing
the sixth year, made good or not? If not, that of itself would have discovered
the cheat. If it was made good, it is a full evidence the law was divine,

So that considering the nature of these laws, I think it a demonstration, they
could not be the contrivance of any, but were given by Moses, and that by the
special appointment of heaven, as he affirms. The reason is, they would not
otherwise have received them. They were so much against their case and their
present interests, had not God made up all to them by a peculiar providence,
they had so much of burden in them, that no less authority, than that by which
Moses acted, and which they knew he was invested with, could have enforced them
upon them. Their heathen neighbors laughed at them as a foolish people, for
throwing away a seventh part of their time; because they kept the weekly
sabbath, and would they have yielded not only to this, but to a sabbatical
year, and to many other cumbersome observances, if they had not had a full
conviction of Moses's commission, and of the divine authority of their laws.

3. The methods taken to instruct the people, both in the law from the first
promulgation of it, and in matters of fact from the time that they happened;
were such as leaves no room for imposture. They were all of them obliged to the
most careful study of the law, and to propagate the knowledge of it in their
families: These words which I command thee this day, (says their legislator)
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Add to that,
every seventh year, at the end of the year, the book of the law was brought
forth and read in the audience of all the people, men, women, children, and
strangers, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 10. The autograph or original book of Moses, as some
think, was then produced that the people might hear their law recited in the
words in which Moses left it.

Now it must be remembered, that this book contained not only their decalogue,
their ordinances of worship, sacrifices and ceremonies, their appointments of
festivals, and the like; but also the history of God's providence toward them,
the judgments he had wrought among them, and the deliverances he had wrought
for them. These they often heard read, these they read themselves, and were so
well acquainted with, that Josephus tells us, they knew them as perfect as
their own names. And this being the state of that people, of the main body of
them at least, I would demand, could it be possible for any man after Moses's
time to invent such a book, and persuade people to receive it? to invent a
narrative of such facts, and prevail with a whole nation to own them as facts,
though they knew nothing of them, and though they could not but know they were
false?

The books were in their hands, and in their hearts, as you have heard. Now
there must be a time when these books were first read. If it was a long time
after the facts were done, could not the people tell, whether they had ever
heard of such things before, as the plagues in Egypt, the dividing the red sea,
the delivering the law at mount Sinai, and the miracles in the wilderness? and
if they knew all these things, the point is granted I am pleading for, the book
was wrote, when we say it was wrote, in Moses's time, and when a great part of
the generation remained, that had seen the transactions there described. If
they knew them not, how came they to receive a book that relates such strange
things, and not only so, but appeals to themselves as knowing them. He that can
suppose this, is strangely prepossessed in favor of infidelity, and indeed
prepared to believe any thing, but the Bible.

Let me add, they had public memorials of many of their great events. To say
nothing of the names of persons, and places, which were given at the time of
this or that event, and designed to perpetuate the memory of it; some of their
festivals were of this nature. Their passover was a monument raised up to
preserve the memory of their deliverance from Egypt, and of the slaying the
firstborn there. The feast of tabernacles was a memorial of their dwelling in
booths in the wilderness. Aaron's rod, the pot of manna, the golden censor, the
brazen serpent; these and the like were standing records of great and eminent
providence toward that nation.

And two things I infer from them, viz. that as they were monuments, public
records of ancient facts expounded to the people and well understood by them,
they could not be ignorant of these facts. The feast of the passover was a
constant memorial of what happened in Egypt, and whilst it was yearly repeated
among them, they could not forget that great salvation. And further, as these
memorials took rise, and were instituted immediately, upon such events to which
they refer, the history of these facts could not be the forgery of after times.

And thus I have sufficiently proved, that Moses's history was wrote at the
time when the facts they relate are said to be done, and that (...) could not
be an invention of a later date. You will excuse me for insisting on such
things. I ^am sensible they will be less acceptable to those, that never had
their thoughts employed about subjects of this nature. But as I am persuaded of
their importance, so, I hope, in the progress of these discourses, to make you
sensible of their usefulness.

Some may ask probably, though we allow the history to be as ancient as is
desired, how does it appear that Moses was the writer of it? I answer, it was
constantly believed by the Jews themselves: other places of Scripture ascribe
it to him; it was owned by the most ancient writers among the Pagans, at least
he was owned by them as the Jewish lawgiver. As for the objections of Spinosa,
Hobbs, and father Simon, I apprehend it would be thought tedious, should I go
about to consider them distinctly. They all amount to little more than this,
that some passages in the Pentateuch could not be written by Moses; and, I must
declare, I know no inconvenience in allowing they might be inserted by some
after-writer; as, for instance, by Ezra; though I am satisfied most of those
they insist on, may fairly be accounted for, without any such concession.

I next proceed to consider the New Testament. And what I have here to assert
and maintain is, that the facts there recorded were publicly done, and the
history wrote at the very time when it might be known, whether they were done
or not.

As to the first of these, I think, I need not discourse at large upon that
subject. The doctrine, the miracles of Christ and his apostles were none of
them concealed; but all things were transacted in the presence of their
enemies, and exposed to their view. Hence our Lord pleads in his own defense
before the high priest, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret
have I said nothing. And both the gospels, and the history of the Acts, inform
us of the miracles the apostles wrought in the most populous cities, at
Jerusalem, Samaria, Antioch, and other places. How eminent an event was the
effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the apostles on the day of Pentecost; and how
visible and public the effects of it. They were enabled to work miracles, and
to speak with all sorts of tongues, which they did in the presence of a
multitude of people from all parts of the world. At that great festival,
Jerusalem was filled not only with the natives of Judea, but with the Jews of
the dispersion. They came from the east as far as Persia and Media; from the
west, as far as Rome and Lybia; from the south, as far as Arabia; and from the
north, as far as Parthia, and many provinces of Asia the less. Now in this
convention, in the midst of such an assembly, and in the most public manner,
the apostles and preachers of Christ gave a specimen of the extraordinary power
with which they were endued from on high, and spoke all kinds of languages they
had never learned: an astonishing thing! at which the auditory were all amazed:
Are not these Gallileans? say they, and how hear we every man in our own
tongue, wherein we were born?

Further, as the facts recorded in the New Testament, were done in the face of
the world, so the history was published in that age, and whilst the witnesses
were alive. That it was thus early published is evident, since it mentions the
temple and nation of the Jews as still subsisting: so that consequently, it
must be written before the destruction of Jerusalem. The Acts of the Apostles,
were wrote by St. Luke, soon after St. Paul's going to Rome, an account of
which he gives at the close of that history. Now this was but about twenty
years, after our Lord's resurrection. And you find he there mentions his
gospel, as wrote before that time. But I need not stand to prove what none of
the enemies of christianity dare take upon them to deny. Hobbs himself owns,
that the writers of the New Testament lived all in less than an age after
Christ's ascension, and had seen our Lord, or been his disciples.

The purpose I bring this for, is, to show that the history of the New
Testament, must be unquestionably true; otherwise, the writers of it would
never have published it to the world, and in the midst of their enemies of all
sorts, when so many thousands were living that could have detected the
falsehood. The books they wrote, were immediately dispersed, read in all
christian assemblies, as Justin Martyr assures us, And the apostles and first
preachers, wherever they came, always insisted upon the great facts of them,
the death and resurrection of Christ, and the miracles that were wrought, God
still working with them, confirming their words with signs following. To which
may be added, that the next christians, The next christians in the age after
the apostles.] Remarkable to this purpose, is that of Quadratus, who as
Eusebius assures us, dedicated and presented an apology for the christian
religion to the emperor Adrian, about the year 120: in which were these words,
The works of our Savior were always consp^^^ous, for they were true. Those
that were healed, such as were raised from the dead, did not only appear after
they were healed, and raised, but also were afterward seen of all, and that
not only whilst our savior was conversant upon earth, but also after he was
gone; they continued alive a great while, insomuch that some of them survived
even to our times. Eusebius declares in the same place, that this book of
Quadratus was extant among many of the brethren in his time, and that he
himself had it, Eccles. Hid. L. iv. c. 3. And we have another observable
passage to the same effect in the epistle of Irenaeus to Florinus, where that
father, who flourished before the year 170, speaks of his being with Polycarp
in his youth, whose person and discourses he perfectly remembered, the
conversation, he used to say, he had with St John, and others, that had seen
the Lord: and what Polycarp had received concerning our Savior, his doctrine
and miracles, from those who had been the eye witnesses, all exactly agreeing
with the scriptures. ^^seb. Hist. Eccl. L. iii.
in the age after Christ and his apostles, constantly professed an assurance of
the facts recorded in the New Testament.

Now I appeal to any reasonable person, whether this looks like imposture, or
whether there be any instance in the whole world, of an imposture that comes up
to it? Would the apostles have taken this method, and have exposed themselves
to the contempt of mankind, had they not been conscious of their own integrity,
and assured that none of their enemies could contradict what they say? They
report to the world that their master rose again, that the jews sealed the
sepulcher, that they craved a watch of Pilate to guard it, that the guard run
away, and that the chief priests, and others, hired the soldiers to say, while
they slept, his disciples came and stole him away. They affirmed, that a person
born lame, and known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, by begging daily at a
gate of the temple, was cured by Peter, only with invocating the name of Jesus,
Acts iii. 6.

These and the like things, they report and write, and you will consider, that
they do not write in a remote country and age, but at the very time when, and
in the very place where, the matters were transacted: which I think so strong
an argument of the truth of their history, that all the cavils of infidelity
can never shake it.

But perhaps some may object, that in all this argument, we appeal to the
history itself, and are taking that for granted, which is the question. We
suppose that there were such persons as Moses, as Christ and the apostles; that
they did such things, and that their history was wrote at such times. But this,
says the unbeliever, wants to be proved. I answer, that it is certain these
histories are now in the world, and I dare say, the objector will not pretend
they were wrote either this or the last century. I demand therefore, when they
were wrote? who wrote them? who invented the stories of Moses and Christ, and
when they were invented. It is but reasonable to expect from them, that they
should fix upon something as certain, in opposition to the account we give;
which yet, I (...) confident, they will not pretend to; and consequently, this
objection must pass for a cavil.

However, I shall more directly consider it, and remove the difficulty that it
seems to throw in our way, which will bring me to the next head, viz. That we
do not depend purely on the authority of the historians of the Bible, but have
the chief facts confirmed by very ancient, and some of them cotemporary
writers. Now this, as it fully answers the objection I just mentioned, so it
tends very much to confirm the truth of the scripture history. But as the
subject is too copious to be brought into this discourse, and too important to
be passed over superficially, I shall take leave to resume it on another
occasion. At present, let me make a reflection or two upon what has been said.

1. If the Bible be true, as I am proving it is; how weighty and important a
thing is religion? the doctrines and concerns of which have been handed down to
us in the way mentioned there, by such a train of wonderful providence, such
surprising miracles, such labors and sufferings of holy men; and which eclipses
all the rest, of the Son of God himself. The Bible gives that account of these
things, and makes all subservient to the great ends of religion: that one
cannot but infer, it must be the most important thing in the world. The
interest of the church, divine worship, God's covenant and promises, his favor
and eternal life, etc. These must certainly be the most momentous affairs. They
must be so if the Bible be true; otherwise, they had never been so much the
care of heaven, had never employed the council of God so much as they have, if
we may believe the Bible.

2. If the Bible be true, it deserves our most diligent and serious study, its
subject is so great, its tendency so divine, and we have so mighty an interest
in the discoveries it makes, and encouragements it proposes, that to neglect
it, must argue great stupidity. And indeed, it is to revive and increase our
veneration for the Bible, and to assist you in understanding and improving it,
that I have undertaken these discourses, and the exercises that may follow. Did
we believe the Bible more, converse with it, and study it more, it would tend
to give us a distaste of many of those little things that fill our time and
thoughts. Nor do I ever expect to see religion recover its luster, till the
Bible recovers its reputation among us. I do not mean, only rescued from the
contempt of such low triflers as prefer a play book to it; but from the neglect
and carelessness with which most christians treat it. Were our tempers and
frames right, we should only divert and turn aside to the things of this world,
when, and so far as the necessity of our affairs, and duties of our places
obliged us. But the study of the Bible, and the practice of the great things it
directs to, would be the main business to which our minds stood bent. And happy
will it be for us, if we find a strong and prevailing bias this way! I have
good authority for it, when I say, Blessed is the man whose delight is in the
law of the Lord, and therein does meditate day and night.

DISCOURSE III. THE TRUTH AND CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I AM endeavoring to prove the Bible is true, and particularly, that it is of
equal credit with any other history in the world. To which purpose I have
shown, I. That the persons who wrote it, had sufficient opportunities of
knowing the things they published. II. That they were persons of integrity,
who, as they were not deceived themselves, would not deceive others. III. That
they wrote at the time when the facts they relate, are said to be done, and
might be known to be done. I now add, IV. The account the writers of the Bible
give of things. The particulars of their history is confirmed by co-temporary,
or at least, very ancient writers, that had an opportunity of knowing the facts
published there, and could not be supposed to be biassed in favor of those that
published them.


What can one expect more in an historian, than that he knows his subject,
whether the things he publishes be true or false; that he be a person of
unblemished honesty: that he writes at the very time of action, and when the
things he relates were done; and that persons of the same age, who have an
opportunity also of knowing the same things, do not deny, but confirm his
account. If these characters be not sufficient to make an ancient historian
authentic, there is none in the world to be depended on. Now the writers of the
Bible have them all in a degree above any others. I have proved this with
reference to the three former particulars, and am now to do it in relation to
the last.

As to the first part of the Bible, the history of Moses, there may seem a
defect and want of vouchers. And it must be granted, we cannot find cotemporary
writers to confirm Moses's history. The reason is, there are no such, Moses
being the most ancient historian in the world. And yet something we have to
allege in confirmation of the sacred history, and indeed as much as can
reasonably be expected, in the first ages of the world. Now this being a point
of great nicety, and yet of great necessity in the present argument, allow me
to make a few observations; in which, I shall not only let you see what
footsteps we have of Moses's history among the most ancient writers, but also
why we have no more, nor more early vouchers among them. And,

1. Let me observe that the sacred history, that of Moses, is properly the
history of the church. After the dispersion of the sons of Noah, when the world
was relapsed into idolatry, God was pleased to single out Abraham and erect a
church in his family, to give them a covenant of peculiarity, distinguishing
them by many special favors and privileges. Thus he tells them, Deuteronomy. xiv. 2.
Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God; and the Lord has chosen thee to
be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that are upon the
earth. They were a separate peculiar people, had peculiar laws; he showed his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so
with any nation; and as for his judgments they have not known them, Psalm.
cxlvii. 19, 20. The apostle takes notice of this, Romans ix. 4. To them
pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the law, and the service of God, and the promises. God was pleased to enclose
and incorporate this people, for the special purposes of religion, to set them
apart for himself; among them was his tabernacle and shechinah, the seat of his
worship, his special presence, the displays of his grace, and theater of his
wonderful works. Now it must be considered, that the history of the Old
Testament, particularly of Moses, is an history of facts that more especially
concerned this people; of revelations made to them, and of things done among
them and for them, that is, of things done within the enclosure.

2. The circumstances of the rest of the world were such, that no very
authentic memoirs, no particular history, especially of the affairs of this
people, could be expected from them. They were left out of the pale of the
church, and could have but a very imperfect knowledge of what was transacted
within it. It was the posterity of Abraham, the children of his grandson Jacob,
that went down into Egypt and sojourned there, they and their descendants for
some hundreds of years; who were the persons that saw the miracles in Egypt,
and at the red sea. These were they that received the law at Sinai, and were
entertained with that surprising scene of wonders in the wilderness, for forty
years. The rest of the nations as they bore no part in these things, so all the
knowledge they could have of them must be by distant reports. They never saw
Moses by his rod turn the waters of Egypt into blood, and afterward divide the
red sea, never saw the flaming mount, on which the divine law was delivered;
the mysterious cloud that descended, and conducted God's people for so long a
time. All these strange phoenomena were among the Israelites, and part of that
glory and distinction God put upon his peculiar people.

And besides, it must be considered, that the nations of the world were
involved in gross ignorance, overrun with idolatry, and sunk into barbarism.
Upon the confusion of tongues at Babble, and the defeat of that impious attempt
thereby; the knowledge of God, and of the true religion, began to decline in
the world, and in a few generations was very much lost. I cannot better
represent this, than in the words of a learned man. Stilling fleet Originae
Sacrae. p. 11.
The sons of Noah, after their several dispersions and plantations of several
countries, did gradually degenerate into ignorance and barbarity; for upon
their first settling into any country, they found it employment enough to
cultivate the land, and provide themselves habitations and food He adds, They
were often put to remove from one place to another, which Thucydides speaks of
as the case of the ancient Grecians, and it was a great while before they came
to embody in towns and cities, and from thence to spread themselves into
provinces, and to settle the bounds of their territories.

This being the state of most nations in the first ages after their plantation,
there was no likelihood of any great improvement in knowledge; so far from it,
that there would probably be a great decay of that knowledge, which had been
conveyed down to them; their necessities keeping them in continual employment.
It was a considerable time before they were settled under regular and formed
governments: and till then, they had no opportunities to pursue arts and
sciences, or write history. And that this was the case is past question, with
respect to most of them, they had so far lost knowledge of themselves, and
their ancestors, that they could give no tolerable account of their own
original, but generally thought themselves to have sprung out of the earth,
where they inhabited. From which opinion, Thucydides tells us, the Athenians
used to wear their golden grasshoppers.

There were two other causes, besides what I have just mentioned, of the
ignorance, and particularly of the defect of records and history, among the
heathens, namely, the want of necessary means and helps to preserve the memory
of things. The Grecians, that most of all others glory in their antiquity, had
not the use of letters till Cadmus Had not the use of letters till Cadmus.]
Some learned men indeed have imagined the Greeks had the knowledge and use of
letters before his time, having learned them from Cecrops the first king of
Athens, who led a colony out of Egypt, where learning and letters had long
flourished, fixed in Greece, built that city, and taught the use of letters to
that people. But this conjecture, how probable soever it may appear, is not
supported by so many and good arguments, as the opinion of those, who make
Cadmus the first author of the Greek letters. It is very certain if Cecrops did
introduce any, there are no monuments of his characters remaining, nor were
they known to the most ancient writers of that nation, whose works are come
down to us. The oldest we have any memoirs of being those taught by Cadmus, and
his followers, that seem at first to have been the same with the Phaenician, as
Herodotus testifies they were, and as may be concluded from the most ancient
Greek inscriptions, that we have copies of, particularly the Sigaean, given us
by Dr. Chishul; whence it is easy to observe a very great affinity between the
old Greek letters, and those now called Samaritan, thought by many to have been
originally the Heb. e. v. and Phaenician characters.
taught them the same; who, carry his antiquity the highest, was but
co-temporary with Joshua, and many think him only co-temporary with Samuel. And
as they wanted means, so also an inclination to such work. They had not
learning sufficient, to record things concerning themselves, much less any
inclination to interest themselves in the affairs of other nations. The great
events of the Bible were done among another sort of people; as those barbarians
knew little of them, so they had little zeal about them.

Add to this, as what may reasonably be supposed, that after God had confounded
their language at Babel, and scattered them abroad upon the face of the earth;
he in a great measure took his holy spirit from them. And as they had not the
special revelation from heaven, that the family of Abraham enjoyed, nor that
intercourse with God; they gradually fell into a forgetfulness of him; lost the
knowledge of the true God, set up idolatry, and run into those horrid
superstitions, that in process of time, were the disgrace and reproach of human
nature.

Now that a people in these circumstances; thus abandoned of God, a people
sitting in darkness, and in the regions of the shadow of death; destitute of
arts and sciences, in a great degree, and for a long time of letters; that knew
little of their own affairs, had few or no memorials of their ancestors; and
seldom extended their view beyond their own times and concerns; that these
should not be historians, and especially historians of the church is now wonder.

3. As there are no histories among them, but what fall much below the time of
Moses, so when they began to write the history of their respective nations, and
of others, they mix it with fables to that degree, that little dependence can
be had on the accounts they give.

Thucidides owns, they have no records of Greece before the Peloponnesian war.
All that he could discover in the ancient state of that country, was a great
deal of confusion, as he tells (...), unquiet stations, frequent removals,
continual piracies, and no settled form of government. So that before that
period, according to this writer, who is justly celebrated as the most
impartial of all the greek historians, there was nothing certain among them,
but all was mere chaos and confusion. Indeed, the Phaenician history by
Sanconiatho, is acknowledged to be of more antiquity. The Phaenician history by
Sanchoniatho is acknowledged to be of more antiquity.] It is so by the
generality of learned men, as to say nothing of Eusebius and others anciently,
by Grotious, Bochart, Stilling fleet, Cumberland, and many more among the
moderns: not to mention Kircher, who pretended he had seen Sanchoniatho's
original history; but there are several others, both of the last and the
present age, who have called it into question, and even rejected it as
spurious. That great antiquary Mr. Dodwell offered diverse arguments to prove it
to be so, and to show it was a forgery, if not of Porphyry himself, yet of
Philo Biblius the translator; and an ingenious writer has of late expressed his
suspicious concerning the genuineness and antiquity thereof, in some
dissertations published in the present state of the republic of letters, with a
view of confuting bishop Cumberland's system of mythology in his learned
treatise upon Sanchoniatho's Phaenician history, in order to defend and
establish the chronology of the incomparable Sir Isaac Newton. However, without
entering into that dispute, and admitting the book under consideration to be
genuine, and as old as it can be supposed to be, there are several things
therein that are a surprising confirmation of the Mosaic history.
And yet his greatest advocate, Prophyry, is forced to grant he was younger
than Moses; Bochart makes him co-temporary with Gideon; though others think him
much later.

I hinted, as their histories are of less antiquity than the sacred history, so
they are very much disguised with fables. This might be shown at large, was it
proper here to stand upon it. They found themselves at a loss for materials for
true history, wanting ancient monuments, and therefore made use of inventions
to supply the defect. Hence the famous distinction by Varo, of time into
unknown, fabulous, and historical; accounting all time, either absolutely
unknown, or fabulous, till the first Olympiad, which was when the world was
three thousand years old. If it be asked, what purpose this serves? I answer,
it affords a satisfactory reason why we should not expect the records of the
Bible among heathen historians. It is no wonder we find so little in heathen
authors concerning the Jews, their religion and affairs. As for the Romans
their writers are comparatively of a late date. And for the Greeks they were
not only very ignorant in antiquity, but so full of themselves as to despise
all other people, and esteem them barbarians; not excepting even the Romans,
whom they appear to have known little of, till they were brought into
subjection to them. Add to this, that it seems highly probable, if not certain,
that many of their authors designedly omitted speaking of the Jews, and their
concerns, out of envy and hatred to them as Jesephus observes, and indeed
proves by a remarkable instance. Besides, it is not to be doubted, but several
of their works are now lost, wherein we might have met with accounts of that
nation that would have confirmed the sacred history. This we know to be
actually the case with Hecataeus's book relating to the Jews, and we may be
sure it is so in regard of many other Greek authors. Though after all, there
are not a few of the old heathen writers, whose works are come down to our
hands, that make mention of them, and some particulars of their affairs
agreeably to the sacred records, as Herodotus, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus,
Trogus, Pompeius, and other.
You see they were out of the church, that Goshen of the world, the land of
light, and spot where God displayed himself in the wonders of his providence.
They can give no tolerable account of themselves, their own original and
affairs, for want of sufficient authentic records. And we need not think it
strange that they say so little of a people separated from them, and confined
within such an enclosure as the Jews were.

And then, what has been said may also serve to promote our veneration for the
Bible. We had known little of the origin of the world, the maker of it, or of
those glorious acts of providence on which our religion is founded; had it not
been for Moses's history. So that however our modern deists despise the Bible,
and insult Moses, as they sometimes do with an impious freedom, they are
beholden to the sacred writings for all that is valuable in their knowledge of
ancient things; the creation of the world, the fall of man, God's purpose of
grace toward fallen mankind, the manifestation of his power and providence in
the government of the world for some thousands of years; the knowledge of these
things we derive from the Bible, and entirely depend on divine revelation for.
The most ancient profane historians here give but very little satisfaction;
they do not begin soon enough, their discourse is dark, obscure, broken, and
disguised; the reason of which has been sufficiently intimated. So that not
only our faith, as christians, is established, but our curiosity, as men,
gratified by the Bible. But.

4. Notwithstanding the great disadvantages the heathens lay under, and the
manifest defects of their histories; it may reasonably be expected, that there
should be preserved among them some memory of the great events recorded in the
Bible. I ground this chiefly upon a fact, which with me admits of no dispute,
viz. That all mankind proceeded from the same stock, and had originally the
same parents. What cavils are advanced against this, I shall not at present
take notice of; nor can I find the least weight in any of them. The Scripture
is so plain in this matter, that I apprehend none can make a question of it
that believes the sacred writings. The apostle tells us Adam was the first man.
And our Lord, speaking of Adam and Eve, says, that at the beginning of the
creation God made them male and female. And the apostle more directly to our
purpose, God has made of one blood all nations of men, to dwell on the face of
the earth; some Greek copies followed herein by the Arabic, vulgar Latin, and
others, read "of one," that is, of one man, leaving out "blood;" but there is
no need of the criticism; blood signifies, as is common in the best Greek
authors, the stock out of which mankind springs. Add to this, that Adam
expressly calls his wife, the mother of all living, making that the reason of
her name Eve. So that I need not call this a postulatum, and desire it may be
granted by those that receive the Bible: It is a certain truth, fully revealed
there, that from this pair, Adam and Eve, all mankind derived, and the whole
world was peopled.

I am only to observe further, that after the destruction of the world by the
deluge, Noah and his sons were the heads and parents of a new world. For this,
at present, I appeal to the Scriptures; you have it in express words, Genesis x.
32. after an account of the descendants from Japhet, Ham, and Shem, it is
added, these are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in
their nations, and by these were the nations divided in the carth aster the
flood.

New to apply this to my present purpose, since all ^ankind had a common
original first, from A^^^, and then from Noah and his sons, it is most
reasonable to think they should have among them some memory of the chief facts
in the Mosaic history, that were of common concernment; as the creation of the
world, with the manner of it; the name of the first man, the first institutions
or ordinances of religious worship, the general slood, and the like. It is not
accountable that all these things should be utterly lost, and no footsteps of
them continue in the heathen nations, since they had the same original. So that
what remains here to be done, is to enquire, what traditions we find of the
sacred history among the heathen writers. Your attention I know would not
accompany me, should I enlarge upon this head: and therefore, though I have
taken some pains to collect what I can meet with relating to the subject, and
which I am sensible is of use for confirming our belief of the Bible. I shall
pass it over with some short and general hints.

Let me observe, that the most ancient and celebrated historian among the
pagans, Sanchoniatho, has a great many instances of the scripture history, and
of the stories related by Moses: as concerning the creation, the original of
idolatry, the invention of arts, the foundation of cities, the calling of
Abraham, and the like; in so much, that Porphyry, an ancient philosopher and a
great enemy to christianity, endeavors to establish the credit of his history,
from its agreement with that of Moses.

I must not descend to particulars, and trace all the passages that occur to
our purpose. The fullest account that is given, by any one author, is in that
learned book of Grotius, Of the truth of the christian religion; an abridgment
of which I shall offer, as I find it prepared to my hands by an ingenious
writer Dr. Clark's evidence of natural and revealed religion, p. 279
The manner of the formation of the earth out of a chaos is mentioned by the
ancient Phaenician, Egyptian, Indian and Greek authors: the name of Adam and
Eve by Sanchoniatho and others: the longevity of the antedeluvians by Berosus,
Manetho, etc. The ark of Noah by Berosus: many particulars of the flood by Ovid
and others. The family of Noah, and two of every kind of animals, entering into
the ark with him, are mentioned by Lucan, as a tradition of the ancient
Grecians: the dove which Noah sent out of the ark, by Abydenus: the burning of
Sodom by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Tacitus and others. Several particulars of
the history of Abraham, and the rest of the patriarchs, by Berosus and many
more. Many particular (...) Moses's life, by Berosus and others. The eminent
piety of the most ancient Jews, by Strabo and Justin. Diverse actions of David
and Solomon in the Phoenician annals. Some of the actions of Elijah by
Menander, and confessed by Julian himself. The history of Jonah under the name
of Hercules, by Lycophron and AEneus Gazaeus; and the history of the following
times by a multitude of authors. It would be easy to add a great many other
particulars to these; as, the attempt to build the over of Babel was not only
sung by the poe^s, but recorded by Berosus, ^b^denus, Eupolemus and others. The
confasion and di^ition of languages upon that occasion was generally apple
ended and acknowledged by the heathens, who owned that originally the^e was but
one language in the world, as joseph^s, Fuiebius, and St. Cyril informs us from
Abydenus, and other of their writers. Many things conce^ning Joseph, his
character, conduct and management in Egypt are men^ioned by Ju^in. Several
particulars relating to the Israelites of old occur in their authors; as their
going into Egypt, and their coming out of it again, attested by Manetho,
Berosus, Strabo, Justin, and others; the dividing the red sea for a passage to
them, by Artapanus, and Diod^rus Sic^lus; their traveling in the deserts of
Arabia and coming to mount Sinai by Justin; their being fed with manna in the
w^lderness by Artapanus, who says, they lived there upon a certa^n ^n^w which
God rained from heaven. As to Moses himself, his story is witnessed to, and
recorded by Egyptian, Phoenician, Chaldaean and Grecian writers. Besides, what
is afterward taken notice of by the author, there is a particular and
remarkable account of him given by Artapanus and Numenius, as of his being
taken out of the water, brought up accourt, working miracles, and being opposed
before the king by certain magicians, called Jannes and Jambres, who attempted
to do the like, etc. There are diverse other facts related in the Old Testament
the memory whereof seems to have been preserved among the heathens, and which
were probably referred to in their fables, as the story of Jeph^ha's daugh^er
under the name of ^^higen^a; Abraham's attempt to ^acri^^ce Isaac his only son
by Sarah, in the fable of Saturn's sacrificing his only son Jeo^d, whom he had
by the nymph Anobret, and the like. But these are sufficient for a specim^n,
and may serve to att^^ the truth of he ^cr^pture history.


To this I might subjoin, that a great deal of scripture history was disguised
in the heathen mithology, as the names of God, Jehovah, Elohim, and the like;
the names of Adam and others of the patriarchs, the name of Noah under that of
Saturn; Bochart shows no less than fourteen instances of a parallel between the
one and the other. The flood of Noah, as it could not escape them, nor the
memory of it be lost, upon the principles I have mentioned, so it is taken
notice of by many of them, and generally under the name of Deucalions, Berosus
the Chald^ean historian, Abydenus and Alexander Polyheistor describe it under
the name of Xisuthrus's flood, and mention a great many particulars concerning
it, that have a surprising co-incidence with the account given by Moses. As,
that he was forewarned of it beforehand, was directed to build a sort of a ship
for the preservation of himself and his kindred, eight persons in all, to take
provision with him for their subsistence, together with beasts and fowls; that
accordingly he did so, and when the flood abated sent out some birds which
returned to the ship twice but the third time came back no more, whereby he
understood that the earth began to appear, upon which taking off the cover he
found the ship rested upon a mountain, and after some time he went out and
offered sacrifices. And no doubt Ogyges flood spoken of by other ancient
writers, was only a corrupt tradition of the same event, that of Noah. Lucian
says, that all creatures went into the ark by couples. Plutarch mentions the
very time when Noah (under the name of Deucalion) en^e^ed into the ask, and of
his sending forth the dove to discover the state of the waters, whether they
were decreased or no: and he adds, that it returned into the ask again. Indeed
there was hardly any nation that had not some notion remaining of the deluge.
If Mart^nius may be credited, there is a tradition of it among the Ch^nese, and
we are even tol^, that the Americans of Pe^u, Me^ico. etc. have still the like
tradition among them.
with such particular circumstances, as show their account must be borrowed
from scripture; or if it depends upon traditions preserved among them, that
very much confirms the scripture story. Change the name of Deucalion for Noah,
and Lucian's representation of this matter is almost parallel to that of Moses;
he tells you the first generation of men were destroyed, and Deucalion was the
progenitor of a second generation: he ascribes their destruction to their
wickedness, and makes the means of it to be a flood of water; that Deucalion
and his family only were saved, and that in a great chest, into which he came
with his children, and with several animals; and that the deluge of water sunk
into a great hiatus, or gap in the earth. These, and a great many more
particulars of scripture history, are commemorated among them, though changed
and mangled in their fables. But any one, that has the Bible in his hands, may
trace them in the stories they tell.

I will only hint at two things more here, namely, that Moses was universally
owned among them, and celebrated as a lawgiver. Longinus mentions him as no
ordinary man. Strabo speaks of him with great commendation, and Diodorus
Siculus places him among the chief lawgivers, Trogus Pompeius takes notice of
his beauty and wisdom, agreeably to the character Stephen gives of him in Acts
vii. Farther, they had among them a great many religious rites, which I think
is evident, they derived from the Jews; as circumcision, so famous among the
Ishmaelites in Arabia. So their weekly sabbath, new moons, and above all, the
constant custom of sacrificing. These things were notorious among the heathen
nations, and I look upon them as so many footsteps of the original laws given
to the patriarchs and Jews, and attestations to the sacred history.

And from the whole, without further reasoning, I think I may infer with good
evidence, that the history of Moses is true. That they speak of them so fully
as they do, and that there is such a general concurrence and agreement among
them upon the main heads of the sacred history, I think can never be accounted
for, but upon supposition that the history is genuine and authentic. Whence
should all the world have these notions of a chaos, of a creation out of it, of
the flood, of Abraham and the patriarchs, of Jewish rites? and whence should
they take up the practice of sacrificing, which universally obtained among
them, had not God appointed it, and had it not come to them from the patriarchs
and Jews? That the reason of mankind should agree in such a rite of worship for
appeasing God, and recommending themselves to his favor, is not imaginable. For
how should they conclude, that the deity would be pleased with the destruction
and blood of any of his creatures. So that I think their opinions and
sentiments, the scattered fragments of the sacred history, that occur in the
pagan writers, and their religious observances, are so strong a testimony to
the history of Moses, that no reasonable man can question it, unless at the
same time he ^ill question all history, and destroy all the monuments of
ancient facts, both sacred and profane.

If any ask, whence had the gentiles their account of these things? I answer,
in short, some of them might be had by tradition from the ancient patriarchs,
from N^^^h and his sons. Several things they might learn from the Israelites
during their stay in Egypt. And they might get intelligence of some other
particulars from the Jews themselves, after their settlement in Canaan, and
from their sacred Scriptures, The heathens may reasonably be supposed to have
had their knowledge of these matters some or all of the ways here hinted at.
For mankind descending from one common father Noah, who we may be sure
carefully instructed all his children in the history of the world, the
creation, fall, deluge, etc. It is by no means likely, that the more remarkable
passages concerning these great events should soon be totally forgotten among
any of his posterity. Certainly they would be handed down from age to age, and
some kind of tradition be preserved of them a considerable while, though indeed
it is natural to imagine, it would by degrees be so broken and altered, as
exceedingly to disguise the truth. Besides, one cannot but conclude, that
during the long residence of the Israelites in Egypt they would communicate
many things to the Egyptians, and others, who frequently corresponded with
them. Without question Joseph, and other good men, would improve the
opportunity they had of spreading the knowledge of those truths, which had been
faithfully transmitted down to them from their excellent ancestors the
Patriarchs, and would take care to leave some lasting memorials of them among a
people they had so much conversation with. And then the Gentiles undoubtedly
derived a great many of their notions from the sacred oracles afterward, both
in Judea, whither several of them traveled for instruction, and in Egypt,
where a multitude of the Jews, occasionally at least, resided, and whence, the
best records we have of those times inform us, most of the famous sages and
philosophers of old fetched their learning, as Solon, Thales, Pherecydes Syrus,
Pythagoras, Plato, etc. That this was really the case, we have the testimony of
the ancient Jews, christians and heathens, as has been shown at large, and the
matter of fact attested, and clearly proved, by abundance of our most learned
modern writers, such as Scaliger, Grotius, Bochart, Vossius, Seldon, Huetius,
Stilling fleet, Gale, and many others.
as might be made appear highly probable, but that I must not enlarge upon
these things.

I must yet beg your patience whilst I touch the other part of the history of
the Bible, that of the New Testament, as recorded by the four evangelists, and
in the acts of the apostles. I have here a noble subject, and sufficient matter
had I time to launch out. The facts related there were done openly in the face
of the sun, and exposed to the view of the world: not done in a corner but
publicly. And when the history of these things was formed, it was not
concealed, but proclaimed and divulged to all, and therein a challenge and
appeal made both to friends and enemies.

As to particulars, I must be forced to take the same method as before, give
you an abstract from the same learned author, Dr. Clark's evidence of natural
and revealed religion p. 271.
which he takes from Grotius. His words are, that a little before the coming of
our Savior there was a general expectation spread over all the eastern
nations, that out of Judea should arise a person who should be governor of the
world, is expressly affirmed by the Roman historians, Suetonius and Tacitus:
that there lived in Judea at the time which the gospel relates such a person as
Jesus of Nazareth, is acknowledged by all authors, both Jewish and Pagan, who
have written ever since that time. The star that appeared at his birth, is
mentioned by Chalcidious the Platonist: as is also the journey of the Chaldaean
wise men. Herod's causing all the children in Bethlehem, and among the rest his
own son under two years old to be slain, and a reflection made thereupon by the
emperor Augustus, that it was better to be Herod's swine than his son; is
related by Macrobius. Many of the miracles that Jesus wrought, as his healing
the lame, the b^ind, and casting out devils, are owned by the most implacable
enemies of christianity, by Celsus and Julian, and the authors of the Jewish
Talmud. That the power of the heathen gods ceased after the coming of Christ,
of which I may say more afterward, is acknowledged by Porphyry. Many
particulars of the collateral history concerning John the baptist, Herod and
Pilate, are largely recorded by Josephus: the crucifixion of Christ under
Pontius Pilate, is related by Tacitus; and diverse of the most remarkable
circumstances attending it, such as the earthquake and miraculous darkness, was
recorded in the Roman registers, and are in a very particular manner attested
by Phlegon. That the most considerable facts mentioned in the New Testament are
confirmed by the concurrent attestation of Jewish and heathen authors, might be
made appear, by a much larger ind^ction of particulars; but I choose to refer
the inqu^^^tive reader to Mr. Lardner's credibility of the gospel history,
where ^e will meet with fall sati^faction upon this head; and instead of
thinking it strange, that we have no more and plainer corroborating te^imonies
from those writers to the matters of fact recorded in the gospels, I am
persuaded, he will rather admire that we have so many, and such clear ones, as
we have. Especially considering, how seldom it was to their purpose to take
nonce of these things, how unacquainted they must be supposed to have been with
them for the most part, and how little they believed them, having never
impartially examined into their truth. In short, nothing seems to me more
unreasonable than to urge the want of plainer and fuller testimonies from
heathens and Jews, to the facts on which the belief of the christian religion
is grounded, as an argument against it, when the very plainness and fullness of
a testimony of this sort, is by many thought a sufficient reason to suspect it
to be spurious and counterfeit, the forgery of some over officious chri^^^n.
This is the case with reference to that famous controverted passage in
Josephus, the best argument that I know of produced against the genvineness of
which is, that it contains an higher character of our savior than it is likely
an unbelieving Jew would give. And as I doubt not the case would have been the
same in other instances, it must needs be very unfair to make the paucity of
such testimonies an objection against christianity. So that upon the whole, I
think it manifest, that we have as many and just such as we could in reason
look for and expect.


I might add to these testimonies the acts of Pilate, which though questioned
by some, have I think a great probability in them. The case was this: it was
usual for the Roman deputies, or governors of provinces, to give an account of
the chief things, during their administration, to the emperor: accordingly,
Pilate gave an account to Tiberius of what had happened in his time concerning
Jesus of Nazareth; an account of his miracles, death, crucifixion and
resurrection: upon which, it is said, that emperor proposed it to the senate,
that he should be admitted into the number of their gods; and decreed, that
none should be accused for being a christian during his reign. Two things I may
remark with reference to this matter, namely, that Pilate's account was
enrolled in the public records at Rome: and, that the fathers, as Justin
Martyr, and Tertullian afterward appealed to the emperor and senate upon the
head, in their apologies for the christian religion. Which we cannot imagine
they would have done, had they not been well assured of the fact, that such
things were registered, and that their enemies had nothing to allege in
opp^^^tion to it.

Now this was a testimony of a public nature. Pilate, you know, was the judge
before whom our Lord was tried, and by whom he was condemned. The thing was of
so great consequence, and made such a noise in the world, that one cannot think
he would pass it over in silence, and take no notice of it to the emperor. The
fact is considered, the matter laid before the senate, and committed to their
records; and thereupon a decree made in favor of the christians. That this is
likely to be true, may be argued from the circumstances of the case. The
emperors expected from their deputies, an account of any notable event that
happened where they were. And can we imagine, that Pilate either would or durst
conceal so great an event, as that concerning Jesus Christ, about which all
Judea was in an uproar, and in which he himself had so great a share, From
hence then, we may infer the probability of the story; and, I think, conclude
its certainty from the apologies I mentioned of Justin Martyr and Tertullian.
They were both learned men, lived in the next century, and I cannot think it
consistent with their character to appeal, as we find they do, to the head of
the Roman empire, and to so august a body as the Roman senate, concerning this
fact had it been in the least doubtful.

So that here you see, we have the testimony of all sorts of authors in behalf
of our point, of those that lived in the time, and nearest to the time, when
the things mentioned in the New Testament history were done. The testimony of
enemies, of Jews, of Pagans, of the emperor and senate, of Pilate, the very man
that judged and condemned our Lord. All these own there was such a person as
Jesus Christ, that he lived at the time the gospel relates, that he wrou^ht
miracles, that he was put to death by crucifixion, that he had many disciples
and followers, of whose affairs several of them speak. And it deserves
observation, that the most spiteful adversaries of the christian religion, and
such as attacked it formerly with the greatest sharpness, as Julian, Porphyry,
and Celsus, do not dare to deny the facts; they own what is said of Jesus
Christ; and that he wrought miracles; only they pretend he did it by the power
of magic, the Jews lay by the Tetragrammation, just like the absurd cavil of
his enemies in the days of his flesh, that he cast out devils by Beelzebub, the
prince of the devils.

You will allow me, I hope, to say now, that so far I have made good what I
undertook, and have shown you, that the characters of authentic historians
belong to the writers of the Bible; they have, you see, the testimony of other
ancient writers, even of their very enemies to confirm their history. The Old
Testament has as much of this as could be expected, and the New Testament more
plain, direct, and early vouchers. So that I think I need not scruple hence to
conclude, that the Bible is certainly true. But I have not yet given you all
the evidence of its truth. I proceed therefore to the next particular, which I
shall dispatch in a few words, viz.

5. That the writers of the Old and New Testament treat of subjects of great
importance, in which the interests of men are very much concerned: in
consequence of which, we may conclude their relations of things would be
examined by all sorts of persons: and yet none of the most critical examiners
are able to disprove them, or pretend they were false. If any ancient history
be a trisle, contains things of no moment to the world, mankind will not think
themselves obliged to look very narrowly into it. Be it true or false it is all
one to them. When this is the case, as it often is, no wonder they (...) it
pass, even though the greatest part of it be fiction and romance.

But when a history comes forth full of great and surprising events, especially
of new laws and revelations in which the highest interests of men are nearly
concerned; we cannot imagine, it should be admitted without trial and
sufficient evidence. And of this nature is the history of the Bible, There is
no history of equal weight with it, as may be shown with respect to both those
parts of it, I have already more than once touched upon.

The history of Moses, that contains the memoirs of the creation, the fall of
man, the promise of a redeemer to recover lost sinners, the apostasy and
destruction of the old world, the preservation of Noah and his family, as heads
of a new race, the laws and covenant of God, and the wonders of his providence
toward the church, has something in it not only great and august, but of
consequence to the world above any other history. And though I grant the Jews
being distinguished and separate from the rest of the world, their law was not
of general and universal concernment; yet even their history, as well as that
of the patriarchs, was such as would excite the attention of mankind;
particularly, as so many things are related in it that give them a preference
to the rest of the nations, the miracles God wrought for them, the triumphs of
his providence over their enemies, and in their behalf, in Egypt, in the
wilderness, and afterward in Canaan. Their neighbors and enemies could not be
ignorant of many of these things, and had they been false, would loudly have
remonstrated against them. Would not the Egyptians have borne testimony against
what Moses lays of the destruction of their monarch, and disgrace of their
country by so strange a series and train of judgments, had there been any room
to c^^^dict his report? And yet we find nothing of this, no counter history,
but, as has been observed, have evident footsteps of the facts recited by
Moses, in their most ancient records.

I need not show how important Moses's history was to the Jews, and that they
could not have received it without examination. They would never have submitted
to Moses, had he been an impostor; would never have embraced his laws, had they
not known they were divine, nor believed his history, if they had not been
assured it was true. When he delivers his law to them, he does it in strains of
very high authority, and signifies to them that he sets before them a blessing
and a curse. A blessing if they obeyed, and a curse if they would not obey. To
the same purpose he says, I have set before thee this day, life and good, and
death and evil. And again, I call heaven and earth to record this day against
you, that I have set before you, life and death, blessing and cursing. He tells
them, that if they walked in the statutes and judgments of God they should live
and multiply, and God would bless them in the land whither they went to possess
it. But if their hearts turned away and they would not hear, he solemnly
denounces to them, that they should surely perish. And as their law came with
such an awful sanction, so the authority of it reached to all their affairs;
their inheritances, civil rights, peace, health, and prosperity of every kind,
depended upon it. I might add, that though the whole history of Moses tends
very much to exalt the mercy and grace of God toward that people, and sets
forth the wonders of his providence done among them and for them, yet it leaves
them under severe censures; it represents them as a stiff-necked, rebellious,
ungrateful people; gives an account of their frequent murmurings and
apostacies, and of the judgments of God inflicted upon them for their sins;
sets a mark of infamy and reproach upon some eminent persons and families among
them, as Aaron, Miriam, Corah, Dathan, Abiram and others.

Now had not this history been true, and known to be true beyond all
possibility of question, had not the laws published been from God, the censures
past been just, the things related been done according to the revelation; as it
had been in the power of a multitude to have confronted the deceiver and
contradicted the story; they would not have failed to have done it. The account
given of them was of too great consequence to the community, and too nearly
touched particular persons, to pass without examination, and to be received
without irresistible evidence.

As to the New Testament, every one will discern the importance of its history
and of the facts it contains; the incarnation, death, and resurrection of the
Son of God, were the greatest events that ever entertained the world, and could
not but draw the attention of men, as we know they did. Consider the matter a
little, Jesus of Nazareth an obscure person by his birth and education, assumes
the character of the Mesliah; declares himself sent and commissioned by God the
Father; and accordingly acts as his ambassador, repeals the statutes of Moses;
condemns the forms of worship that had so long obtained among the gentiles, and
calls upon them to renounce their idols; reveals a new doctrine and plan of
religion; works miracles and sends forth apostles to preach his doctrine, and
gives them also power of miracles to confirm that doctrine. He lays down his
life, rises again from the dead, promises eternal happiness to his followers,
and demands of all, as ever they expect an interest in his salvation, that they
believe in him, and submit to his authority.

Now these were such very important things, of so mighty consequence to all
sorts of persons, that I think it was impossible they should be passed over
with indolence and neglect. Here was a new state of religion introduced, the
venerable rights of Moses cancelled, the superstitions of the Pagans trampled
under foot, and not only so, but the reputation both of the one and the other
struck at. For to say nothing of any other instances of their conduct set forth
and censured in the sacred history, we find they are represented there as
acting a scandalous part in the tragedy of Christ's death, the Jews persecuting
and delivering him up for envy. and Pilate condemning him against the
conviction of his own conscience. The former, the Jews, seem apprehensive how
much their credit was touched in the matter, and therefore endeavored to
silence the apostles and stifle their report, alleging they had filled
Jerusalem with their doctrine, and intended to bring this man's blood upon
them. So that had there been room for cavilling, any pretense upon which they
might hope to invalidate the testimony of the sacred writers, their malice,
nay, a concern for their own reputation, would have put them upon it. They were
avowed enemies to Jesus Christ, nothing galled them so much as the fame of his
miracles, and the spreading of his doctrine thereupon; and we may be sure as
they did observe these things, they would not let them go without
contradiction, but that there was no ground for it.

As for christians, the whole body of christians, they were so deeply
interested in the facts recorded in the gospel, that it is certain they could
not neglect them. They professed to believe the gospel history and indeed
ventured their all, their present and everlasting all, upon the credit thereof.
They could not be christians without believing, nor believe, ordinarily,
without being martyrs. Their master made the first necessary, and their enemies
the latter. Christ would not accept them unless they would own him, confess
him, and be faithful to him: and if they did so their enemies generally
persecuted them, even unto death.

This was the state of the sacred history, especially of the gospel history. It
relates matters of the greatest importance to mankind, wherein their highest
interests are immediately concerned; and consequently, they could not but think
themselves obliged to enquire narrowly into it, as actually they did: and after
their utmost examination, none were able to deny the facts, or destroy the
credit of the history: from whence I may conclude, it is undoubtedly true.

It was not possible to forge such an history as that of Moses and of Christ,
and persuade mankind to believe the same. The reason is, they were too much
concerned in these things, not to examine whether they were true or not. There
are many ancient histories of so little moment to any part of mankind, that no
body thinks it worth his while critically to enquire into all the particulars
of them; and therefore no wonder that some such pass current, whatever fictions
there may be in them. But when the history is of general and great moment and
importance the case is otherwise. Should any one for instance, pretend to give
us an history of our own nation, or but of the reign of one of our kings,
wherein a great many facts are forged, and a great multitude of stories told
against the interest and reputation of any considerable party. And should he
moreover alter public laws, and go about to impose a new statute book; I ask,
whether such an history could possibly obtain any credit, and such an attempt
succeed among us? would not thousands rise up and detect the imposture? or
rather the attempt would sink and ruin itself by the absurdity and impudence of
it. The same may be said with reference to an abuse and forgery of the records
in the Bible. No man could have contrived such a book, with such laws and
facts, without exposing himself to the contempt of the world, of Jews, Pagans
and Christians. England may as soon be persuaded to receive a forged body of
statutes never enacted in parliament, nor pleaded in any court of judicature,
as the Jewish and christian church could have been persuaded to receive the
laws and history of Moses and Christ, from the hands of an impostor.

And thus I have gone through the first of the three particulars I proposed to
insist upon; have shown you, that the sacred history has equal credit with any
ancient history, and that all the characters of credible historians belong to
the writers of the Bible. They had sufficient knowledge of what they wrote;
they were persons of great integrity; they wrote at the time when the facts
they publish are said to be done, and when it might be known whether they were
done or no; their history is confirmed by co-temporary writers, and the things,
they relate, are of so much importance to mankind, that they could not but
think themselves obliged to enquire into them. From whence it follows, that
either the Bible is true, or we can have no evidence that there is any true
history in the world.

And now to conclude this discourse with a practical remark, or inference from
what has been said. If the Bible is true, then on the one hand, how sad and
deplorable is the case of wic^^d men; of carnal, worldly, sensual sinners. The
Bible is wholly against them. It censures their principles, condemns their
practice, represents God as their enemy, and hell as their portion. Which, by
the way, I doubt is one great reason of many persons' enmity to the Bible. It
checks and controuls them in their sinful pursuits, and did they believe it,
would exceedingly terrify them. Hence they hate it, as Ahab did the prophet,
because it speaks evil to them. If the Bible be true, the way of the ungodly
shall perish, and the wicked shall be turned into hell. On the other hand, we
have hence matter of great joy and comfort to good men. It is so much our
interest that the Bible should be true, that methinks those that are inclined
to question, whether it is, or not, should yet wish it true. And indeed was
that the case with the opposers of it, I do not doubt but their scruples would
soon be over, and the dispute cease.

A good man would not for the world that the Bible was not true. He finds there
so much satisfaction concerning God and providence, as governing all things and
interesting himself in all his affairs; so much assurance concerning another
better state, so much support and comfort in this, that he justly esteems his
Bible his inheritance and treasure. Rejoice then, christian, that we have such
good evidence of the truth of it. There thou have a glorious revelation, a sure
word of prophecy, excellent rules to direct thy practice, exceeding great and
precious promises to afford thee comfort, and a certain prospect of eternal
life hereafter. O be thankful for the Bible; study, love, and live the Bible;
and you shall find all true at last, and that not one iota, or tittle of the
word shall pass till all be accomplished.

DISCOURSE IV. THE TRUTH AND CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I HAVE made it appear, I think, that our Bible is of equal credit with any
other ancient history, and consequently, that if it be not true, we have no
sufficient reason to receive and believe any ancient book in the world. And
according to the method I proposed, I am now

II. To show that our Bible has greater marks of credibility, stronger
evidences of truth, than any other ancient book. I might argue this at large;
but I shall content myself with a few observations. As,

1. The writers of the Bible seem to have excelled other historians in their
moral character. They appear to have been persons of eminent integrity,
goodness and virtue; and discover in all their writings, the greatest
impartiality, and love of truth. Compare them in these things with most
historians in the world, and it is easy to see on which side the advantage will
be.

To touch only on their impartiality; how gloriously does that shine through
all their narrations. Moses fully relates the evil things of his nation; both
their sins and their sufferings; their offenses against God, and his judgments
upon them. Nor does he spare himself, he records several instances of his own
infirmities, and tells you, that God was angry with him and Aaron, and for
their sins excluded them out of the promised land. The New Testament writers
represent their master under all the disadvantageous characters of a sufferer,
as loaded with reproach and contempt, and at last undergoing an ignominious
death. And I before took notice, they do with great freedom set forth their
weaknesses; their cowardice, slowness of belief, their pride and emulations;
the many rebukes they met with from their master, and their shameful forsaking
him, and denying him in his last sufferings. It is left on record against the
great apostle Paul, that he consenter to the death of Stephen, and made havoc
of the church; on which account, he calls himself the ch^ef of sinners, a
persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious. And when he mentions that glorious and
distinguishing instance of favor to him, his rapture into the third heaven, he
does it with such circumstances as tend to mortify him; for he tells us
thereupon, God sent a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him,
lest he should be exalted above measure. This and the like, way the conduct of
these men from first to last, as might be made out in a multitude of instances.
But it is sufficient to say, there never were in the world more candid fair
writers; persons that acted a more disinterested part than the writers of the
Bible. Bring other writers to the test, hear and examine their characters,
compare them to that of Moses and the apostles, and I am confident sew can bear
the trial. The common historians must fall before them, as Dagon before the ark
of God.

What gross fables the Greek and Roman historians mixed with their histories,
on pu^pose to aggrandise and raise the same of their own nations, has been
taken notice of; at the same time, omitting whatsoever tended to their
diminution. Among other instances, this is remarkable, that Plin. Not. Hist. l.
34. c. 14.
Porsena, in his league with the people of Rome, obliged them to make no other
use of iron, but for the tilling the ground, none of the Roman historians think
fit to relate this circumstance; whereas, when the people of Israel were
reduced to the like straits, their historian freely owns it. And even Josephus,
the celebrated Jewish historian, passes over in silence several things
dishonorable to his nation; particularly, their folly in making the golden
calf. But the sacred writers have none of these blemishes upon them, none of
these objections lying against them. They sought not their own glory, the honor
of their own nation, their friends, their party; but appear in all they say and
do, to act from no other principle but love and zeal for the truth.

Not but there are a great many histories wrote by very honest and sincere
persons, who had no design in any particular to impose upon the world; but as
good men, the best of men, are in all things fallible, it many things
prejudiced; so none of them could come up to the manifest character of the
writers of the Bible. These have been actuated by an higher spirit, have
discovered a purer zeal, a more steady, uniform, divine intention in their
composures. Allow me therefore again to repeat the corrollary and consequence
from hence, that if we do not admit the Bible, we must give up all other
histories as legend and juggle.

2. It adds to the credit of the scripture history, and gives it the preserence
to all others, that, as I remarked before, it contains matters the most weighty
and important of any in the world. It treats of things of such a nature, that
all mankind, before whom it was laid, would think themselves bound to look into
it, and fifth it to the bottom. There is no other history like to undergo so
critical a scrutiny as the sacred; the reasons of which, I have already hinted
at: and, I think, I may justly allege it as a circumstance in favor of the
Bible, and as what gives it a superior credit to any other ancient book.

3. The scripture history has had more enemies than any other, and has stood
the test of the most nice c^^^iry: some of it several thousand years, and all
(...) several hundred. The Jews and christians have espoused their respective
sacred histories, upon full conviction of the truth of each. Their successors
have from age to age, and for a great cract of time, acquiesced therein as
sufficiently established. Nor have their enemies, for so long a while, been
able to discover any fraud, or cheat in the sacred writings, notwithstanding
their utmost efforts.

If it be objected, That the adversaries of christianity might confute these
things at the time they are said to be done, though we have not now the account
of that matter. I answer 1. We have no proof, no records remaining of any such
confutation. Let the objector name by whom this was done, or undertaken;
produce any tradition of such a fact, any book wrote on such a subject. If he
cannot, there is nothing in the allegation, but it must be looked upon as a
mere cavil. 2. It is evident, the enemies of the Bible never pretended to
confute or deny the facts therein reported; for instance, the miracles of
Christ and his apostles. On the contrary, you find some of them freely
confessing them. What shall we do, say they, to these men? for that indeed a
notable miracle has been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it. Should the objector turn upon me, and
suggest, that I am producing the testimony of a book under dispute, that it is
only the Scripture itself that tells us this. I reply, these facts are owned by
the heathens and Jews of that time, as has been proved. And besides, the Jews
since do not pretend to deny them; but plead, that Christ wrought miracles by
the power of magic, or by the mysterious use of the Tetragrammaton, the name
Jehovah. I answer further, 3. Had there been any such confutation of the facts
in the Bible, the Jews, no doubt, would have preserved the testimony or
writings of such opposers; would have made use of them in their disputes
against christianity; which yet they never did. So that, I conclude, this
character, this superior character of the credit and truth of the Bible, is
unquestionable. No other ancient book has been so much examined and criticized
upon, and stood the attacks of enemies so long and so much.


4. The Scripture history receives a mighty confirmation from the concord and
harmony of its several writers. It was wrote by several persons, in several
parts and ages of the world, and every one gives testimony to another; which is
a circumstance that cannot be alleged with the like advantage in behalf of any
other book or history. Moses speaks and writes of Christ, as he himself tells
us, John v. 46. and in his types and prophecies points out and delineates the
great events of the gospel dispensation in his song. He has raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of his servant David; as he spoke by the mouth
of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began. So Acts iii. 24.
And all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have
spoken have foretold of these days. Moses and the prophets give testimony to
Christ and the gospel; foretell and describe the things thereof. T^^ gospel
owns Moses and the prophets and gives testimony to them. So that it is a good
argument, that if any part of the Bible be true, all is true; if Moses be true,
the prophets be true, the New Testament is true: and on the other hand, if the
New Testament be true, so are Moses and the prophets. They have a mutual
dependence and give mutual testimony. They stand or fall together. An argument
that will serve no other book or history in the world, at least not so fully as
the Bible. I might add,

5. God himself has owned this history, and given it a divine testimony in a
manner, that cannot be pleaded in behalf of any other history. He has owned
this book to be his; owned the penman of it, and vindicated its truth and
authority. But as this belongs to another argument and will be afterward
considered as a proof of the inspiration of the Bible, I shall not here insist
upon it. In the mean time it may fitly be observed as one of the particulars
that give the Bible a preference to all other books.

And this may suffice for the evidence of the second particular, that the Bible
has superior marks of credit and truth in it above any other history. It
remains according to what I promised,

III. That I show, that all circumstances considered, it is morally impossible
the Bible should not be true. I say morally, by which I distinguish the
impossibility I speak of, from that which is strict and absolute, arising from
the nature of things. All human understandings are, and will be, imperfect. If
we have the testimony of one man, of an hundred, of a thousand, concerning this
or that particular, we may have great reason to believe this or that testimony.
But it implies not contradiction when any say, it is false. But notwithstanding
this, there may be such a concurrence of circumstances in a testimony or an
history concerning past things, as renders it not only highly reasonable to
believe it, but even impossible to be false without changing the faculties and
nature of man, and the state of things among mankind. And of this kind, I
think, is the evidence we have, that the Scripture contains a true history. It
is I say, with the distinction mentioned, impossible the Bible should be false.
To confirm which position, I shall offer a few considerations.

1. It is not possible that the writers of the Bible should be deceived
themselves. They had the help of all their senses and faculties to enable them
to discern whether the things they published were true or not. And if so many
persons, in so many different cases, were not enabled to make a judgment about
what they relate, having all of them their senses and the use of their reason;
others in the like circumstances may be deceived, you and I, and ten thousand
more, and consequently nothing can be certain in the world.

Moses could not but know, whether he had been with Pharaoh, treating with him
time after time in the manner he reports. He could not but know, whether he
used his rod for the working such miracles as are contained in his history; he
could not but know whether he had been on the mount with God, and received two
tables of stone from God there; whether he brought them down in his hands,
broke them at the foot of the mount, and had them afterward renewed. The New
Testament writers could not but tell, whether they had seen Christ, heard his
discourses, been witnesses of his miracles, seen him hang on the cross,
conversed with him after his resurrection, and seen him ascend into heaven;
they could not but know, whether they had wrought the miracles they give an
account of; and, particularly, could not but know such as were wrought upon
themselves, as their speaking with tongues they had never learned; they might
know as certainly, whether they received the miraculous gift of languages at
Pentecost, as they knew their own existence. To suppose, that a multitud^ of
persons, and that of all sorts, should be deceived in things of this kind; is
to destroy the nature of man, deny that he is a reasonable creature, capable of
moral government, and reflects the utmost dishonor upon God, the author of his
nature. I may therefore conclude, it is impossible these persons should be
themselves deceived. If what they wrote was false, they knew it was false, and
they could not but know, whether it was true or false.

2. As they could not be deceived themselves, so it is impossible they should
mean and intend to deceive others. For, 1. I have shown they were persons of
great integrity and truth. The characters thereof were conspicuous in all they
said and did. 2. They were under great obligations to speak the truth. Nothing
is more contrary to the religion they propagated, and the doctrine they taught,
than lying; not so much as a pious fraud, an officious lie, was allowed by
them. When a thing of that kind was imputed to them, they rejected it with
abhorrence, If the truth of God, says the apostle, has more abounded through
my lie unto his glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner? and not rather as
we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil
that good may come; whose damnation is just. And you every where find a mark of
reprobation set upon lying in scripture, and such as indulge to that vice,
appointed to destruction. Thus we are told, All liars shall have their portion
in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone. Now is it possible, that
these persons should invent a lie, so prodigious and blasphemous a lie, as that
of the gospel, if it be false? Invent, publish, and palm it upon the world in
the name of God: that they should do this in contradiction to their manifest
character and avowed doctrine? He that will impute this to them, makes them the
most self-contradicting, self-condemned men in the world. 3. They could have no
motive to such a vile undertaking. It was against their worldly interest; as is
evident to any one that knows their case, and reads their history. What the
apostle Paul says of himself, was true of all of them: Christ had forewarned
them of it, and they expected it, viz. That bonds and afflictions did abide
them. They were assured, that to follow Christ in hopes of another world, was
the certain way to be undone in this; that they should be hated of all men for
his namesake, scourged, every way persecuted even unto blood and death. If it
be said, they had not much to lose, I answer, some of them left a very
comfortable subsistence. Matthew was a toll-gatherer, an officer of the
customs, and, no question, was in the way, not only of living, but growing rich
in some measure. Luke was a physician, and the apostle Paul was in so much
esteem among the great men of the Jewish church, and so much devoted to their
interest, was so learned, exact, and zealous in his profession, that he might
have expected considerable preferments: all which he cheerfully renounced,
accounting all, as he tells us, not only loss, but dung for Christ Jesus our
Lord. The rest of the apostles indeed were fishermen; but we are told they had
hired servants, which implies, their circumstances were not very mean, at least
not necessitous. But the argument is not concerned in this. Whatever their
former circumstances were, it is certain, they could not propose to mend them
by following Christ. If they had but little, that little must be much with
them, because it was their all; and no man can lose more than all. Nor did they
only quit their livelihood and means of subsistence, but their ease, their
outward peace and their life was sacrificed for the same cause.


Now I think it not possible, had they been conscious of a lie, and that the
gospel was a forgery, that they should have promoted it upon such terms. They
could have no motive, no temptation hereto; and consequently to suppose them
guilty of this, is to suppose them to have abandoned the principles of
self-preservation and self-love, to do evil for evil-sake: not only without,
but against their own interest; and to contrive the most enormous wickedness,
for no other reason, but to be miserable here and damned hereafter, which I
reckon impossible, as not being consistent with any principles of human nature
that we are acquainted with. If there ever were any that did such things as
these, they must not be men, but another species of creatures than we have any
idea or notion of.

If it be said, that honor and reputation might set them at work. I answer,
that obscure persons, such as were the first propagators of the gospel, and
publishers of its history, are seldom pushed on to great enterprises, upon
motives of honor and vain glory. They have little sense of these things.
Besides, they could have no expectation of honor from the world. They were told
of hatred, of reproach; of the most infamous, barbarous usage. And they saw
that must be their lot, if they engaged in the service of Christ. So that, I
may conclude, it was not possible these men should design a cheat and
imposture. They must know the truth and goodness of the cause they espoused, or
they had never espoused it. Again, 1. I think it altogether unaccountable, and
indeed impossible, supposing some particular persons, should be capable of so
much wickedness and vileness, that so many of them should agree therein, and
that none o^ them should detect the villainy. All sorts of persons, Jew^,
pagans, multitudes of both, were engaged in the profession and service of the
gospel. They had their different sentiments, divided into parties, run into
debates, and mutual censures and schisms: some fell into herasies, and were
publicly censured by the churches, and excommunicated. The apostle Paul himself
had zealous enemies that endeavored to ruin his reputation, among the
Corinthians, Galations and others; against whom he was forced to write with
some sharpness, for the vindicating himself and establishing the churches. Now,
what I remark is, that among all these persons, this multitude of converts, too
often drawn up in factions one against another; full of animosities,
bickerings, party heats and quarrels, none of them ever undertook to accuse
christianity of imposture, or to discover any deceit of confederacy among the
professors of it. Think of the case of Judas here particularly. You know he
betrayed his master, sold him for thirty pieces of silver. Now, either he knew
that Christ was an impostor, and the gos^^^ a forgery or not. If he knew it,
would he not upon this account have proclaimed the thing to all the world, and
thereby vindicated his own honor? but so far was he from it, that you know
conscience flew in his face, and he comes to his abettors with a sorrowful
complaint, I have betrayed innocent blood, and not being able to bear the load
of so much guilt as he found pressing his mind; he throws down the money, goes
his way, and hangs himself. Certainly, had the gospel been false, the device of
some cunning men, one or other would have spoke out; the provoked and enraged;
the apostates, such as Judas, particularly would have done it. It is not, I
think, possible they should all persevere in a lie, a known lie; and neither
the love of truth, nor love of themselves, nor hatred of such as they accounted
enemies, prevail with them to make a discovery. To which I might subjoin, that
multitudes of these persons carried their testimony to the truth of
christianity with them to death, sealing it with their very blood: no fears, no
terrors of their enemies, nor remorse of conscience, could make them draw back
or recant.

Now all this considered, I presume, I may say, it is not to be accounted for,
it is not agreeable to any thing we know of the human nature; and that indeed
it amounts to an impossibility, that there should be any fraudulent design, in
the writers and preachers of the gospel. They could never, so many of them thus
have agreed, and thus have persisted in a known lie and falsehood. And then as
they could not be deceived or design to deceive, so

3. It was not possible they should be able to deceive others. Had the writers
of the scripture intended, and endeavored, to have imposed their history upon
the world, they could not have succeeded in the attempt. This may be
sufficiently collected from what has been said. I shall however remark two or
three things for the proof of it.

1. They had not art enough to manage an imposture. The apostles of Christ
particularly had not. Their education was low and mean; they were not bred up
in the courts of princes, or in the schools of the philosophers; but were taken
from the fisher-boat most of them to preach the gospel; and some have observed,
their employment tended to make them more heavy and dull; for being much upon
the water, and in the night, the cold phlegmatic air would have an influence
upon them and flatten their spirits. Hence Plato, when he would express a rude
dull man, says he was brought up among mariners. Add to this, that they lay
under disadvantages from their country, being Gallileans, whose dialect was
accounted the most ungenteel and rude of any; a Gallilean, was a term of
diminution, a sort of a nickname, by which they meant a mean and contemptible
rustic.

In short, view them in all their circumstances, and it will appear impossible
that such persons, supposing they have the confidence and folly to undertake a
cheat of this nature, should ever be able to carry it on. Their enemies took
notice they were ignorant and unlearned men. They had neither depth of
understanding, nor fluency of speech, were neither scholars, nor orators. And
is it to be imagined, that they should be able of their own heads to contrive
such a story, as that of the gospel history? and not only so, but persuade
others to receive it?

2. They relate facts of such a nature, that it is not possible they should
have cheated the world into the belief of them, had they not been true. For
instance, they give an account of facts done before a multitude of witnesses,
who could not but know whether such things were done, and in that manner done
or not. Let us consider, among many other instances, the passage of Christ's
crucifixion with the circumstances of it; that at the time of the passover when
there was a mighty concourse of people at Jerusalem, he was condemned by Pilate
against his conscience, and publicly put to death; that the vail of the temple
was thereupon rent, the rocks split, graves opened, and there was a
preternatural darkness over the land for several hours; and all this was done,
as they pretend, before great numbers of spectators, both Jews and Romans. Now,
if these things really were done, as is represented in the gospel, our point is
so far gained, the history is true. If false, why did not their enemies
contradict them; especially since the honor of some of them was so nearly
touched. If this story be false, and Christ was not crucified, and such and
such events did not happen at the time of his crucifixion, it is impossible the
apostles should have gained credit to the forgery.

The like I might say of abundance of miracles recorded in the gospel. Let us
reflect a little on the raising of Lazarus from the dead, an account of which
you have in the eleventh of John: where you will observe he was not only dead,
but buried four days; this was publicly known in the neighborhood: and
therefore several of the Jews came to the sisters of the deceased to pay them a
friendly visit, and to condole with them: upon this you are told of a
conference between Christ and Martha; and read of the despair they were in of
receiving any help with reference to their brother: yet notwithstanding Christ
goes to the grave, calls upon the dead man, and immediately he comes forth.
Thereupon, as the history goes on, many of the Jews believed in him. Others lay
the matter before the Pharisees, who immediately summon a council, and being
alarmed with the report of so surprising a miracle, to prevent the consequence
they feared from it, determine to put Jesus to death. What do we? say they, for
this man does many miracles, and if we let him alone all men will believe on
him. And you read in the following chapter, they passed the same resolution
with reference to Lazarus; the fame of the miracle increasing, people flocked
to see the dead man now alive, and many believed on Jesus, by reason of
Lazarus. Hence they thought it necessary, that he should be dispatched out of
the way too, and be put to death. This is the substance of the story, and I
think I may warrantably conclude, without much reasoning upon it, that it was
impossible to make it pass current had it been false. Here are a great many
persons introduced, as having a part in the scene, Lazarus, his sisters, the
Jews; some of whom are represented as convinced, and others as taking
dishonorable methods to slur the miracle and disgrace the author. Lazarus lives
as a standing monument of the divine power of Christ; multitudes are carried by
their curiosity to see and converse with so remarkable a person; and of these
many are converted, and profess faith in Jesus as the Messiah. Now what I
insist on is, that had this story been false, it could never have been admitted
as true. Lazarus himself, we may suppose, would have denied that he had been
dead, and was raised to life again; his sisters, the Jews, would have been
ready to have cried out of the imposture. And upon the whole, I think it is not
possible, circumstances considered, that all of them should have suffered a
forgery of this nature to remain undetected. Upon the occasion of what is here
transiently said concerning the resurrection of Lazarus, I cannot forbear
remarking, that this is one of the miracles of our savior that Mr. Woolston
has lately endeavored to discredit as much as he can; though was it a proper
place to enlarge upon the subject, it would be no difficult matter to show the
weakness and absurdity of his exceptions and cavils. But as the discourse comes
in here occasionally, I shall not at present stand to take notice of what he
says. Only, I think, I may be allowed to observe, that the hints given in this
paragraph are sufficient to vindicate the matter of fact, and manifest the
reality of the miracle. But if any desire to see the case confidered more
particularly, I would recommend to their perusal the Rev. Dr. Harris's two
discourses upon it, entitled, the reasonableness of believing in Christ, and
the unreasonableness of infidelity, with the appendix.


I might allege under this head, and for confirmation of the point I am upon,
that the writers of the gospel history relate many miracles, which a multitude
of persons were the subjects of. For instance, the descending of the Holy
Ghost, and their speaking with tongues. Thus Peter tells his hearers, that if
they repented, and were baptized, they should receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. And we are informed, that while Peter spoke to the people the Holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard the word. Now this was a sensible thing; the
persons that received the gift could no more doubt of it than of the most
obvious, plain and certain truths: they could not be deceived in the matter,
could not but know whether they spoke with tongues they had never learned, and
whether they wrought miracles or no. The thing was evident to others, and
therefore Simon Magus desired that he might have power granted him that on
whomsoever he should lay hands he might receive the Holy Ghost. Others saw it,
the persons themselves felt it, and it was impossible that herein they should
be deceived.

3. It strengthens the argument and further shows the impossibility of an
imposture, that a multitude of persons, and of all sorts of persons, received
and believed the gospel history; the Jews, the Gentiles, many thousands and
myriads of these; such as had been avowed enemies, owned their conviction and
became converts, and that against the most inveterate prejudices. Thus we are
told, that the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem, and a greal number of the priests were obedient to the
faith. Among the rest, let me only mention the case of the apostle Paul. It is
known how deeply he was engaged in another interest, in opposing Christ and the
gospel. He was a person of character and eminency in the Jewish church, an
Hebrew of the Hebrews, bred up under the famous Gamaliel, entered into the sect
of the Pharisees, and exceeding zealous for the traditions of the elders, as
the rest of that faction were. Hereupon the name of Christ became odious to
him, as a person that not only lessened the authority of Moses, but had
declared himself an enemy to the traditions and inventions of the Pharisees,
condemning them as the grossest hypocrites, and th^^ religion as vain and
worthless. This inflamed him against christianity; and you know how much he set
himself to run it down. He was present at the death of Stephen, the first
martyr, and was an encourager of it, received a commission from the chief
priests to do the honorable work of a persecutor, which he followed with a
zeal, that he himself afterward called madness, haling men and women to
prison, and breathing nothing but threatenings and slaughter, and death against
them. Now, I would demand of any reasonable man, whether it was likely, nay,
whether it was possible, on supposition, that the facts in the gospel had been
a forgery to persuade this person and others to have received them. They could
not believe the gospel without quitting the most stubborn prejudices which had
long possessed their minds; without quitting their honors, their interests, and
preferments; without contradicting and condemning themselves, and exposing
themselves to all manner of reproach and sufferings. And would persons in such
circumstances be gulled and cheated by a company of poor fishermen, and
contemptible Gallileans? he that can believe this, is prepared to believe any
thing; and indeed believes the most absurd, incredible thing in the world, even
whilst he pretends to reject the gospel for want of credibility.

So that I do not think I talk in too high a strain, when I say, that it is
impossible the gospel history should be false; and particularly, that if the
writers of it had a mind to deceive, it is impossible they should have been
able to do it. I may add to what has been said,

4. That it is not possible the gospel history, had it been false, should have
maintained its credit in the world to this day. Not to repeat here, what has
been observed already, that it was embraced by so many against the strongest
prepossessions and prejudices, has been examined by such multitudes of persons
of different opinions and interests. What I would at present remark is, that
God himself would not have suffered such an imposture to have been palmed and
imposed upon the world. It is not consistent with the divine knowledge, mercy
and goodness, to have suffered in his providence a book so full of the
strongest evidence to be offered to mankind, a book that looks so like true,
that it is impossible by any faculties we have, to distinguish it from true,
had it been really false. He would not have suffered his creatures, especially
the wisest and best of them, and I cannot forbear accounting them such that
have shown the greatest veneration for christianity and the Bible, to be thus
tried, and to have lain under a delusion from age to age.

I grant there are many impostures and cheats in the world; but God is true,
wise and good, the best as well as greatest of beings, and he will not neglect,
or be wanting, to his upright servants that sincerely desire to be taught by
him, and be subject to him in all things. In a word, should we be deceived
here, I cannot see but we are deceived by an evidence that is in a great
measure irresistible. We cannot reject it without denying our faculties, going
contrary to the faculties God has given us, or if I may be allowed to say so,
governing ourselves by other faculties than he has given us. And consequently,
to suppose the Bible may be false, is to suppose that our very faculties
ensnare, and that God has left us to be deceived in the proper use of them,
without ever interposing for our relief; which is an horrid arraigning the
author of our nature, and issues in no less a blasphemy than this, that if we
be deceived, God has deceived us.

And thus I have sufficiently proved that the scripture is true, that it has
all the characters of truth that any other ancient history has, and that if we
are not to receive it, we can believe no history in the world; I have proved it
has greater evidence of truth in it, and that all things considered, it is
impossible it should not be true.

Perhaps some may be ready to say, to what purpose is all this waste? we do not
question the truth of the Bible. I answer,

1. It is good to be provided against the day of trial. You do not know what
temptations you may meet with on this head; the time may come when you may want
your faith assisted and confirmed, and then such arguments will be of use to
you, if you have digested them and made them your own, whatever you think of
them now: and even though you could not recollect many of them, it will be of
advantage at such a season, that this point has been cleared up to you to the
satisfaction of your minds; and that you have seen the evidence of this great
point, and have made a judgment concerning it. This may help to repel a
temptation to infidelity, when you are not, it may be, able at present to
answer every cavil and suggestion. As a person may be very easy, and rest
satisfied in his title to his estate, after it has been examined, though he
should have forgot the particulars of his security, and even the very names of
the witnesses.

2. You say, you believe the Bible, but it may be you only take it for granted
without believing, or knowing wherefore you believe it. If this be your case,
as I am afraid it is too commonly the case of professed christians; your faith
has nothing rational or divine in it; it stands upon no better foundation than
the faith of the mohammedan with respect to the Alcoran. The Bible has been
delivered to you, as a divine book, and accordingly you receive it without
examining, which is not truly believing, and only shows you are christians by
accident, and that your religion comes to you as many men's estates do, by
succession and inheritance from their fathers. I add,

3. The fuller evidence we have for our faith, the more effectual it is like to
be, the more it will influence the heart and command the life. Did we believe
the Bible more firmly upon solid grounds and clear conviction of its truth,
diligently conversing with those arguments by which the authority of it is
established, its doctrines would have greater force upon us, and be embraced
with more affection, we should mind it more, study it more, live it better.

Do not therefore think I am mispending your time and my own, whilst I insist
on these things. I am so much convinced of the necessity and importance of
them, that I account it well worth while to allot a considerable proportion of
my time and ministry, as God gives opportunity, to the vindicating and
explaining the holy Scriptures. Nor do I know and subject of more use to the
serious christian. The Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and instruction in righteousness: By the knowledge of which, as it
is in the verse following my text, with which I shall conclude, the man of God
is made perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

DISCOURSE V. THE DIVINE ORIGINAL AND INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


THE subject I am upon, is the divine authority of the Scriptures, my present
business being to demonstrate and prove the same. And the scheme I proposed to
pursue for this purpose, was, I. To show that the Bible is true, or that the
facts there related are so. II. That it is inspired. And. III. That the books
of the Old and New Testament, are the originally inspired books of the Bible.


I have hitherto insisted upon the first of these particulars, and have proved,
I hope, to satisfaction, 1. That our Bible is of equal credit with any other
ancient history. 2. That it has greater marks of credibility. And 3. That
circumstances considered, it is impossible it should not be true.
I do not intend that it is naturally impossible. What is naturally impossible,
cannot be otherwise without a contradiction in the very nature of things. Thus
it is naturally impossible that the same thing should be, and not be, at the
same time; should be true and false at the same time, and in the same sense.
And thus I grant, it is not impossible but the history of the Bible may be
false. For instance, it is not impossible but the writers of it might be
deceived themselves. They might lose the use of their senses and faculties;
their imagination might be disturbed, and the texture of their brain altered.
It is not naturally impossible but they might, notwithstanding their fair
appearances of integrity, be at the bottom gross cheats. A man may be deceived
himself, and he may deceive others; he may be weak and deluded, he may be a
knave and intend to delude and cheat. This is true of every man in the world,
for all men's faculties are finite and bounded, weak and defective. It is a
contradiction and naturally impossible that God, a being of infinite
perfection, should either be deceived or deceive, but it is not so with respect
to man, the greatest and best of men. It is not naturally impossible that men
may mistake their interests, may invent and imbellish an unprofitable lie, that
they may run upon their own destruction for no advantage; a frenzy may seize
them, or a false appearance of things may carry them on without suspicion of
the tragical issue. All this, and a great deal more that might be supposed, is
not naturally impossible.

But notwithstanding, it must be asserted, that there are cases, and the case
before us is of that nature, in which we have such evidence of the truth and
certainty of facts, and of the persons testimony, on which we believe the
facts, that it is morally impossible we should be deceived. This is too
abstruse and nice a speculation, or I durst undertake the proof and even
demonstration of it, that it is morally impossible, that the writers of the
Bible have imposed a false history upon us, and that the Bible should be false.
I beg leave only to retouch what I have already enlarged upon, which I think
makes good this assertion.

It is morally impossible, that so many persons should be deceived themselves,
in so many such instances and in the several facts related by them; that Moses,
the evangelists, and apostles should be deceived. The reason is, they have all
the evidence that men are capable of having: had the assurance and closest
testimony of all their senses. And consequently, if they were deceived all
other men may be deceived in all other instances, and there is no certainty of
any thing remaining. And if this be granted, there is an end of all converse
and of all religion: we can neither have correspondence with our follow
creatures, nor receive any revelation from God. For how do I know what any man
says to me, or that he speaks at all; that God speaks, or what he speaks, if I
may not trust my senses and faculties. And if Moses or the apostles might not
trust their senses, but might be deceived in the report they make of the
miracles and facts that fell under their observation, you and I, and all the
world, may be deceived, and that in every thing. The result of which is, that
we can depend neither on God, our neighbor, nor ourselves.

It is also morally impossible they should deceive others, or design an attempt
to do it. One reason of this may be taken from the consequence of denying the
sincerity of these persons. It is certain that man was made for society, with
an inclination and love to it: he needs it, desires it, derives his support and
comfort from it. And as God designed him for such a state, he has given him
principles, or made impressions upon him, suitable thereto. It is also certain
that there can be no society without mutual trust and confidence, which is the
band and cement of it; nor any mutual trust without truth and integrity
supposed, which is the foundation on which it rests. Now what I assert and
argue from is this, that the persons I am speaking of, the writers of the
Scripture, had the highest characters of integrity. If we do not admit them to
be credible, none are, none ever were, or can be credible. The consequence of
which, if it be considered will be no less than the dissolution of society.
Where there is no truth there can be no trust, and where there is no trust
there can be no society. And if we may not trust such men, appearing with such
criterions and marks of honesty as Moses and the apostles, we can trust none in
the world.

Further, they could have no motive to deceive, which is another reason of my
assertion, and shows it impossible they should intend to do it. Men do not use
to invent lies for nothing; much less to spend their time, sacrifice their
ease, reputation, interest, and even their lives, in propagating an
unprofitable forgery, and what they know to be a forgery. And yet this was the
case of the writers of the Bible, of the New Testament preachers and writers
particularly, if their history be false. The facts they published to the world,
and the doctrines they preached, were such as brought all sorts of sufferings
upon them. They were told and expected it would be so; and yet steadfastly,
resolutely and unanimously, give their testimony, and adhere to it to the last,
sealing it with their blood. Now I reckon it morally impossible they should
have acted such a part, had they been conscious of imposture, and known they
were deceiving the world. It is contrary to the human nature, to the principles
of self-preservation, and to that self-love that is natural to every man: for
though the will choose freely and cannot be forced, yet no man can choose evil as
such, choose misery, sufferings, and destruction. So that we have the utmost
security here that these persons were no deceivers, that the Bible is true, and
that it is impossible it should not be so.

I shall only mention one thing more, viz. that it is morally impossible, so
many persons of different sentiments in other things, different interests and
parties, should agree in contriving an imposture, and so many others still of
different interests, and the like, should be imposed upon by it, and none of
the former ever confess, nor any of the latter ever detect the imposture. This
I affirm impossible. We must suppose mankind to have faculties and natures very
different from what they now have, and to be governed by different laws, before
we can admit such a case as possible. There is no sufficient cause of such an
effect; but on the other hand, there are causes, known, certain, and constant,
proceeding from nature, and the governing principles of mankind, that would
produce a contrary effect. It is not possible that among the many thousands
that owned christianity, some especially when they came to sufferings and
death, should not have acknowledged the villainy, had there been any. Surely
some of them would have done it, to have delivered their consciences from
reproach, or at least to have saved their lives. It is not possible, had their
story been false, that their enemies, who were spectators and witnesses of the
facts they report, and to whom they appeal, should be silent, and never
contradict or undertake to disprove them: but instead of it, multitudes of them
be wrought upon to espouse the same cause, and confirm it with their testimony
and blood. Lay such a scheme nearer home and among ourselves, and it will be
easy to see, that a forgery is impossible in any case that bears a tolerable
resemblance to that we are considering.

But I must not dwell any longer upon these things, having considered the
matter more fully before; and only designing by this review a little more
particularly to limit, explain, and confirm the last proposition I advanced,
viz. that circumstances considered, it is morally impossible the Bible should
not be true. Taking it therefore for granted, as a point I have already, I
think, sufficiently proved; that it is true: I now proceed a step further, to
the next thing proposed, which was,

II. To prove, that the Bible is the word of God, or, that the books which
compose our scriptures were given by divine inspiration. I have enlarged upon
the foregoing head, the truth of the sacred history, beyond my first intention,
and indeed had I designed to have taken such a compass, I should have cast part
of my discourse into a different method. I shall endeavor to be shorter on the
present subject, namely, in confirming the inspiration of the sacred scriptures.

What I mean when I say, the penmen thereof were inspired, is that they wrote
under the special and infallible conduct of the Holy Spirit; tha^ the prophets
and apostles, they that were concerned in delivering to us the truths and
doctrines of the Bible, were sont of God and commissioned by him, were stirred
up to their respective undertakings and services by God, by whom they were also
infallibly affisted, so as, that the things they deliver must be esteemed a
revelation from him.

There were indeed different modes of revelation, and different kinds and
degrees of inspiration: as I observed in the first discourse from this text.
God at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke unto the fathers by the
prophets. Sometimes he revealed himself to them by dreams, sometimes by
visions; sometimes by a voice, an audible voice, thus he spoke to Adam,
Abraham, Moses, and others: and sometimes by inward impressions upon the mind
or understanding, which is more properly inspiration.

Sometimes he suggested the very matter and words to them. Sometimes, I
suppose, he left them to the use of their own words, supplying them with the
matter; and in things they were well acquainted with, and recorded as history,
and of which they had been eyewitnesses, all that I think necessary to assert
is, that he concurred with them and assisted as there was occasion, and so as
might secure them from mistake: just as a guide to a traveller, he needs not
direct him in that part of the way he himself knows, it is enough to attend
him, and when he is like to wander, to admonish, or reduce when he does wander.
In a word, by the inspiration of the Bible is meant, that it is a divine
revelation, a revelation from God. The history of it is infallibly true, and
immediately inspired so far as was necessary; the doctrines of it communicated
from heaven, in various ways and different manners, I grant; but all from
heaven; published by persons that had a divine commission, who were sent of God
to make such revelations to the world. The further clearing and stating this
point, I am sensible, would require a great deal of time; but as something was
said of it before, though very short and defective, I shall not resume it, but
directly go on to prove what I am upon, namely, that the Bible is the word of
God, or that the books of the Old and New Testament, are divinely inspired. To
which purpose, I shall lay before you several arguments.

1. The writers of the Bible professed themselves to be inspired, to be sent of
God, and accordingly speak in his name. We have many general assertions with
reference to this; as in the text, All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God. So, 2 Pet. i. 20.21. No prophecy of Scripture is of private
interpretation. For the prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. It is not of
private interpretation, or rather private suggestion or impulse, for so the
word Epilusis may signify, though some crities think that the text should be
read differently, and that Epilusis, is put for Epelusis, thus Calvin, Grotius,
and others, which notes an afflatus or conception within: so that what the
apostle intends is, that the prophecy of Scripture, or the written word, was
not the product of men's own fancies and conceptions; but was by a divine
afflatus, that is, it was given by inspiration of God. And indeed, whether we
have recourse to this criticism or not, and change the reading, for which the
authority of some copies is pleaded, the apostle's reasoning in the words that
immediately follow makes this sense plain, and I think necessary; For, he adds,
prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. If by private interpretation we mean the
expounding of Scripture by particular persons, and every one for himself, as if
that was denied here, to which purpose the papists apply the words, though they
have nothing in them favorable to their cause, except the sound, and build upon
them a necessity of a public authoritative interpreter; if we understand the
text thus, I say, there is no force in what the apostle subjoins. But if we
take Epilusis for inspiration, as I think we are constrained to do, what
follows in ver. 21 is a confirmation of that which is said in the 20th. No
prophecy is by private impulse, for it came not by the will of man, it was not
the issue of their own faculties and reasoning, was not from any motion or
choice of their own, they did not go upon their several errands, and deliver
such and such messages to the world from their own heads; but had a divine
impulse, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. This I take to be the
sense of that text: and so you see it is a full testimony to the truth I am
upon, that the writers of the Scripture were inspired.

The same thing we have elsewhere and often asserted, as Acts iii. 21. God
spoke by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. Acts i. 16.
The Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David. And again, Acts iv. 25. Who by the
mouth of thy servant David has said, why did the heathen rage! etc. referring
to the second Psalm. The prophets were God's messengers, his instruments; he
spoke by them, by all of them since the world began. And we have the same
account given of the apostles. Hence they are mentioned jointly with the
prophets, as the foundation on which we are built. And Christ says to them, It
is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father, that speaks in you.

I may add, that they all profess, for themselves, to be sent from God, to
speak from him, and to deliver his doctrine and message. Moses gives an account
of his commission, of his being sent immediately by God, with the circumstances
thereof; he tells how God appeared to him in a burning bush, as he was keeping
Jethro's flock, and gave him orders to go to Pharaoh and undertake the
deliverance of oppressed Israel. And you know when he afterward came to
deliver laws to that people, he always introduces God as the author of them;
thus you read, the Lord spoke unto him out of the tabernacle, and appointed the
laws and services following. And, God spoke unto Moses, saying, speak unto the
children of Israel, which is constantly repeated when any new matter was to be
laid before them. Nor did the following prophets of the Old Testament pretend
to act without the like authority, the word of the Lord came to them when they
prophesied, thus says the Lord, was the common preface to their messages and
discourses. The same might be observed concerning them that delivered the
doctrine of the New Testament. Christ himself, the great prophet of the church,
owns his commission from the Father, and that he received his doctrine from
him, my doctrine, says he, is not mine, b^^ his that sent me. Again, he that
sent me is true, and I speak unto the world those things which I have heard of
him. And, I do nothing of myself, but as the father has taught me, I speak
these things. To the same purpose, I have not spoken of myself, but the Father
which sent me, he gave me commandment what I should say, and what I should
speak.

The apostles claimed the like authority; I do not mean, equal to Christ, but a
divine mission and authority, as he did; hence when they proceed to the
determination of the question debated in the council at Jerusalem, they
interest the Holy Ghost therein, it seems good to the Holy Ghost, say they, and
lo us, intimating, that what they delivered to the churches the Holy Ghost
delivered; or more properly delivered it by and under his immediate conduct and
direction. The greatest and most copious writer of the New Testament, was the
apostle Paul, and we find him on all occasions asserting his divine authority
and inspiration. He tells the Corinthians that he had received of the Lord,
what he delivered to them. That the things he wrote were the commandments of
God. And to the Galatians, that he was an apostle not of men, neither by man,
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. And how direct that to the
Thessalonians, when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye
received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God. And
St. Peter, speaking of the gospel, says, the Holy Ghost sent it down from
heaven.

This is what the writers of the Scripture profess; many of them in the most
express terms, and you have heard the same is affirmed of all of them. If it be
objected, that impostors have professed the like; many have pretended to
inspiration, that were deluded by their own fancies, or by a warm and heated
imagination, and how do we know that the writers of the Bible were not imposed
upon as well as others. I answer,

1. It is granted, some have been deluded, and have taken their own
imaginations for a divine revelation; but this is no argument that all are so;
and that none ever had a revelation from God. A man may fancy himself awake
when he is in a dream, and have a great many scenes laid before him in his
sleep, which he takes for real, though all be imaginary. But it does not follow
from hence, that he cannot know when he is awake, or be certain that ever he is
awake, or of any thing that is transacted before him, or that he himself does
when he is awake. No more does it follow that because some persons of
distempered brains have thought themselves inspired, when they were not, that
none could ever know that they were inspired.

2. I would ask the objectors here, whether they will allow that God is able to
reveal himself to any part of mankind, so that they shall be certain of the
revelation? If not, they suppose God has less power and skill than men have,
who can express their minds to their fellow creatures in such a manner, as that
they are sure who it is that speaks to them, and what it is they speak. And if
God is able to do this, the objection falls to the ground. Some persons may
then have a revelation from him, any may, to whom he pleases to vouchsafe it,
in which they may rest assured there is no imposture or delusion.

3. The persons inspired might know by inward sensation and feeling, that they
were inspired, and that God spoke to them; and I doubt not, with as an
infallible a certainty as we know when another person, like ourselves, is
conversing with us, and speaking to us. God might make such an impression upon
their senses and minds as carried its own evidence with it, and though we that
are utterly strangers to such a communication with God, have no idea or notion
of it, they that were concerned could feel it, and knew how to distinguish it.
To clear this in all the instances of inspiration, by voices, dreams, visions,
and more direct and mental inspiration, as I may call it, would require a long
discourse of itself, which I know you will excuse me from, though a subject
well worthy our serious thoughts, was this a place for it. I will only say, if
we allow God is able to make any revelation of himself, we must suppose he can
do it in a way that is distinct and certain: and I need not scruple to add,
that the person to whom he makes it, may discern it by the faculties to which
he applies in his revelation, as clearly as we do our mutual discourie, the
communication we have one with another.

4. There was nothing that looks like delusion in the case of these sa^red
writers and preachers. They had all the marks of a regular head and of a calm
sedate mind, that can be; had none of the heats of enthusiasts so far as
appears. And particularly they were not credulous, did not seem forward to the
wo^^ they engaged in; nor to have any preparation and bent toward the service
they undertook. You know what objections Moses made against the errand God
called him to, who am I, says he, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I
should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? They will not believe
me nor hearken to my voice. And after God had condescended to give him
satisfaction in this matter, still he objects, O my Lord, I am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy fervant. And
notwithstanding God had promised to be with him and assist him, his reluctance
still remains. O my Lord, send I pray th^e by the hand of him whom thou will
send. So little was this person prepared to be played upon and abused, either
by his own imagination or the management of others.

And the like might be observed of the apostles. They were themselves very much
prejudiced against the main articles of the doctrines that they were to teach
the world, viz. the death and resurrection of Christ. Though their master had
often spoke thereof to them they could not believe it, nor did they understand
him: so far from it, that when it came to pass and he was actually put to
death, their hopes seemed to die with him, we trusted, say they, that it had
been he which should have redeemed Israel. Words of despair, intimating they
thought their cause lost and ruined. So when they were told of his
resurrection, it is said, the words seemed to them as idle tales, and they
believed them not. This was the case of the apostles at that time. The apostle
Paul was not then of their number, but afterward called to the same office,
and had an eminent part in publishing the doctrine of the New Testament, and I
need not tell you that he had even stronger prejudices than the rest against
the cause he espoused. He persecuted Christ in his members with the utmost
fury; and so much had his zeal blinded him, that as he owns in his defense
before Agrippa, he verily thought with himself he ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. In which temper of mind divine
grace, and the call of God sound him. Now how little there is in all this of
the characters of enthusiasin, how opposite and contrary it is thereto, every
one may easily discern. Enthusiasts generally have a preparation in the bent
and temper of their mind, to receive the delusion; they readily believe that to
be true, which they would have to be true: they are prejudiced in favor of
their pretended revelation. Whereas, the prejudices of these persons lay the
other way, and were so strong that it is plain they would not act without full
conviction of the call of God, and till they were overpowered, as I may say,
into the belief of it. I add,

5 That no scruples might remain God gave them such evidence of his speaking to
them and of their mission as could not be resisted. Let us suppose, that when
God spoke to Moses in Horeb out of the burning bush, he might doubt whether it
was real or not, whether he was in a dream or trance, whether it was not some
unaccountable phoenomenon that had nothing of divinity in it, or the artifice
of an evil spirit. Suppose this I say, he could not doubt any longer when God
bid him cast his rod upon the ground and it became a serpent. Much less could
he carry his scruple with him in all his journey from Horeb to Egypt, and still
maintain it after all that passed in Egypt; after he had by the power of God
wrought so many miracles there, in the presence of Pharaoh and of the
Israelites. He that can suppose this is too great a skeptic to be reasoned
with; and indeed it is impossible he should, upon his principles, be certain of
the reality of any thing that he sees or hears, or that he himself does. God
reveals himself to Moses, that is the thing I am asserting, and that he might
be sure of the revelation, he first summons and awakens his attention by a
strange appearance, a bush all in a flame and not consumed. Then he speaks to
him out of the bush in a manner that no question, had something great and
majestic in it, and brought along with it evidence of divinity. And that Moses
might be able to satisfy others, and at the same time be further satisfied
himself, for what would do the one, must be sufficient to do the other, he
enables him to work a miracle, and afterward repeat that, and do many more
miracles. All which considered, I think it even impossible that Moses should be
deceived; and if any are so resolute, as to suppose he might be under a
delusion, notwithstanding all this security to the contrary, they must be
forced to say that God cannot reveal himself to mankind with certainty, or
mankind is not capable of receiving the revelation, which comes to the same
thing.

I might illustrate the argument in many more instances, particularly in that
of the apostles. But I will only observe, that when they were first called to
their office they labored under a great many inabilities, wanted light, wisdom,
courage; and were no way equal to so difficult a work as lay before them, viz.
preaching the gospel to and proselyting all nations. This they were but meanly
qualified for, and therefore their great master, when he took leave of them
just before his ascension, bid them tarry at Jerusale^ until they were endued
with power from on high. What this power was we are told, Acts i. 8. Ye shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be
witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost part of the earth. This he promised, and in the second of
Acts you have an history of the great event, an account of the accomplishment
of the promise, when the Holy Ghost fell upon them at the day of Pentecost. The
consequence of which was their speaking all sorts of tongues which they had
never learned, to the amazement of those that heard them, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. Now as this was the power from on high, their master had given them reason
to expect, and an eminent instance of their inspiration; so it was a sensible
thing and carried its own evidence along with it; they found that change in
themselves, that exaltation of their faculties, that new light in their minds,
and that new furniture of strength and ability communicated to them, that they
could no more question the thing, nor that it was from God, than that they
could question their own beings, and whether they were men or not. If their
senses and faculties might deceive them in this particular, they might deceive
them in all other things; and I think I may add, all other men in all other
instances may be deceived; and consequently it will be true, in the strictest
sense, we are, and can be, certain of nothing.

So that thus far, I would hope the way is tolerably clear. The writers of
Scripture affirm themselves to be inspired; and they could not be under a
delusion, but might know whether they were inspired or not.

But it may here again be asked, how does this prove the point I bring it for,
namely, that they were inspired? they might impose upon us, and take upon them
to be inspired, to be sent of God, and to be entrusted with a revelation from
heaven, when they were not. We have only their bare word for it. I answer,

1. All the arguments I before produced, to prove their history true, will
conclude in their behalf in the present case. I have given you sufficient
evidence that there were such persons, that they did the things they relate,
that the matters of fact they record were genuine, that they had all the
characters of ingenuity, integrity, and veracity, that any historians ever had,
or can have, and that if we cannot believe them, and depend on their testimony,
it follows, none in the world are to be believed in any of their reports; that
there is no such thing as credible history, and as was further argued in a
former discourse, no safe converse; all mutual trust and converse is destroyed;
and in a word, human society must be dissolved. This it was proved, would be
the consequence of denying the credit and refusing the testimony of persons so
qualified, as the writers of the Bible were. And, I think, it needs no proof,
that if we cannot believe them in this part of their testimony concerning their
inspiration and divine mission, we may believe them in nothing. So that the
result is this, if there be any sufficient witnesses among mankind, these were
such; if any true history, the Bible is true, and if the Bible be true it was
inspired.

2. To suppose them guilty of forgery, and to pretend to a commission and
revelation from God, when they knew they had none, is to make them act contrary
to all the principles of human nature that we are acquainted with. It makes
them guilty, not only of an unprofitable, but of a destructive lie. They knew,
according to the rules of the religion they propagated, they could have no
reward in another world; and they knew as certainly they must be undone in this
world. And what sort of creatures must we suppose them, if we make them act so
extravagant a part, exposing themselves as they did without any motive. For
instance, what temptation could Moses have to forego the honors and preferment
in Pharaoh's court, and choose to suffer affliction with the people of God, had
he not been assured of a di^^^e call? What could induce the apostles to follow
Christ through sufferings, persecution and death, had they been conscious of a
lie, questioned the authority of their master, or their own sincerity, in
engaging in his service? Would the apostle Paul, think you, have renounced the
commission he had from the great men of the Jewish church, with all the
advantages he expected from them, and become a preacher of Christ, upon no
other prospect but bonds, imprisonment, and martyrdom? Would he have done this,
had he not been assured of the justice of the cause he espoused, and (...) the
certainty of the heavenly vision, as he calls it? So that we have not only an
argument taken from their veracity, but a strong evidence arising out of the
principles of the human nature. To suppose they were deceivers in this
instance, is to suppose them ruining themselves for nothing, guilty of the
greatest wickedness without any reason, and doing evil for evil's-sake; which
it may be is more than can be charged on the devil himself. Again,

3. They not only said they were inspired, but proved it by a train of facts
that alarmed and amazed them. God gave satisfaction to Moses concerning his
mission by enabling him to work miracles upon the spot, as you read in the
third and fourth of Exodus. And by the same means, viz. a course of miracles,
he gave the same satisfaction to the Israelites concerning it. Christ sent the
apostles, they were assured, as otherwise, so by the power from on high, that
he had sent them, and by exerting that power in a series of supernatural
miraculous works, they gave sufficient evidence to the world of their divine
mission, that God had sent them, and spoke by them, and that he owned their
testimony and doctrine; as I may more fully show hereafter.

This is the first argument, the authors of the Bible profess themselves to be
inspired; wherein I have shown, that they could not but know whether they were
or not; and that they cannot reasonably be supposed to deceive us in their
testimony. I go on now to another argument, which I shall go through more
briesly.

II. As the writers of the Scripture profess to have their doctrine from God,
so it could not be the invention of men. This will abundantly appear in the
progress of my discourses. What I at present ground my argument upon, is, the
i^^ability of men to contrive such a book as the Bible, of men as such, or of
any sort of men.

It could not be the contrivance of bad men. Had they invented a religion,
surely they would have made it more favorable to their own inclinations, lusts
and appetites; would not have fettered themselves, laid themselves under such
restraints as the Bible does, and denounced such tremendous judgments against
the ways they choose and love; they would not have consulted so entirely the
honor of God, and the reputation of virtue and goodness, as we find the
Scripture does; but would have calculated it more according to their own
natures and designs. I may add, could we suppose them capable of this, which
yet is to make them act contrary to their nature, we cannot imagine they should
be at so much expense to promote the cause of the Bible, sacrifice their
worldly interests, and even their lives for the sake of it. Did ever bad men
act such a part, contrive the greatest good, suffer and die to advance it.

It could not be the contrivance of good men. This supposition involves them in
a guilt, perfectly inconsistent with their character. They speak, as you have
heard, in the name of God, and profess to have received their doctrine from
him. Now if it was otherwise, and they were conscious of a forgery, they must
be the grossest impostors in the world, which is so directly contrary to all
virtue and honesty, that it can never be imputed to any man that deserves the
name of good. In short, the former supposition makes bad men do the best thing
that can be, and this makes good men do the worst; both which are absurd.

It could not be the invention of any man or men. This might be demonstrated,
had I time to stay upon it; and several things will afterward occur that may
confirm the assertion. No man nor body of men could invent such an history as
that of the Bible. A learned Jew, Manasseh Ben Israel, instances in the account
Moses gives of the creation, which he maintains could not be his own invention.
For no man's reason, says he, will dictate to him that the world was made in
six days, and at certain intervals of time, since it is more for the glory of
God's power to make the world in an instant. Who can imagine, adds he, that the
heavens were made without the stars, and adorned with them on the fourth day?
What judicious mind can conceive that the plants were created on the third day,
and the sun on the fourth, since naturally they receive their vegetation from
the sun? He mentions other particulars, and concludes, the creation of the
world was revealed to Adam, and that his posterity had it by tradition from
him. But because it was not fit, a thing of such weight should rely on the
authority of one man, God in the second place appeared to Moses on mount Sinai,
and gave him a clear assurance of these things. Whether this be thought
throughout solid or not, the subject he refers to must pass for a pertinent
instance of a history that has something more than human in it. Longinus the
heathen philosopher, and master of Porphyry, is said to have admired Moses's
history of the creation; and he makes the account of the first day's work, an
instance of the true sublime. There is indeed more satisfaction in it about the
original of the world, the author of it, and manner of creation, than in all
the books of Pagan philosophy.

And what shall we say of the many events recorded in the Bible in a prophetic
manner? Some of them many hundreds, and some several thousand years before they
came to pass. I cannot enter upon the particulars now, though I may do it
hereafter, any one that seriously considers the predictions recorded in the
Scripture, must see it could be indicted by no understanding less th^n infinite.

I might take notice of the doctrine of the Bible, and show how much this
exceed^ human invention. How majestic and sublime a part of it? How admirably
the whole is sitted to the circumstances of man, prescribing to him in every
relation and case, answering all his occasions and necessities; and every way
adapted at once to promote his happiness and the honor of God. These and a
great many other particulars that might be insisted upon, show that the Bible
could not be the invention of any human mind, of any man or men, of whatever
quality or capacity; and fully prove what the apostle afferts, that no prophecy
of Scripture is of private inspiration, or impulse, that it came not by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

I have several other arguments to offer, to confirm the assertion, but must
leave them to another opportunity. In the mean time I cannot help remarking,
how unreasonable the cause of infidelity is. The deists and others, that reject
the authority of the Bible, do it upon a pretense that would ruin all the
history in the world, destroy all human trust and testimony, and introduce
universal sceptiscism. For if the persons, who published the Bible, might not
be certain of what they saw and felt, of the facts they relate, and inspiration
they pretend to, no man can be certain of any thing whatsoever. If we may not
depend on such testimony as that of those persons, we can depend upon no
testimony, nor believe any thing unless we see it, nor indeed then neither. For
if they might be deceived and deluded, so may others, all others; it could not
be expected that any should have a greater assurance of things than they had,
and consequently, there is an end of all evidence even of that of the senses;
an end of all trust, of all certainty: so very absurd is the issue of
infidelity.

And I cannot forbear adding, it would be well for these men, ^^at cannot rest
in the evidence of the truth and divinity of the Scriptures, could they carry
their sceptiscism with them into the other world. But these unreasonable cavils
by which they now support the worst cause, will then vanish, and all will
appear real; the truths they despised real, the distresses they feel real, and
neither the one nor the other to be run down with a jest and a banter. O let us
believe this beforehand, believe Moses and the prophets, Christ and his
apostles, that we come not to the place of torments, and there receive a
terrible, as well as unavoidable conviction; believe and reverence the
Scriptures, and conduct ourselves according to the glorious rules thereof. It
is the Bible that describes heaven and the way to it: it is the light by which
a wise and gracious God would guide us through this world, a dark and dangerous
place, and the more we love, study and practice the Holy Scripture, the more we
shall know of the future heavenly state, and the fitter we shall be for the
enjoyments of it. Let the word of God therefore dwell richly in you. Peace
shall be upon all them that walk according to this rule, and upon the Israel of
God.

DISCOURSE VI. THE DIVINE ORIGINAL AND INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


THE divine authority and inspiration of the Scriptures, is what I am now
endeavoring to prove. To this purpose I have observed, I. That the writers of
the Bible profess themselves inspired, and speak in the name of God. II. That
the doctrine they deliver could not be the invention of men. I proceed now to
another particular. III. The Scripture has several internal marks of its divine
original; several inherent characters which may be urged in confirmation of the
point before us. That it was given by inspiration of God. As 1. The excellency
of its doctrine. 2. The spirituality of its design and tendency. 3. The majesty
and simplicity of its style. 4. The harmony and agreement of its parts. And 5.
Its efficacy and power on the hearts and consciences of men.
These are characters of its divinity, such as are inhere^t, which may be
observed in the frame and constitution of the Bible; and all of them proclaim
its divine original, though some with more force than others.


1. The excellency of its doctrine, is an internal character of its divinity.
The Bible contains the most glorious system of religion. Consider the general
scheme of it, and it will appear a revelation admirably suited to the case and
circumstances of men, and every way worthy of God.

That we are fallen creatures, and, as such, guilty and defiled, all the world
is, or may be convinced by their own experience. The wiser heathens were
sensible of this, though how to account for it they knew not. Whence comes
evil? was a question they could not resolve. What more agreeable to the
acknowledged perfections of God, that infinite goodness, kindness, and love we
ascribe to the Creator of the world, and Father of all things, than to pity,
relieve, and restore his lost creatures? And what method more congruous and
suitable to that end, than that which is laid down in the Scripture, namely, by
repentance, and remission of sins through the mediation and atonement of the
Lord Jesus Christ? What was more necessary for God to do for us, than to
forgive our ill, and make us good again? And what way to remove the guilt of
sin, but his grace, since it was impossible we should make him satisfaction? As
for the method in which he has done it, by the sacrifice of his Son, though we
cannot at present comprehend the depth of that design, it appears however a
dispensation full of wisdom and goodness, highly tending to advance the honor
of God, and secure the gratitude and obedience of the creature. This is the
general scope of all the evangelical writings. They represent the plan and
council of infinite wisdom for the salvation of sinners through the Lord Jesus,
make known the purpose of God for the redemption and recovery of fallen man,
the method, means, and terms thereof; a contrivance so wonderfully adapted to
the great end it is refferred to, and including so profound a mystery both of
wisdom and grace as speaks its author, and shows it could not be of man, but
from God.

Which would appear with greater advantage, could we here survey more
particularly the doctrines of the Scripture. The Bible is a revelation, a
distinct and full revelation, of all that concerns our duty and happiness, of
all that it behooves us to know and practice. I might illustrate this, in the
three great branches of religion, as it refers to God, our neighbor and
ourselves. With reference to God, we are there instructed in all the
particulars of religion as he is the object of it. For instance, we have a
glorious discovery of the divine nature and will. I grant that the being and
attributes of God are not to be proved from Scripture, a belief and some
knowledge of these is supposed to the belief of the Bible. The divine
perfections, especially his goodness and veracity or truth, are the greatest
security we can have that we are not deceived in embracing the Scriptures as a
divine revelation. And these perfections are otherwise to be demonstrated and
must be known beforehand. The evidence of them does not first and chiefly
depend on the account we have of them in the Bible. But notwithstanding, it may
justly be reckoned among the benefits and advantages of Scripture revelation,
and among the excellencies thereof, that it gives us so clear a view of the
perfections of the divine nature. Moses and the prophets revealed God to the
world, and the only begotten Son, that lay in the bosom of the Father, who is
the brightness of his glory, the express image of his person, has more fully
revealed him. The Bible makes God known in his nature as the one God, the
living and true God, infinitely wise, powerful, just and good; the blessed and
only potentate, who alone has immortality, whom no man has seen, or can see.
It makes known the glorious mystery of the trinity, represents the three divine
persons jointly carrying on the work of our salvation, acting several and
distinct parts in this great affair, according to the council of the divine
will, and all conspiring in the same design and end. A dispensation of wisdom
and grace, that no book in the world can pretend to give an account of but the
Bible.

We have here also a full discovery of our duty toward God in the disserent
parts thereof; as, that we must love him with all our heart, soul, mind and
strength; that we fear him, and fear him above all others, as being able to
cast both body and soul into hell; that we trust in him, hope in him, rejoice
in him, and the like; that we worship him, outwardly by prayer, praise,
thanksgiving and fasting; and as to the manner, that we worship him in spirit
and in truth; that we lift up holy hands without wrath and doubting, and that
we do every thing in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the
Father by him. A glorious plan of religious worship this! grounded upon the
perfections of the divine nature, and mediation of Christ, and admirably
corresponding with the case and necessities of sinful man.

As to our duty toward our neighbor, nothing can exceed the rules and
prescriptions of the Scripture herein. We are commanded to love our neighbor as
ourselves; and whatever we would that men should do to us, we are required to
do even so to them; which glorious and divine laws the great author of the
Bible has there more particularly explained, and filled up with such instances
of justice, charity and love, that nothing can be added to them. He requires,
that we put away all bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil-speaking; that
we lie not one to another, nor take up a reproach against our neighbor; that we
be gentle and courteous, that we be kind to one another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God forgives us; that we walk with all lowliness
and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; that we owe
no man any thing but love; and in a word, that we imitate the great pattern of
goodness, our heavenly Father, and with a charity as extensive as the beams and
influence of the sun, do good against evil, bless them that curse us; forgive,
pray for, and love our enemies, and overcome evil with good.

I might show at large, what provision is made, in the rules laid down in the
Scripture, for the duty and comfort of the several special relations men stand
in toward one another. In whatever stations men are placed, by the providence
of God, the way of duty is there made plain before them; which did they mind
and pursue, the consequence would be the beauty and order of the world, the
peace and harmony of society. Every office, was it discharged according to the
direction of God's word, would appear glorious and useful among mankind, and
every relation amiable and comfortable. The magistrate is here taught how to be
a guardian of the society, to defend and serve it in all useful ministries,
agreeably to the original design and institution of his office, and therefore
he is required to be just, ruling in the fear of God, to be a terror to evil
works, and a praise to the good. Parents are here taught, with what tenderness
and care, to conduct and provide for their children; to treat them as an holy
seed, conseerated to God, bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. And that most intinate relation between husband and wife is made an
emblem and sigure of the relation between Christ and the church. The husband is
to love his wise, as Christ the church, the wife to observe and reverence her
husband, as the church does Christ; and both together are to make up a lively
image of the love and subjection there is between Christ and the church. And
should I pursue the account through all other relations, as subjects and
children, ministers and people, masters and servants; and set before you the
several precepts and rules of Scripture for the conduct of persons in those
relations, the excellency of the doctrine of the Bible might be demonstrated
from thence to the conviction of all. It would appear, how well it is
calculated to promote the good of society, and that it must proceed, not only
from a friend to mankind, but one that perfectly understands the human nature,
that knows what there is in man, and what man is; what is the just decorum of
every action, and what becomes him in every state; that understands his
interests, defects and wants; what belongs to his whole duty, and what would
contribute to his happiness.

But to touch a little the next particular, our duty toward ourselves, here
the Bible exceeds all other institutes, all the laws and maxims of the moral
philosophers, though it is granted, some of them have spoke admirably on this
head. The Scripture above all other books teaches us the knowledge of
ourselves. It enjoins, that we should not think of ourselves more highly than
we ought to think, but to think sobely, according as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith. And it has directed us to make a right estimate of
ourselves, preferring the soul to the body, and the interests thereof, to all
the little concerns of the present life. Which is the import of Christ's
doctrine, What is a man prosited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? The Scripture
teaches us the proportion of our cares, and the moderation and government of
our passions in a most exact and divine manner. Tells us one thing is needful,
bids us not labor for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures unto
everlasting life, to take no thought for the body, saying, what shall we eat,
or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed. And because the
mind of man is too confined and limited to be intent upon two studies at once,
which tend to divide and distract it, we cannot serve two masters, we are
therefore required to give up the one, whenever it comes in competition with
the other, and to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.

And how many and excellent its rules concerning sobriety, moderation,
humility, temperance, chastity, and the like. It enjoins us to mortify our
members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections
and evil concupiscence; to take heed lest our hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life; to possess our vessel in
fanctification and honor; to be content with such things as we have, and to
depend on the providence and promise of God, who has said, he will never leave
us nor forsake us. In a word, the Bible prescribes to men in every state and
circumstance, and lays down most excellent laws and rules, such as tend to
reform and perfect their natures, to make them comfortable, useful and happy in
this and the other world; it regulates their desires, passions and affections,
and as it is in the verse following the text, is able to make the man of God
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

Let me add what I observed before, viz. Whatever is excellent in natural
religion, and to be found among the philosophers, is all of it taken into the
Bible. And further, the Bible represents the same with much advantage; what
lies scattered in the books of the heathen philosophers, and must have been
gathered from thence with much care and difficulty, is here brought to our
hands and set before us in a short summary, truths that were hid under much
rubbish and mixed with many mistakes are here pure and clear, and without
adulteration. And again, the Bible supplies the defects of natural religion;
some of these have been before taken notice of, and I shall now enlarge.

Natural religion, or the light of reason, says nothing of the mystery and
redemption of the Son of God incarnate, it discovers nothing certainly of the
pardon of sin, the terms and means of it, and nothing at all of the atonement
by the sacrifice of Christ; it leaves us very much in the dark about the main
article and foundation of all religion, a future eternal state of rewards and
punishments; and indeed is lame and imperfect, as to moral duties and virtues.
It is observable, that the philosophers have no name for that eminent christian
grace of humility. What we call so, passes with them for abjectness and lowness
of mind; nay, so unaccountable was their vanity, that they thought a wise man
might make himself happy, and was not beholden to God for his virtues.
Aristotle places several things in the clastes of virtues, which the Scripture
brands as vices and sinful disorders; as indignation and displeasure at the
prosperity of unworthy men, so expressly censured in many places of the Bible;
a disposition to jesting, a lightness of discourse, the philosopher represents
as a virtue, and the apostle condemns as not convenient among christians, not
being suitable to the gravi^y with which a christian ought to conduct himself.
Greatness of mind, which he defines, a man's judging himself to be worthy of
great things, and accordingly pursuing them with an elevation of mind; thi^
also has the character of a virtue and excellency with that philosopher. But
how contrary it is to that modesty, abasement, and self-denial, the becoming
little children, saying, after we have done all, that we are unprofitable
servants, which the Scripture recommends I need not stand to show.

I might observe, that several of the greatest philosophers allowed lying,
theft, fornication, selfmurder, etc. Even the famous Cato thought it was a
point of honor to make away his own life, rather than fall into the hands of
Caesar: which Seneca, one of their strictest moralists, is so far from blaming
in him, that he undertakes his vindication, and applauds him for the greatness
of his mind. Thus mixed and corrupted was their divinity, even among those that
had most refined it.

But nothing of this can be charged upon the Scripture. It has none of these
blemishes and defects. As it supplies what is wanting in their religion, so it
corrects what is wrong in their edition of morality. It recommends every grace,
prescribes an entire holiness without any blots and stains, according to that
of the Psalmist, which he mentions as an encomium upon the word of God, and one
reason of his affection to it, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment
of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes; the fear of the Lord, that is, the
word or law of God teaching religion, or the fear of the Lord, is clean,
enduring forever. These are properties of the law of God, these are
excellencies of the Scripture. It contains a doctrine according to Godliness,
admirably suited to promote the great ends of religion and Godliness in the
world. And though I will not call this, and the other argument under this class
and order, demonstration; yet I think they have a great deal of force in them.
It is certain, if we might expect a revelation from God, the Scripture is such
a revelation as we might expect from him. It is a revelation every way becoming
him; and to suppose it came from an impostor, as must be the case if it be not
from God, is very unreasonable and ab^^^d. It is in its contrivance above the
reach and capacity of any man, and it is manifest, the structure and frame of
it is quite contrary to the gust and heart of a bad man.

2. The spirituality of its nature, its divine tendency, may be pleaded to the
same purpose, and reckoned among the internal characters and marks of its
divinity. And here I might take notice that no book condemns sin like the
Bible, and appears against it with so strong an opposition. It strikes at the
very root of it in the thoughts, heart and desires, and pursues it through
every part of the conversation and life; represents it as the abominable thing
which God hates, and threatens it with eternal death.

I might also remark, that no book so much and so effectually teaches us to
deny self and exalt God, as the Bible does; to refer all to him, and give him
the glory of every attainment.

Thus the apostle, by the grace of God I am what I am. And having taken notice
of his labors, his more abundant labors, in the service of the gospel, he adds,
nevertheless, not I, but the grace of God which was with me. And elsewhere, I
am less than the least of all saints. And again, though I be nothing. Where
will you find any strains like this in all the volumes of the philosophers. So
far from it, that pride and self-exaltation was their great idol; honor,
applause, and glory, the main spring of all their actions; even of their more
generous achievements, when they sacrificed their lives for the good of their
country. But the Bible breaths all self-denial, it teaches, that whether we eat
or drink, or whatever we do, we should do all to the glory of God; that we
should not receive honor from men, but be content with the honor that comes
from God only.

I will only subjoin under this head as a glorious character of Scripture, that
it every where recommends and promotes a right frame and posture of soul
toward God, and what I may call a devotional temper. The main scope of heathen
philosophy, was to regulate the passions, which it is granted was a noble
subject; or to direct them in homiletical and social virtues. The first tended
to fit them for converse with themselves, and the other with their fellow
creatures. But for converse and intercourse with God in the exercise of divine
graces, those moralists knew little of it. There is a deep silence in their
writings about it. And I am sorry to find there is so much of the like defect
in the discourses and writings of others, whose business and profession it is
to explain the Bible, and recommend the religion there taught to the world. In
the mean time, the Scripture has this mark of divinity in it throughout; every
part of divine revelation leads to God, to a devout communion and converse with
him; and in order to this it directs us to beg for the holy spirit, to sanctify
the nature, impress, renew, and transform the mind, and thereby prepare us for
this divine and heavenly employment. It prescribes rules of inward and outward
purity, that we may not lose the devout frame. It appoints solemn ordinances as
so many means and opportunities of intercourse with God. And I might show you
that this has been the temper of good men in every age of revelation. How much
it was of David particularly, under the Old Testament, every one knows that has
read and considered his Psalms. You often hear him speaking in these, and the
like strains, As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God. In thy favor is life, thy loving kindness is better than
life. A day in thy courts is better than a thousand. My soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have
seen thee in the sanctuary. Nor are these expressions of the peculiar
experience of David, but pious breathings that in some measure suit all good
men, and describe the heart and frame of the church of God. And you have a
great deal to the like purpose in the book of Canticles, which must also be
understood in the same latitude.

In short the Bible is a book of devotion: so it may not unfitly be termed. It
not only prescribes it, but seems very much calculated to promote it. Its
principles and articles of faith, its rules and laws, its ordinances of
worship, are all directed to this end; to elevate and raise the mind to God, to
bring him and his soul near together. The spirit and grace it bestows are for
the same purpose given to refine the nature, purify the heart, and fit the soul
for the divine presence and embraces. And accordingly all the great heroes of
the Bible, those divine souls that have lived under the impression of its
doctrines, have been men of devotion, a temper that the greatest among the
philosophers, as I have hinted, were very much strangers to.

Now from hence without further enlargement, I think I may justly piece this
among the characters of divinity, that we may discern upon the Scripture. It is
pure and spiritual, wholly favors of God. It so directly leads to him in the
design of it, that one cannot but infer it comes from him. It teaches to live
godly, as well as soberly and righteously. It prescribes an high point, the
dignity and glory of human minds, which the light of nature and the philosophy
of the heathens fell short of, viz. a friendly commerce with God.

3. There is something in the style of the Scripture, that favors of divinity.
As for instance, the majesty and grandeur of it. I do not mean with respect to
pompous figures, or any rhetorical flourishes and flights of oratory: but with
respect to the authority with which it speaks. It speaks in the name of the
great God, the maker of heaven and earth, and demands the attention of the
whole world. Some have observed there is a great deal of majesty in that often
repeated expression of our Savior, he that has ears to hear, let him hear.
Which is a solemn admonition to mankind of the mighty importance of the thing
spoken. What I would chiefly remark, is the awful sanctions with which this
book enforces its laws and precepts, no less than eternal rewards and eternal
punishments. Hear, and your soul shall live. He that believes shall be saved;
and he that believes not shall be damned. Such as this, is the language of the
Scripture, and hereby it is too sublime and great for any human lawgiver. How
far any might have gone in this way, personating the supreme majesty of God,
and abusing the world with a counterfeit of his divine authority, is not easy
to say. But it has been observed, that no book has ever yet come forth, that
has spoke with such a sublimity and height of sovereignty, as the Bible does.

Further, there is an admirable simplicity mixed with the authority. This
appears in the laws contained in the Scriptures, particularly, the ten
commandments. Every thing is delivered with an air of greatness, and yet with a
plainness that cannot be enough admired. Thou shall have no other gods before
me. Thou shall not make unto thyself any graven image, etc.. Thou shall not
take the ^ame of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall
not steal, and the like. I know some make this, which they call a lowness and
flatness of style, an objection against the divinity of the Bible. But it is a
cavil without all reason. There is really a grande^^^ in such simplicity. Even
human lawgivers would think it a diminution to them to deliver their laws in
the strain of an orator, Speeches from the throne, the edicts of princes, and
acts of parliament, come forth in naked plain terms, and the greater their
simplicity and plainness, the greater marks of authority they have in them.
Persons whose business it is to persuade, address to the passions of men, and
make use of their art; but where the highest authority speaks, and the will of
the speaker is a law, the more plainness there is in the style, the more
authoritative it appears.

There is the like simplicity in the narrations and history of Scripture. The
writers delivered things without disguise, relate facts, even the most
wonderful and surprising, and their several circumstances, with freedom and
boldness; like men that are conscious of their integrity, and depend upon the
dignity and importance of the things they report, and the authority of him that
sent them. They make use of no artful apologies, nor studied addresses, to
possess their readers in their favor. When they command it is with a majestic
plainness, as those that speak in the name of God, and when they relate past
things it is with the like simplicity, as those that speak in the name of
truth, as I may say.

Now this is so far from being the manner of impostors and cheats, that it is
not really the manner of common men. I do not think any men, left to the
conduct of their own wisdom and understanding, would have represented such
things, as the Bible contains, in the way the writers of it do; making their
reports, and delivering their messages with a freedom and indifference of
style, that may seem rather to favor of carelessness, than any thing of
affectation. And though I do not say, that these, and the like properties and
characters of the Scripture style, are a full argument of its divinity; yet I
cannot help thinking the style thereof has a great deal in it recommending; it
is something worthy of God, and what one might expect in a divine revelation.

4. The harmony and agreement of the several parts of the Bible is another mark
and character of the inspiration of the writers thereof. Particularly, there is
an harmony in the greatest point of all, I mean exact truth. Survey the
Scriptures from the beginning to the end, examine the part every penman has
born in this composure, and there is nothing to be found, but what can stand
the test of the most severe and critical judgment. It may be affirmed of all
the sacred writings without exception, what is affirmed of some part, these
sayings are faithful and true. Let us reflect a little on this matter. The
Scripture consists of three sorts of subjects, doctrines, histories, and
prophecies. And in none of these can it be convicted of falsehood. As to its
doctrines, you have heard that it comprises a very glorious and large system,
articles of faith, rules of practice, all were concerned to know, believe, and
do; our whole duty toward God, our neighbor, and ourselves. And in all this
there is no flaw, no false doctrine. No caviller in the world is able to
pronounce upon evidence concerning any principal, maxim, or rule laid down in
the Bible, that it is corrupt and erroneous; what cannot bear the trial of
sound and impartial reason. As to the historical and prophetical part, it is of
great extent, takes in a compass of some thousand years; and yet here one may
challenge all the adversaries of the Scripture to produce a single instance of
mistake, any facts misrepresented, or any predictions given forth, disgraced by
the event; which is a circumstance that distinguishes it from all human
composures, and gives it a sort of triumph over all competitors. In the best
writings of uninspired men there are marks of frailty and infirmity, weakness
of judgments, slips of memory, inconclusive arguments, mistaken facts, and the
like. But there is nothing of this in the Bible. All is without a blot, true
and irreproveable.

Further, this harmony is among all the writers of the Scriptures. They not
only speak truths, but many of them the very same particular truths. When they
touch the same doctrine they give the same account of it, the same in the main,
no one contradicting or interfering with another. They teach the same things
concerning God, his nature, attributes, providence and government; give the
same account of the creation, apostasy, general flood, and other facts of
ancient date. The New Testament writers deliver the same things concerning
Christ, his incarnation, death, burial, resurrection, ascension; his doctrine,
miracles; the coming of the Holy Ghost, and the like. Not that they copy from
one another, or express the same particular thoughts upon every subject. But
there is no repugnancy among them. They harmonise in every thing. One may
enlarge upon and explain what another has said, add to his account and carry it
further; but he never contradicts him.

Again, this harmony is among a great number of persons, living in very distant
places and ages of the world; so that they could not act by confederacy and
combination. The prophets that follow Moses, and who confirm his history, laws
and predictions, had, many of them, never seen him. Christ and his apostles,
that lived above a thousand years after Moses, all agree with him. In short,
they are all of a piece; their revelations, their doctrines and narrations,
accord as much as if they had lived at the same time; had done every thing by
concert and contrivance before one word was written. This will appear
afterward with more advantage when I speak of the prophecies of the Bible, and
their accomplishment. I shall only at present mention one instance for the
illustration of what I am upon. Moses writes that the seed of the woman should
bruise the serpent's head. This was a promise made to our first parents in
paradise immediately upon the apostasy, about four thousand years before it
came to pass. This Moses records, places in his history, lays his credit upon
it, and leaves it to the examination of after ages. The succeeding prophets
likewise, all with one voice bear testimony to the same thing, point out the
same glorious event till it was actually accomplished. They resume the subject
and comment upon it, one after another, and in one age after another, still
enlightening it more and more, one adding this, another a different
circumstance; as of what family he should come, of what person, namely, a
virgin, where he should be born, at what time, and the like; which I take to be
an irresistible evidence of their inspiration, and that their prophecy came not
of their own will, but that they spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost;
otherwise they could never have agreed in an event so strange and surprising as
this. Had Moses spoke of it on his own head, what could induce the other
prophets to venture upon the same prediction, with more particular and
determining circumstances. This would never have been the doctrine of one
prophet, retouched and enlarged by others, and confirmed by all, had they not
been guided by the same spirit, and proceeded under the conduct of God. In a
word, all the parts of the Bible are in close connection, and like the several
parts of a regular building, give strength and support to one another. The Old
Testament contains the New in types, shadows and predictions; and the New
Testament is an accomplishment of the Old. Hence the apostle takes notice in
his defense before Agrippa, that he had said no other things than what Moses
and the prophets had foretold should come to pass. Even all the prophets, that
have been since the world began, spoke of these things.

I might subjoin, that this harmony appears the more beautiful and divine, as
it is with some circumstantial variety and difference. They preach the same
doctrine, but not in the same manner, relate the same facts, but not with the
like circumstances; and often foretell the same events, but place them in a
different light and cloth them with different circumstances, which is so far
from disparaging their writings, that it really gives reputation to them, and
is an argument of their sincerity and inspiration. Had they acted with a
fraudulent design they would have been more cautious in this respect, and
avoided all appearance of discord; had they contrived a deceit, they would have
laid it closer together, and not have exposed themselves to any suspicion of
contradiction. Common writers think themselves obliged for their credit-sake to
guard every expression, are timorous and anxious, especially if there be any
design of falsehood an imposture. But the sacred writers conduct themselves with
a noble freedom of expression, as being secure of the truth and justice of
their cause, and that under all this variety, the same divine truth would
appear and triumph upon examination.

Well, as this is the case of the Bible; as there is such a wonderful agreement
and harmony among the writers of it; it must, I think, imply and infer their
inspiration. It is not to be conceived, that a weak and fallible understanding,
as that of man is, should go through such a variety of matter, doctrines,
histories, prophecies, of exceeding great latitude and compass, and always be
consistent with itself. We do not find that two persons can write on the same
subject, especially if it be copious and diffusive, without clashing; nor can
one man write on a multitude of subjects, but he will forget himself, and show
his weakness and infirmity. Whereas the Scripture is clear of all imputation of
this kind, I mean all just and well grounded imputation. As to the objection of
contradictions therein, I may afterward consider it; at present I take it for
granted there are none and thence argue, that they who wrote it were under the
special and infallible influence of the Holy Ghost, who led them into all truth.

5. I may offer to the same purpose, or as a further proof of the inspiration
of Scripture, that efficacy, power and authority, it has on the ^earts and
consciences of men. Indeed this may be thought an effect of the Scripture, and
accounted extrinsic; and consequently, not here in its proper place. But it
must be considered, that the efficacy I am arguing from, is owing to the
internal constitution of the Bible, and to the divine spirit that breathes in
it. Now take this in conjunction with the other arguments, and I look upon it a
great confirmation of our faith, that it is the word of God. I shall beg leave
to enlarge a little here. And,

1. I observe, that the Scripture is attended with a penetrating light; has a
great deal of efficacy and power in this respect. It shines into the mind, and
lays open the most secret, concealed treasures of it; the good or evil treasure
of the heart. Thus the apostle speaks of it, as many understand that text, the
word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing assunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. God
that made the heart, is perfectly well acquainted with all its workings,
desires and motions, he knows our thoughts afar off; he knows all that is in
man, and has in his word, as in a map or glass, delineated and represented the
various movements of his soul, what is formed in his heart, and lodges at any
time there. Thus St. Paul, speaking of prophecy, or the opening of the
Scripture by virtue of that afflatus or gift of the spirit which some had at
that time, tells us, that by the means thereof, the unlearned and unbeliever is
convinced of all, and judged of all. It follows, and th^^ are the secrets of
his heart made manifest, and so ^alling down on his face, he will worship God,
and report that God is in you of a truth. The word of God often finds the
sinner out, and when it is displayed before him, God cooperating therewith by
his spirit, there is a discovery made of the heart and conscience, and of the
thoughts and purposes lurking there, that often astonishes and amazes. What the
king of Syria's servant told his master, viz. that the prophet Elisha made
known to the king of Israel even the words that he spoke in his bedchamber,
may be said of the Scripture, it makes known to men the language spoken in the
secret chambers of their hearts; their most retired thoughts and affections. It
discloses the hidden things of dishonesty, anatomises and dissects the
conscience, brings into open and full light, what the sinner before was not
aware of. This thousands can witness that have been seriously conversant with
the holy Scriptures, and especially such that have sat under a lively searching
ministry. They find their sins, their secret sins, set in a clear light, find
themselves struck at, and described in the word of God with great exactness, as
if the writer or preacher had known their hearts, and been some way privy to
what passes there. The reason (...) which is, that the Scripture, proceeding
from God, the author of the human mind, that is acquainted with its most secret
springs, and inmost recesses, is able to penetrate into it, and lay all open.

I might observe that the light thereof equally reaches the hearts and cases of
good men. It shows them what they are, what they want, what they suffer;
describes their graces, their conflicts, and fears. In short, it is a glass in
which both good and bad may view themselves, and see what manner of persons
they are. Now had it been a mere human writing, a contrivance of men, though of
never such great and wise men, it could not I think have had this property in
it. It would not have been a searcher of hearts, as it every where pretends to
be, and we find it to be, had it not proceeded from him that framed the heart
and knows it perfectly.

2. The Scripture has a wonderful power and efficacy to convince and awaken
conscience. A great deal might be said here, agreeable to the experience of
thousands and myriads among mankind. The world has had a real and sensible
experiment of this property thereof for many generations. It has been
gloriously instrumental to discover the fig leaves, and detect the delusion of
blinded sinners, and to demolish those refuges of lies wherein they trusted.
How many mountains has it thrown down? how many sons of pride has it abased?
how many obdurate and hard hearts has it broken? many a soul has the
Scripture covered with the shadow of death, even of those who thought
themselves full of light, and while they have exalted themselves to heaven, it
has brought them down even to hell. Thus the Scripture has often been to the
secure sinner, as the hand writing on the wall to Belshazzar, it has made his
countenance change, and his thoughts trouble him, the joints of his loins to be
loosed, and his knees to smite one against another. Something of this it is
supposed the apostle intimates, when he says, I was alive without the law, but
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died. Then the commandment which
was ordained to life, I found to be unto death; that is, when the law was sent
home to my conscience in its spirituality, purity and authority. When God
carried it to my heart, and removed the ignorance, prejudice, and blindness
which kept the law from reaching me; when it was thus I died, I was filled with
amazement and horror at the view of myself upon this discovery the law made of
my heart, state and condition; and I became as a dead man. Now this the
Scripture has done in innumerable instances, with a strange sovereignty and
authority, ransacking the hearts of men, casting them down from their high
towers, and laying their pride in the dust. And is there nothing of God in
this? is it not manifestly his finger? can any human writings pretend to such a
force? must not a word armed with so much power be the word of God? It is
observable the Hebrews call thunder the voice of God, the voice of the Lord is
powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty, the voice of the Lord
breaks the cedars of Lobanon. And the reason why it is termed his voice seems
to be, because of the majesty and terror that sometimes attends it. Have thou
an arm like God, says he himself to Job, or can thou thunder with a voice
like him. Now certainly to thunder in the minds and consciences of men, and to
make such terrible commotions and concussions there, as the Scripture does,
cannot but argue something of divinity, and import that it is the voice of God.

If it be said, men may have terror from other causes, and without the ministry
of the Scripture, I grant it; God can strike the conscience of a secure sinner
immediately, or by what means he pleases. But I believe I may justly observe,
that trouble of mind, of a spiritual nature, and about another world and the
concerns of it, is seldom the exercise of any but such as are conversant with
the Bible: and it is mostly the exercise of those that have the word of God
brought closest to them under a lively ministry. Whilst Peter preached, his
hearers were pricked in their hearts, and cried out, men and brethren what
shall we do. It is the Scripture read or preached, laid open and applied, that
gives the compunction and makes sinners inquisitive what they must do to be
saved. Such as live in ignorance of the Bible, and enjoy no faithful preaching,
seldom know any thing of this: No, their goods are in peace, they are alive
without the law; but when he that commands light to shine out of darkness,
shines into their hearts: when the word of God which is quick and powerful
pierces the conscience, former delusions vanish. former strong holds are broken
down; and there is an inward awakening, and inward light, and often a terror
that may be called divine. And as this is a known property of Scripture, what
it claims, and what the church of God has all along more or less found in it,
it is an argument of its inspiration. Again,

3. It shows a mighty efficacy in quickening and comforting good men. Read the
hundred and nineteenth Psalm, and you will see how much of this David
experienced in the Scriptures that were extant in his time. Hereby God
quickened him, and hereby God supported him, as he abundantly declares,
particularly, ver. 92. Unless thy law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in mine affliction. And thousands can say the same thing. They have
felt these powers of the world to come, have found a divine power breaking out
of the Scripture in the serious perusal, or in the faithful ministry of it,
like lightning out of a cloud, by which their hearts have been revived and
raised, as it were, from the dead. Sometimes they have been strangely eased in
their minds; freed from their darkness, burdens and fears: at another time
gloriously strengthened in the inward man: sometimes, when they have been in
sackcloth, under darkness and terror, the Scripture has cheared their drooping
spirits, girded them with gladness, and filled them with joy in believing. If
this be fact, and I am persuaded some of you can rise up and give testimony to
it, if the Scripture has been of this efficacy to you; if you have found it to
be a word of power, of life, peace and consolation; you will not easily doubt
whether it be the word of God or not. When John the Baptist sent some to Christ
with this question; Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?
Christ answers, Go, and show John the things you hear and see, the blind
receive their sight, the lame walk, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and
the poor have the gospel preached to them. Intimating that such things as these
were a sufficient attestation to him, that he was the M^. The things were too
glorious, and of too gre^^^ reputation, to attend an impostor. So if the
question be, whether the Scripture be the word of God, it might be a sufficient
answer methinks, if we are able to say, that by them the souls of men are
enlightened, comforted, the dead spirits of men are raised up, and made to live
again, that many who were in chains and fetters are set free by them, and by
them the world filled with joy and gladness. A tree that bears such fruit must
have been planted by God's right hand. I will only add,

4. That this efficacy is still the same. The Scripture has the same
quickening, reviving, comforting power that ever it had. The church has lived
upon it some thousand years; and it has the same light, life, and consolation
in it that it had at first. What the statutes of the Lord were to David, so
long ago, they are still to all the faithful; a lamp to their feet, and a light
to their paths, their rejoicing and their heritage forever. Nay, the more we
know of the Bible, the more we meditate in the law of God, the more we shall
delight in it, discovering still new and rich mines; being like its author an
inexhausted storehouse of all supplies.

Well, these are the internal marks and characters of the Scripture's divinity.
How far they may be depended upon, and what argument they afford for the
establishing this doctrine, I designed at this time to have enquired; but that
would lead me farther than your patience and attention may be prepared to
follow; and therefore I shall defer it to another opportunity.

In the mean time it is easy to observe, that good men have a mighty advantage
above others for understanding and believing divine revelation. They can
discern its innate excellencies and beauties. They have the witness in
themselves, an inward experience of the glories of the Scripture; they have
felt its power, tasted its sweetness, and therefore can say a thousand things
on its behalf that others cannot, and consequently will not be staggered with
every little sophistical cavil; but when attacked by gainsayers, will be ready
to reply, as the man born blind did to those that were wrangling with him
concerning Christ, It is a mavelous thing that ye know not from whence he is;
and yet he has opened mine eyes. Endeavor that you may find the power and
efficacy of the Scripture on your hearts, and it will very much assist your
faith, and confirm you in it, you will never question whence it is, nor whether
it be of God, since it has opened your eyes. I will never forget thy precepts,
says David, for with them thou have quickened me. The more we experience of the
power and usefulness of the word of God, the more we shall value and love it,
and the more steadily we shall adhere to it: we shall not forget it, nor be
drawn off from our regard to it, because thereby God has quickened us, thereby
he has comforted us, restored and established us, and many ways saved us. And
if this be the case, if the word of God has got this hold of us, of our hearts
and affections; and recommends itself to our experience, we shall not be moved
with every flirt of wit and little jest that the author may think brisk and
lively. God's testimony to the Scripture without, in his works and providence,
has a glorious evidence in it, as you will afterward hear. But his testimony
within comes nearer and closer to the conscience, and is of mighty use to those
that have it. Endeavor for this, and for more of it; and if you do the will of
Christ, and feel the authority of the Scripture in your hearts, you shall know
of his doctrine, whether it be of God.

DISCOURSE VII. THE DIVINE ORIGINAL AND INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


IN my last discourse on these words, I laid before you the internal marks and
characters of the divine inspiration of the holy Scriptures. Some call them,
the self-evidencing light thereof, and lay so great a stress upon them, that
they not only think all other arguments insufficient without this, but that
this is sufficient without them, and exclusive of them all. There are, they
think, those characters and impressions of divinity upon the Scriptures that it
manifests itself by its own light, to be from God. The authority of God, the
supreme Lord of all, says a learned divine Dr. Owen's self-evidencing light of
the Scripture.
speaking in and by the penmen of Scripture, evidenced singly in, and by
Scripture itself, is the sole bottom and foundation or formal reason of our
assenting to these Scriptures as his word, and submitting our hearts and
consciences to them. He adds, God's voice to the penmen of Scripture was
accompanied with its own evidence, which gave assurance to them; and God
speaking by them, or their writing to us; his word is accompanied with its own
evidence, and gives assurance to us, his authority and veracity did, and do, in
the one and the other sufficiently manifest themselves. And again, as God in
the creation of the world, and all things, has so made and framed them, has
left such characters of his eternal power and wisdom on them, filled with such
evidence of their author, that without any other testimony from himself or any
else, under the naked consideration of what they are, they declare their
Creator. So in the giving out his word, he has by his spirit implanted in it,
and impressed on it such characters of his goodness, power, wisdom and
holiness, of his love to mankind, truth and faithfulness, with all the rest of
his glorious excellencies and perfections, that at all times, and in all
places, where the expansion of Scripture is stretched out over men by his
providence; without any other witness or testimony given thereunto, it
declares itself to be his, and makes good its authority from him. So that the
refusal of it upon its own evidence, brings unavoidable condemnation on the
souls of men. This is divine testimony, accompanying the true voice of God,
evidencing itself, and ascertaining the soul beyond all possibility of mistake.
Wherever the Scripture is truly received, as the word of God, it is received
upon the evidence of that light it has in itself; it is all one by what means,
by what hands, whether of a child, or of a church, by tradition, accident, or
special providence, the Scripture comes to us; come how it will it has its
authority in itself by being the word of God, and has its power of manifesting
itself so to be from its own innate light. A great deal more in the like strain
occurs in the same learned writer. He particularly hints wherein the power and
authority of the Scripture consists, by which it proves itself to be divine. As
its diving into the hearts, consciences, and secret recesses of the minds of
men; its judging and sentencing them in themselves; its convictions, terrors,
conquests, and killing of men; its converting, building, making wise, holy and
obedient; its administering consolations in every condition, and the like. These
he accounts such an impress of God on the Scripture, that they may be looked
upon as so many infallible signs, distinguishing it from the product of any
creature. To the same purpose another ingenious writer, the Scripture, says he
Polhill's Precious Faith, p. 35.
, appears in divine and heavenly characters, and by these it bears witness to
itself that it is the word of God. So Calvin putting the question how we shall
be persuaded it comes from God? answers, it is the same thing as to ask, how we
can distinguish light from darkness. And adds, another author of considerable
name, I mean bishop Leighton, Sermons, p. 85.
They are little versed in the holy Scripture that know not that it is
frequently called light, and they are senseless that know not that light is
seen and known by itself. If our gospel be hid, says the apostle, it is hid to
them that perish; the God of the world having blinded their minds against the
light of the glorious gospel. No wonder if such stand in need of a testimony. A
blind man knows not that it is light at noon day, but by report; but to those
that have eyes, light is seen by itself. I mention these passages more
particularly, that I may give you the argument they lay so great weight upon in
its full strength, as represented in their own words. These learned men you see
suppose the Scripture to bring with it its own proof; and its internal
characters, that impress it has upon it of the majesty and authority, purity,
wisdom and holiness of God, they suppose a sort of a divine light, and requires
only open eyes to discern it. Now before I dismiss this argument I shall make a
few remarks upon it; in which I mean not to set aside or weaken it, but guard
it. No doubt there is a great deal in the doctrine of Scripture to recommend it
to us, as a revelation from God. It has internal characters, that show its
excellency, and imply divinity. But whether the notion of self-evidencing
light, as you have heard it stated, be not carried too far may be questioned. I
shall briefly propose my thoughts concerning it in the following particulars.

1. It must not be asserted, that the Scripture appears to all men with this
self-evidencing light. They, that insist most upon it, grant that the special
illumination of the spirit is necessary to our discerning the evidence. The
eyes of our minds must be opened or we shall not see this light, how clear and
strong soever. So that the argument from hence is rather for the confirmation
of good men, than the conviction of all. Though the sun shines with the utmost
brightness, it cannot enlighten those that want eyes. And the case is allowed
to be the same, with reference to the Scripture's internal light and evidence.
Consequently, this argument cannot be of general use. And yet I question not
the Scripture may be proved, not only to be true, but to be inspired even to
the conviction of carnal men, that have only use of their rational faculties,
without special grace and illumination. Not that they can receive it, or indeed
any other point or particular doctrine of religion with a divine faith; but it
may be demonstrated by strong arguments, the force of which they may discern,
even before they receive the spirit of illumination. How far they may discern
the internal marks of its divinity, I cannot digress to enquire. No doubt they
may discover much of the beauty and excellency of the Scripture, and own it. It
would be presumptuous, I am afraid, to affirm, that all who have wrote with
great learning in defense of the Bible, and particularly have with great skill
displayed the internal excellency of its doctrine were sanctified and good men.
However, whether this be granted, or not, as the self-evidencing light, in the
judgment of those authors I have mentioned, shines only to them that have the
illumination of the spirit, and no question it shines most eminently to them,
it must not be looked upon as an argument proper to convince every one.
Whatever light there is in the Scripture, or how much soever it partakes of the
nature of light, it cannot enlighten them that have not eyes, or want the
faculty of discerning. And yet even these are bound to receive the Scripture,
and are capable of apprehending sufficient reason and evidence upon which they
ought to believe it.

2. When it is said the Scripture is self-evident, it must not be understood,
that the evidence is as easy and obvious as in the case of those propositions
we call self evident; as that two and three make five, or that the whole is
greater than a part. Even good men, notwithstanding their illumination from
above, need a great deal of reasoning, and consideration, and the help of much
and long experience before they can satisfactorily discern the internal light
of the Scripture; so discern it as to make it an argument of the divinity
thereof. We must not therefore apply the metaphor of light, to which the
Scripture is compared, too strictly; as if every spiritual and good man, that
opens the Bible, might see characters of divine inspiration there, as plainly
as he can see when the sun shines. Those expressions, that import any thing of
this kind, I cannot think sufficiently guarded.

3. I apprehend this self-evidencing light does not run through the whole
Bible, and appear in every part alike. And I know not but I might say it does
not sufficiently appear at all in some parts of it. If the light and evidence
be placed in the assertions of Scripture, that it is from God, this cannot be
admitted as evidence enough that it is so; because other books not inspired, as
the Alcoran for instance, assert the same. And besides there are some parts of
Scripture that do not assert this. If the impress of God thereon be made the
self-evidencing light, I am afraid it will be difficult to discern this in
every book and chapter of the Bible, as in the Kings and Chronicles; and it
will be no less difficult for any one, by this impress appearing in the book
itself, to pronounce that the Proverbs is the word of God, and not the book of
wisdom, that Ecclesiastes is divinely inspired, and not Ecclesiasticus. I
subjoin,

4. That this internal evidence of the inspiration of Scripture results from
the constitution and frame of the Bible in general; from the doctrines and
history of it, the excellency of its matter and style. Take the Bible together,
consider it in its whole plan and design; and it has glorious characters of
divinity upon it. Its doctrines, laws and histories, have something so great,
so pure and spiritual in them; it has such marks of wisdom and goodness; it is
so wonderfully suited to the necessities and occasions of sinful men, and so
well fitted every way to subserve the professed end of such a revelation, that
one may conclude it to be a revelation from God, and above human contrivance.
And this will appear with greater force and conviction to those that have lived
under the impression of it, and have long experienced its power, and tasted its
comforts.

5. Though this be a good confirming argument of the divinity of the Bible, we
ought not, I think to lay the main stress here, much less to make it the only
argument. We find our Lord appeals to other evidence, namely, that of his
miraculous works; I have greater witness, says he, than that of John; for the
works, which my father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And again, the works I do in my
Father's name, they bear witness of me. And, If I do not the works of my
Father, believe me not: but if I do, though you believe not me, believe the
works. You see he does not demand their assent and faith upon his own
testimony, or the testimony of John, but produces his works as his credentials.
The Scripture is a doctrine worthy of God, and appears in its own innate light
and excellency worthy of our acceptance. But, as God has been pleased to
recommend it by many other arguments besides his own image and impress
thereupon, these ought not to be neglected. Christ brings in his works among
the evidences of his divine mission: and certainly whatever tends to prove,
that God sent the writers of the Bible, should be admitted on their behalf, and
as a plea for their inspiration. Nor can I think it any service to the cause,
to lay all the weight upon a single argument, rejecting others that may have
equal, if not superior force. Once more,

6. It must however be allowed, that the internal excellency, or what some call
it, self evidencing light, is at least a strong motive of its credibility. I do
not say, it is no more, for I think the Scripture Revelation, considered in the
whole of it, is too sublime and divine, has too many characters of wisdom,
holiness, etc. to own any author, but God. So that it is more than a motive of
credibility. In the mean time, it is that in a very high degree. Indeed no
external arguments of the divinity of the Bible could conclude and determine
any reasonable creature's belief of it, as from God, was it not a revelation
every way worthy of him. It is a pertinent passage to our purpose of the great
Chillingworth I profess, says he, if the doctrine of Scripture did not appear
as good, and as fit to come from God, the fountain of goodness, as the miracles
by which it was confirmed were great, I should want one main pillar of my
faith, and for want of it, I fear, I should be much staggered. In short, there
is nothing a christian can rest in with more satisfaction, touching the divine
inspiration of the Bible, than this, that he finds it speaks to him in a way
becoming God, commands with an authority becoming God, searches the heart and
conscience with light and force becoming God, directs with a wisdom and
knowledge God-like, supports, quickens, and comforts in a manner that plainly
shows a divine influence attends it.

But thus much for the third general argument, the internal characters of the
Scripture's divinity; which I have stayed the longer upon, because I
apprehended some difficulty in it; whether I have cleared it or not, I shall
not fay. I have however offered what occurred, at present, most proper for that
purpose. I proceed now to another argument.

IV. The divine inspiration of the Scripture may be argued from some external
marks and characters, some outward circumstances, and from the providence of
God eminently interesting itself in behalf thereof: as the antiquity of it, the
preservation of it through so many ages, its surprising accomplishment in all
the parts of it, and the like.

1. The antiquity of it. I am far from thinking this, one of the best of our
arguments. But as it is generally produced in favor of this cause, I do not
think fit wholly to neglect it; though I shall but touch it briefly. It is
agreed, I think however I am satisfied nothing tolerable can be offered against
it, that the Scriptures, I mean part of them, are the most ancient writings of
any in the world. Justin Martyr, a learned father, who lived in the second
century, within about one hundred and thirty years after Christ, as some
compute, in his exhortation to the Greeks, proves by comparing the times of all
human writers, poets, philosophers, historians, and lawgivers, the most
celebrated for their antiquity, that the laws of Moses and his writings were
long before any of them. And at the same time shows, that whatever is excellent
in any of them, as Orpheus, Homer, Solon, Pythagoras, or Plato, they derived
from Moses, lighting their candles at his lamp. Eusebius, another primitive
writer, evidences at large the superior antiquity of Moses, and concludes, that
Moses is found to be more ancient, even than all the gods and heroes of the
Greeks. To the same purpose Tertullian and others. And indeed, there are none
of the heathen authors that can vie with Moses in this respect. He begins his
history and account of things, from the creation, and continues it through the
first two thousand years of the world, and more. And though we have no written
records of the affairs of the patriarchs before the time that Moses wrote, yet
it is certain his book is of earlier date than any other. His Pentateuch was
extant before Thales, Hermes, Sanchoniatho, Homer, or any of the famous pagan
antiquaries were heard of, indeed before they had a being; which Tertullian The
whole passage of Tertullian being so very remarkable and full to the purpose it
cannot be amiss to insert it here; Before any of your public monuments and
Inscriptions, says he, before any of your forms of government, before the
oldest of your books, the original of many nations, the foundation of many
famous ^ities, and most ancient historians; yea, before the invention of
letters; and, as if I had hitherto said but little, before the very being of
your gods, your temples, oracles, and sacrif^ces, were the writings of one of
our prophets extant, which are the treafury of the Jewish religion, and by
consequence of the Christian. If you have heard of Moses the prophet, I will
tell you his age, he was co-temporary with Inachus the first king of the
Argives, older by three hundred ninety-three years than Danaus the oldest in
your histories. About a thousand years before the destruction of Troy, or, as
others reckon, about five hundred years before Homer; the rest of the prophets,
though later than Moses, yet the latest of them fall in with some of your
Sages, lawgivers and historians. -- Nor did he say so without reason, since
Isaiah, Hosea, and other of the prophets lived at the time when the Greeks
first began their Olympiads, before Rome was built; and the very latest of the
Old Testament writers flourished before Socrates. To which I may add, that as
the other two fathers here mentioned, Justin Martyr and Eusebius, to say
nothing of Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyril, St. Austin, etc. who urge the same
argument, insist more at large upon the subject, so they fully prove Moses of
much greater antiquity than the most ancient pagan authors. And indeed, this is
universally owned not only by Jews and Christians, but also by heathens
themselves. Even Porphyry, one of the most learned and shrewd adversaries
christianity ever had, was forced to allow him older than his favorite
Sanchoniatho, whom yet he places before the Trojan war.
enlarges upon, and thereby triumphs over the gentiles; showing them their
religion was but a novel upstart thing compared with that of the christians.
Moses, he tells them, lived some hundred of years before the ruins of Troy;
that all the rest of the prophets succeeded Moses, and yet some of the last of
them were of the same age with their first wife men, lawgivers, and historians.

If it be asked, what evidence does this afford of the divinity, or inspiration
of the Bible? I answer, as mankind needed a revelation from God, immediately
upon his apostasy, and had reason to hope for such a favor, from the divine
mercy and goodness; and as the Bible is the most ancient revelation, beginning
with man's necessities, and providing a suitable remedy for them, it is most
likely to be from God. Not to say, that antiquity has always claimed a sort of
veneration, men agree by common consent, to rise up before the hoary head
thereof. Hence Tertullian pleads with the gentiles, that as it was matter of
religion and conscience to give credit to things according to their age and
antiquity; therefore the Christian religion, having marks of the highest
antiquity, deserved their greatest honor, and they ought accordingly to
reverence it. But what I think of the greatest weight here, is, that the Bible
being the most ancient book in the world, has gone through a course of the
longest examinations. It has, some of it, bore the test of many thousand years,
and has stood its ground, after the severest and most critical trial.

Now had it been false, it is not to be imagined it would have escaped without
discovery. After it has undergone the scrutiny of so many ages, of so many
thousands and millions of persons, both of friends and enemies, from one
generation to another, one cannot reasonably suspect it; nor can we think it
consistent with the wisdom and goodness of God, his love of truth and hatred of
falsehood, and his regard to mankind, to suffer a cheat to reign and triumph so
long in full glory and reputation. No, had it been a cunningly devised fable,
he would surely have interposed in his providence and have defeated it. As time
is a consumer of things, so it is a touchstone to discover what they are. A
cheat may pass for a while, but it was never known that a cheat, such a one as
the Bible must be, if it be a cheat, ever passed long without disgrace. So that
it is really a probable argument, and I carry it no farther, whatever others
have done, that as the Bible is the most ancient book, it is a divine book.

If any object, this only speaks for the writings of Moses. I answer, it is
granted. But then it must be considered that Moses' books contain the substance
of the rest. The apostle tells us, the gospel was preached to Abraham. It had
an edition then. We find in the Pentateuch the lineaments, and a more imperfect
draught of the whole Bible. And besides, it has been shown before, that the
several parts of the Scriptures give testimony to one another. So that what
confirms and proves one divine, derives a sort of an Authority to ^ll the rest.

2. The preservation of the Bible through so many ages is another circumstance,
that may be urged to prove the same thing. If it had not been of God, we cannot
think he would have concerned himself so much about it, and employed his
providence for its security all along, as we are assured he has done. That we
have the several inspired books brought down to us safe and entire, in the
main, I shall hereafter show. At present, I suppose this to be fact, and may, I
think, ground an argument upon it in favor of the Bible.

Several things might be offered to illustrate this; as, that it is the most
ancient book, and so has had the more time to decay and perish in. It has gone
through a longer state of trial, as I may say, and has stood exposed to all
casualties and hazards for more ages than any book besides.

Farther, the subject of it would create it more enemies. Some books so little
concern mankind, they treat about such mere amusements, matters of no
importance, or at best little speculations; that they are not like to raise the
enmity of the world against them. Indeed men's carelessness about things that
deserve no care, may suffer them to perish; but their supposed interests, or
real enmity will never rise up against them to destroy them. Whereas the Bible
is of a different consideration. It treats of higher important things, to which
the passions and corruptions of men stand in a direct opposition. It is a
standing record for God, and against Satan and his kingdom; a constant curb and
check to vicious men in their pursuits, and sometimes a terror to them. And
consequently, such a book would have many enemies that would be glad to get rid
of it; to ruin its reputation, and destroy its very being, if they could.

I add, this has actually been the case of the ^cripture. Not only bad men have
always hated it, but some of its enemies have appeared against it with a power
equal to their malice. The attempts of Antiochus Ep^phanes under the Old
Testament, and of Dioclesian under the New, to this purpose, are known. The
former, when he had sacked Jerusalem, profaned their temple, and made the daily
sacrifice to cease, as Daniel prophesied of him; made diligent search for the
law; burnt all the copies of it he could find, and threatened the severest
torments to those who should conceal it. And the very same thing did
Dioclesian, so famous, or rather infamous, for his rage against christians, and
who triumphed in his supposed success. After the most barbarous havoc of them,
he put forth an edict commanding the^ to bring in their Bibles to be burnt and
destroyed: which multitudes out of fear complied with, and thence had the
reproachful name of Traditores, those that delivered up their Bibles, and in
case of failure, he threatened all sorts of tortures and death. Well,
notwithstanding these and all other assaults, notwithstanding the enmity and
malice of wicked men and devils against the Scripture, it has been preserved
pure and incorrupt, in the main, to this day. We have the same law God
delivered to Moses on mount Sinai, the same statutes and judgments he gave to
Israel, we have the true history left by the immediate followers of the Lord
Jesus, and those sacred books that contain the genuine records of their
doctrine. These God has preserved to us, and lodged in our hands, by a care and
sovereignty of providence, that one need not scruple to call divine. They have
been often in danger, The greatest danger they were ever in of being lost, was
in the days of king Josiah, if those learned men are in the right who think
there was only one copy of the law of Moses then left, which Hilkiah the priest
casually ^^^^^d in the temple, 2 Kings xxii. 8. But there are others to when it
seems much more probable, that the book there spoken of, was either the
Autograph of Moses, that authentic copy that was expressly ordered to be laid
up and kept by the side of the ark in the most holy place, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 26. or
else some other sacred copy used in the service of the temple and preserved
there, like as was afterward done in the second temple, where we are told that
copy was kept, which Titus carried in triumph to Rome. Joseph. de Bell. Judaic.
L. vii. cap 24.
and sometimes almost bundled up and brought to the funeral pile. The
implacable and avowed enemies of religion, who at once had all human power and
terror in their hands, have decreed their extirpation, and accordingly set
themselves to accomplish it. But God has defeated all their designs; still the
Bible exists and is triumphant, and, I doubt not, will as long as there is a
church in the world, that is, till the end of time, and consummation of all
things.

Now hence, I think, one might form an argument that amounts to a demonstration
of a moral kind. God's providence in preserving the Bible is a public
signification that he owns it. Such have been its hazards, that it could never
have been preserved, had not God undertaken its defense. And such is the
justice, truth, holiness, and goodness of God, that he would never have
espoused it in the manner he has done, had it been a forgery, and not from
himself.

3. Another particular, under the general head of external marks and characters
of the divinity of Scripture, is the wonderful accomplishment of it in all the
circumstances thereof. I say, in all the circumstances of it; which I question
not is true, though we may not be able fully to make this out. We may want
capacities sometimes to understand the text, and often to expound the
providence that is an exact accomplishment of it; and so cannot discern the
harmony between the one and the other: which yet is real and certain, and
reaches even to very minute and little things, had we penetration enough to
discover it. However, notwithstanding our defects here, so much is evident to a
diligent observer, as is sufficient to give this argument its due force. The
Bible has been fulfilled in all ages, from the beginning of the world to this
day. It has been so in many instances as must appear to the satisfaction of
all, that will allow themselves seriously to consider these matters, and we
have reason to conclude, it is so universally.

I shall a little expatiate on this head; and let you see wherein the Scripture
is fulfilled, and then make a few remarks, showing you how the accomplishment
thereof proves its divinity. Now the Scripture has been fulfilled, 1. In the
natural and material world. And, 2. In the moral world or world of mankind.


1. It has been fulfilled in the natural or material world. The account the
Bible gives us of the heavens and the earth, so far as they fall under our
observation, has been answered in providence through all generations hitherto.
I shall mention a few particulars out of many.

1. We find, according to Scripture, the ground laid under a curse upon man's
apostasy, And unto Adam he said, because thou have harkened unto the voice of
thy wise, and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, thou
shall not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring
forth unto thee: in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou
return unto the ground. This the Scripture tells us should be the future state
of the earth, and we have the experience of several thousand years attesting
the truth of it. Had not mankind sinned, we may justly suppose the earth would
have been more fertile, and would have yielded the conveniences of life with
less labor and pains. But as a punishment of his transgression it was doomed
to a sort of sterility, or barrenness. Thorns and thistles are its spontaneous
production. It brings forth these of its own accord. But if man will enjoy its
more useful fruits, it must be with greater expense than was necessary
heretofore. He must labor in cultivating it, and eat thereof in the sweat of
his face. Thus the Bible intimates it should be, that the earth would undergo a
change for the worse in this respect; being cursed for man's sake. And thus all
have found it through every age since.

2. When mankind had lived upon the earth for fifteen or sixteen hundred years,
and their sins had provoked the wrath and vengeance of heaven against them, the
Scripture foretells the amazing judgment of an universal deluge, or flood,
which God would bring upon them for their wickedness. The denunciation of this
judgment you have, Gen, vi. 5, 6, 7, 13, 17. That it was fulfilled, and how,
you read in the next chapter. I will only observe, that the fact that there was
a general deluge, at the time assigned by Moses, is not only affirmed in the
Bible, and referred to over and over again there, both in the Old and New
Testament, but we have the concurrence of the most ancient heathen writers to
the same truth. One of them, of great reputation, tells us, that Osiris, or
Noah, went into the ark on the seventeenth day of the Egyptian month Athyr,
when the sun passes the sign Scorpio, which is the very same day mentioned by
Moses, the seventeenth day of the second month, as some have shown from
astronomical calculations. Nor have we only full testimony for the fact; but a
kind of demonstration of it from the numerous shells of fishes, from plants,
trees, and other remains of the antideluvian world; which are to this day found
buried in the bowels of the earth; and, I do not think, can be so rationally
accounted for, as upon the supposition of a general deluge.

Now if it be considered, that this was threatened above a hundred years before
it came to pass, when there were no tokens and intimations of it in nature:
that Noah, that preacher of righteousness, was employed to give warning of it
all that while, and that the judgment was executed in the very manner, and at
the very time foretold; we may, I think, place this among those remarkable
providence that confirm the truth and divinity of the Scripture. None but the
great Author of nature could bring about such an event, and none but he could
predict and insure it. He alone could do the thing, and he only could foretell
it.

3. After this dreadful and amazing judgment had taken place, God was pleased
to give a solemn assurance to mankind, that he would not again destroy them in
such a manner, and inflict the like calamity of an universal deluge; and as a
token and pledge of his promise he tells them he would set his bow in the
heavens. I will remember, says he, my convenant which is between me, and you,
and every living creature of all flesh: and the waters shall no more become a
flood to destroy all flesh. And the how shall be in the could; and I will look
upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God, and every
living creature that is upon the earth. This was God's promise to the world
after the flood, and one may observe it carries an air of sovereignty and
authority in it, that seems to intimate it could come from none but God; could
not be the fiction of Moses, or any impostor, inserted as an embellishment in
his history. For who but the great Sovereign and Lord of nature, that had
spared a very sinful world for above sixteen hundred years, and just now
destroyed it, could pass an act of indemnity, and grant a security against the
like judgment for all future time; and not only so, but place the rainbow in
the clouds, as a pledge of his faithfulness in this instance: a token, a
federal token between God and man, that the world should never more perish by
water.

This is the record of Scripture, and every generation since, for more than
four thousand years, has seen the accomplishment of it in both the parts, viz.
a freedom from an universal flood, and the frequent appearance of the rainbow:
if it be said, the rainbow is no new thing, it appeared as much before the
flood, as since, and could not but appear, if they had rain, it proceeding from
natural causes, and being the necessary result of them. I answer, that at least
it was appointed for a new service and purpose after the flood. If it appeared
in the clouds before, it was not as a sign of God's covenant and promise till
afterward. But, I answer further, that it does not appear probable to me,
there ever was a rainbow before the flood. The manner of introducing it,
behold I do set my bow in the clouds, and the end it was to serve for, it shall
be for a token of the covenant between me and the earth. This I think implies,
it had not been seen in the clouds before, and that it was then first, and ever
after upon occasion, to appear as a pledge to mankind, that God would make good
his promise. Nor are the late discoveries in philosophy concerning the rainbow,
any sufficient objection against this. We need only suppose, that the state of
the air before the flood was different from what it is at present, and then the
objection is removed. And that it might be so, is not at all improbable; and
that it actually was so, I have the authority of some modern philosophers of no
little reputation for skill in these matters. One Whiston's Scripture
Prophecies, p. 103.
of them speaking of the subject, has these words. Who, but the great governor
and disposer of all the works of nature, could so alter the constitution of the
air after the deluge, that whereas all the former generations had never seen
nor heard of such a thing as the rainbow, the future should never be without
that glorious signal of divine goodness, and instance of the divine power. He
supposes, that the rainbow is a new appearance, that it is a special work of
the divine power and providence, and that to produce it God changed the state
of the air. And if this be the case, as I reckon probable enough, that the bow
is a new phenomenon, never seen before the flood, it was the fitter when it
appeared, to be a sign of God's covenant, and a confirmation of his promise.
And the constant appearance of it now, is a glorious instance of the truth of
the Scripture. We should accordingly improve it, and when we behold the bow in
the clouds; such a reflection as this cannot be impertinent. How faithful is
God in all his promises! How certain, how divine the record he has given of
himself in his word! This God promised before any such thing was known in the
world; and every age has seen the performance. Thus true is the word of God,
and thus sure are his promises. I may subjoin, as what is nearly connected with
this head.

4. The assurance the Scripture gives us of a regular succession of day and
night, and of the various seasons of the year. This was promised immediately
after Noah came out of the ark, and had offered sacrifice to his great
preserver, while the earth remains, seed-^ime and harvest, cold and heat,
summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease, that is, there shall be
no such confusion of things as during the late catastrophe and desolation
occasioned, by the deluge, but he will preserve nature in its regular course to
the end of time. This I take to be the import of that promise or prophecy, and
every age since has had the comfortable experience of the accomplishment of it
to the present day, and we may depend upon it, it shall always be accomplished,
even till that period the apostle speaks of, when the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works therein shall be burnt up.

This account and representation that the Scripture gives of the natural world,
some great and important phenomenon and events therein: To which much more
might be added to the like purpose did I apprehend the discourse would be
acceptable and useful to the auditory; this account, I say, gloriously confirms
the truth of Scripture, and evidences it must have a divine original. Had the
writers thereof invented their own materials, they would not have drawn such a
scheme of things, and so boldly have pronounced concerning future events of
providence, wholly out of their power and prospect, about which they could have
no certainty themselves, nor give security to others. In the next place,

2. The Scripture has been fulfilled in the moral world, or the world of
mankind. The account it has given of men and their affairs, has been verified
and answered with great exactness through every age, so as to make a beautiful
harmony between the word of God and providence. It would be no small pleasure
to contemplate and view this, as far as our knowledge and observation can carry
us. But I shall restrain myself, and only offer a few hints. The Scripture has
been and is fulfilled in several instances, that concern mankind in general. It
has been fulfilled in some special instances toward particular families,
nations, and people, toward particular persons, and toward the two different
sorts, in the grand division of mankind, bad men and good men.

1. It has been, and continues to be fulfilled in several instances that
concern mankind in general; as the universal taint and defilement of nature.
This the Bible mentions as fact. God made man upright, but he found out many
inventions. And it gives an account of the occasion and rise of it, viz. the
apostasy of our first parents; by which the human nature was corrupted in the
fountain of it. That this has been fulfilled, every man in the world has had
experience, more or less, according to his time in the world, and his sense and
understanding of these matters. This only have I found, says Solomon in the
place I now refer to, that God made man upright; but they have sought out many
inventions. He was a person of eminent wisdom, of great observation, and very
inquisitive; and he could find nothing more certain, than the degeneracy and
depravation of mankind. And this every one finds in himself, and may observe in
others. The heathens found it and complained of it, though they could not find
out the cause of it; which the Scripture acquaints us with, and herein is
fulfilled in the experience of the whole world.

I might instance in the labor, toil and sorrow, mankind was doomed to upon his
sin and apostasy, which every one tastes of in one degree or other. As also, in
the vanity and disappointment that attends every undertaking and state. Nothing
can be attained without labor and sorrow, nothing enjoyed without vanity: a
sort of curse flows down upon it, and mixes with the enjoyment. This is implied
in the sentence pronounced, Genesis iii. 16, 17, 18, 19. Witnessed to abundantly
in other Scriptures, particularly in the book of Ecclesiastes, and confirmed by
the experience of the whole world. Nor is it impertinent to mention here with
respect to one sex, her pains in childbearing, which are greater than those of
any other females in the world, and were appointed as a peculiar punishment for
the part the woman had in the transgression; together with her more uneasy
subjection to her husband. This the Scripture speaks of with authority and
certainty, at the very beginning of the world: and it has had a constant
confirmation during a succession of many thousand years.

I may add, the sentence of death passed on all mankind. And let it be
observed, that according to the Scripture account, this was pronounced before
there was one example of death in the world; and before it could be known by
any, but the great Lord of life, or those to whom he would reveal it, whether
any of the human race should die or not. And yet, this has been fulfilled
universally, excepting two instances, where the great lawgiver interposed, and
where the persons underwent some kind of an equivalent, a translation instead
of death. It has been fulfilled, I say, in every age and place, and continues
to be so, at this day. And it is very remarkable, that as the life of man, was
prolonged for several hundred years, in the first ages, the better to serve the
purposes of he wise providence, that governs the world, and was at last reduced
to three score years and ten, as being the common standard, that is, the time
of a full age, when nature should appear decayed and spent; so that if men do
not die then, they will however, be languishing and dying: as, I say, the
standard was thus fixed, it has been found the common measure of life ever
since, and men have died, as I may express, according to the word of the world.
The Scripture has pawned its truth and veracity upon this point, and that when
there was no example of dying, as you have heard, that all men should die,
should return to the dust, and that in the revolution of seventy years, they
should at least be ready to fall into it.

Now, could men, any men, by their own understanding and foresight, not let
into the secrets and purposes of the great governor of the world, could they
draw such a scheme of things? could they have recorded such matters? have given
such an history of providence, for many ages and generations to come, which is
so fully and punctually answered in the event? was it possible they should have
done this, if they had not had intercourse with the divinity, and had not spoke
from God, who saw the end, from the beginning?

2. The Scripture has been fulfilled in some special instances, toward
particular families, nations, and people. The subject here is too large for me
to trace through the particulars, that are known and certain: or, it would
afford an ample confirmation of the divinity of the Bible; and not having room
for it in this discourse, I must leave it to another head, where it may be
urged not less pertinently. In the mean time, I shall observe in general, that
the state of Abraham's family, the surprising increase of it, when as yet he
had no child, and according to the course of nature, was likely to have none.
The sojourning of his posterity in Egypt, for four hundred years, their
deliverance thence and settlement in the promised land, with a great many
amazing circumstances, concerning their settlement, their apostacies, and
punishments, their several captivities and restorations, with a multitude of
things relating thereto; even till the coming of the Messiah, and their final
destruction: all these are set forth and described in the Scripture, with so
much positiveness, so distinctly, and with such an air of sovereignty, as
leaves no room to question, by whose authority the Bible was written. And, as
it describes the state of the Jews, in all their revolutions, so it paints the
various scenes of the christian church, that have been, and that shall be; I
presume to the end of the world. These we have in the books of Daniel, Ezekiel,
and the revelations of John; to say nothing of the sat of the several kingdoms
of the Gentiles, against whom the prophets denounced judgments, the burdens of
the Lord, as they express it, against Idumea, Tire, Sydon, etc. all which
prophecies, have been fulfilled, even in the most minute circumstances, as we
are assured, in regard of the main branches of them; and in a manner, that
gives the Scripture a triumph over all the cavils of infidel objectors, and
will warrant, I think, this conclusion, that either the Bible is true, or God
does not govern the world. For, I cannot see but providence and the Bible, are
in such connection, that they stand or fall together: and that whoever denies
the one, must give up the other also. Further,

3. The Bible has been fulfilled toward particular persons, in some very
memorable instances, as toward Abraham, instanced in before, whose concerns
reach through many generations; wherein there are such marks of divine
providence, as plainly imply, the persons who wrote the accounts, were under a
divine conduct. To this, I may add, that denunciation of wrath against Eli's
house, which was to this effect, that God would certainly reject his family
from the honor and dignity of the high priesthood, for their profanation of
sacred things, and substitute another family in their room; that he himself
should live to see the ark of God, that glory of Israel, depart from them, and
fall into the hands of the Philistines; that all the branches of his house
should die in the flower of their age, and that there should not be an old man
among them, and that instead of the plenty they now lived in, and which they so
much abused, they should be reduced to a piece of bread, and be forced to beg
some mean employment of the high priests, his successors about the sanctuary,
to keep them from starving; and that as a confirmation of all this, his two
wicked sons, Hophni and Phineas, should both die in one day. This is the
threatening, the description laid down in Scripture of a future event; as you
have it, 1 Samuel ii. 31, 32, etc. and chap. iii. 11, 12, 13, 14. How it was
fulfilled in all the parts of it, the Scripture history of Eli's house lets us
see, though neither my time nor your patience, will allow me to consider it. I
shall only take notice of one passage, very remarkable, related by a grave
author, that a certain family among the Jews being observed to be short lived
in an unusual manner, all of them dying about eighte^^ they consulted a learned
rabbi about the occasion of such a judgment. He advised them to enquire into
their genealogy, and see if they were not of the posterity of Eli, to whom such
a punishment was threatened of old; which they found to be their case, and
thence learned the cause of that severe dispensation.

Of the same nature is what Joshua denounces against the builder of Jericho,
that his eldest son should die when he attempted the work and laid the
foundation of the city; that the rest of his sons should perish during the
progress of the building, and his youngest at the sitting up the gates. The
threatening is recorded, Josh. vi. 26. and the accomplishment, 1 Kings xvi. 34.
So exactly all along has divine providence commented upon the Bible, and
verified its predictions.

I shall only mention farther under this head, the threatening of the prophet
against his servant Gahazi and his posterity, viz. That the leprosy of Naaman
should cleave to him and to his seed forever, 2 Kings, v. 27. The inflicting of
which judgment, as we have reason to expect it would be certain from the
authority of him that denounced it, so we have an intimation of it in a story,
not unlike that I mentioned before, concerning the short lives of Eli's house,
viz. That a family of considerable note being leprous one after another in a
long succession, enquiry was made into their descent, and it was found that
they were of the posterity of Gahazi. Thus true and infallible is the holy
Scripture. What it predicts, it insures. An argument it could not be of human
contrivance, but must proceed from an all-comprehending mind, that had
knowledge to foresee and discern what would be, and right and authority to
determine what should be. In a word, the Scripture is the disclosure of the
divine purposes, and contains the model and plan of the divine government. It
points out future events, and is a sort of a prophetic register, as I may say,
of all the vicissitudes and changes there are in human affairs, and of the
proceedings of divine providence, whether in a way of rebuke and judgment, or
mercy and deliverance, toward the world, toward the church, and toward
particular persons. And, as it has been hitherto verified, we may conclude, it
shall be so still, not one word shall fail, nor one iota pass, till the whole
be accomplished.

The last particular under this head remains, which I must be forced hereafter
to resume. As it contains matter of so much instruction and confirmation to
christians, I cannot satisfy myself to pass it over lightly. I shall therefore
in another discourse show that the Scripture has been fulfilled, and continues
to be fulfilled in numerous instances in the two different sorts of men, good
and bad. It gives the character, lays open the heart, principles, states and
frames of both. Wicked men are exactly such as they are there represented to
be. Their inward thoughts, desires, affections are such as the word of God
describes them, And as for good men they find the Scripture a bright mirror
wherein they view themselves in all the varieties of their case; at least, they
might do so, and would do it more fully, did they study the Scripture more, and
understand themselves better. So that the sensible, serious christian has a
witness in himself that the Bible is the word of God. He finds it fulfilled in
his own heart every day in some measure; fulfilled in the constant experience
of his life; whence he is assured it is true, and thence infers that it is
divine.

DISCOURSE VIII. THE DIVINE ORIGINAL AND INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


AS an argument of the inspiration or divine original of the Scripture, I
mentioned the accomplishment of it in all the circumstances thereof. I
observed, that it has been fulfilled in the natural, material world, and in the
moral world, or world of mankind. Under this last particular, I showed you, I.
That it has been, and is fulfilled, in several instances that concern mankind
in general. II. That it has been fulfilled in some special instances toward
particular families, nations, and people. And, III. Toward particular persons.
I proceed now to show, IV. The Scripture has been, and continues to be
fulfilled in numerous instances in regard of the two different sorts in the
great Division of mankind, Bad men and good men. It has been fulfilled in the
Representation it makes of the hearts, principles, condition, and frame of both.


I. It has been fulfilled in bad men, and is constantly fulfilled in them. I
shall touch upon a few things to make this appear.

1. The Scripture is fulfilled in the account it gives of their inward
principles and frame, with respect to God and Religion. As, that they know not
God; that their carnal minds are enmity to him; that they are of this world,
have the spirit of the world, their portion in this life, and mind earthly
things. That they are sensual, not having the spirit; that they live without
God in the world; that he is not in all their thoughts; they call not upon him.
It represents them as void of the fear and love of God, destitute of all divine
graces; having dark minds, hard hearts, seared consciences, and being reprobate
to every good work; and in consequence of this, wanting the great
distinguishing ornaments of the new and divine nature, their hearts are said to
be little worth, and they are compared to the chaff which the wind drives
away, and that shall be burnt up with unquenchable fire. Now how evidently is
all this verified in a large body of mankind. It is granted, the character
being taken from the heart, it is not so legible to us; but it is true of all
the ungodly; they exactly answer this description, and their conformity hereto
is in part obvious to the observation of others; their carnal minds and earthly
frame are in some measure manifest in their practice. And every one that has
had the experience of both states, has the confirmation hereof in his own
breast. He knows what that darkness, ignorance, enmity, and carnality is, the
Scripture makes the character of the wicked and unsanctified. What he sees such
woeful symptoms and indications of in others, once he experienced in himself.
He was once alienated from the life of God; dead in trespasses and sins; once
darkness, though now he be light in the Lord; and though he has not war^ant to
say precisely of such and such persons, that they have the characters of the
ungodly; yet he can be assured he was once one himself; and comparing what he
observes in others about him with what formerly he found within him, he remains
convinced that the Scripture account of this matter is true, and that were the
hearts of wicked men laid open, as they will be at the great day, it would be
evident they are there painted to the life.

2. The Scripture is fulfilled in the description it gives of their antipathy
to good men; their hatred of them, and opposition to them, that Enmity God put
between the seed of the serpent and that of the woman, has been working ever
since. It showed itself carly in Cain, and has appeared in all following ages.
There has all along been a generation of men, that may properly be called a
serpentine seed; full of enmity against the sincere worshippers of God, and
followers of the Lamb: and though their enmity has been, and is disguised under
various pretenses, it is really levelled at the religion of the principles of
piety and virtue in good men. This the apostle remarks concerning Cain, he was
of that wicked one, and slew his brother; and wherefore slew he him, because
his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous. This was then the ground
of the quarrel, and it remains so to the present day. As he that was born after
the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it is now,
says St. Paul. So it was in the apostle's days, indeed, always was, and always
will be. Thus the Scripture has told us of one sort, at least of wicked men;
and I appeal to the observation and experience of every age, whether it is not
fulfilled. The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor. Sometimes they
persecute with the tongue only, calling names, inventing invidious distinctions
and terms of reproach; and sometimes they proceed to more open methods of
violence. But the enmity still reigns in the heart, which way soever it breaks
forth.

3. The Scripture is fulfilled in the character it gives of this body of men,
as to their outward circumstances; placing them on higher ground, and
representing them as the great men of this world. This character they have
often in the Old Testament, but more commonly in the New. Ye see your calling,
brethren, how that not many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, are called. Where you will observe, the persons of this condition,
the rich, the mighty, are left out of the church. So elsewhere, do not rich men
oppress you? do not they blaspheme that worthy name by which you are called?
And again, go to, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton. Ye have
nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Thus the Bible speaks of that
body of mankind, which it distinguishes from the church. And no man, I think,
can read the history of former times, or observe the occurrences of his own,
but must see an exact accomplishment thereof herein. Not that all rich men are
bad men, or all bad men rich. But in that division I am speaking of into two
classes or kinds, bad and good, the church and the world; it is evident
according to Scripture, that bad men will have the greatest portion of this
world. In short, the Scripture sets forth the danger of riches, in the most
lively terms; tells us, a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven; represents such as often abandoned to sensuality, pride, oppression, to
forgetfulness of God and religion. All which we have seen so punctually
fulfilled hitherto, as may convince us there are no random guesses in
Scripture; that it is a divine revelation, makes known what shall be;
containing the dictates of an infinitely wise, foreseeing, I may add, of a
sovereign mind.

4. The same may be said of their inward disquietude, want of proper
tranquillity and rest of mind. The Scripture tells us, There is no peace to the
wicked, that they are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. For the accomplishment of this, I appeal to those that
once were in such a state, and are happily got out of it. I appeal to the
persons themselves, whether they do not find a thirst and craving that cannot
be satisfied among the creatures: whether they have not many a time been weary
of pursuing vanities and grasping shadows? whether their inward lusts do not
vex and disturb them; their outward enjoyments disappoint them? and in a word,
whether they be not utter strangers to the solid rest and satisfaction of
pious, devout souls? They may indeed endeavor to quiet conscience, divert and
amuse themselves by little arts, and cheat themselves into a false peace; but
after all, they find it will not do: their peace is a dream, their joy a flash.
Nor can they rest till they return to God, and rest in him.

Thus the Scripture is fulfilled in regard of bad men: it is fulfilled in their
moral character, in their outward state and circumstances, in their enmity
toward the church, in their disorder and uneasiness of mind.

II. It is fulfilled likewise toward good men. I have here a large field, but
must satisfy myself with the bare mention of such heads of discourses, as would
admit of great enlargement. It is fulfilled toward good men in general, and
toward particular believers.

1. The Scripture is fulfilled toward good men in general, the whole church of
christians. I shall illustrate this in a few instances.

It represents the church of Christ, as consisting of persons mean and low, as
to their circumstances in the world. Not many wise men after the flesh, says
the apostle in the text I have quoted before, not many mighty, not many noble
are called. And has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in says, and
heirs of the kingdom which he has promised to them that love him. This is the
constant language of Scripture. It every where intimates, that the followers of
Christ would be of the meaner sort. Indeed, every thing was at first so
contrived, and the scene so laid, as plainly imported and signified this. Thus,
when the Lord and head of the church came into the world, it was in
circumstances of great outward meanness. He did not appear with any of the pomp
and grandeur of a temporal prince, but assumed the character of an ordinary
mechanic; was called the carpenter's son, and the carpenter. The prime
ministers of his kingdom were chosen from among fishermen. And it is remarked,
at the beginning of his religion, that the poor had the Gospel preached to
them, that is, were gospellized, or brought to receive the gospel. All which
was a sort of a type, as I may call it, or intimation of what he himself
expressly declares, that his kingdom was not of this world. He did not intend
to set up a worldly kingdom, nor would the men of this world, that were fond of
its distinctions and enjoyments be among the subjects of his kingdom. And a
little observation, I think, may convince any competent judges, that in this
instance the Scripture has not wanted its accomplishment. Not that the members
of the christian church are the abject and miserably poor; but generally they
are of the meaner sort. Nor is it to be understood, as I hinted before, that
none of the great men of this world belong thereto; but that not many of them
do so. This is what the Scripture affirms, and the event agrees to the account
it gives. It may be otherwise, indeed, before the end of the world, when the
kings of the earth shall bring their glory into the new Jerusalem, which is but
according to the Scripture prediction, and will be the accomplishment of it.
But, at present, the church of Christ is the congregation of the poor, as they
are called, I mean the invisible church, the true genuine members thereof. For,
as for mere professors and pretenders, that usurp the christian name without
the christian nature, by whatever title they are distinguished, whether
catholic, christian, or most christian, it is no objection against this; he is
not a Jew, that is one outwardly, nor are all christians, that bear that
character.

The Scripture represents the church also as the less, as well as the lower
part of mankind. Fear not little flock, says Christ, it is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdon. And elsewhere, many are called, and few are
chosen. If it be understood of the church compared with the world, the true
church of Christ, the invisible church, compared with the rest of mankind, the
great body of hypocrites and salse professors; there can be no question of its
accomplishment.

Again, the Scripture represents the church, the real genuine members of it, as
generally in a state of conflict, exercise and sorrow; whilst the men of the
world are in circumstances of great freedom and ease, that appear more
plausible and agreeable to common judges. Thus, ye shall lament and weep, but
the world shall rejoice. And this is the constant strain of Scripture; Blessed
are they that mourn, says our Lord, for they shall be comforted. They that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, and through much
tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of neaven. And even when we are
told, that they who forsake father or mother, etc. shall receive a hundred fold
in the present life, and in the world to come eternal life: it is added, with
persecutions, Mark x. 30. intimating, that the church in this world would be in
a state of suffering, and will be so, more or less, whi^^^ it is militant. The
accomplishment of which has been matter of experience and observation through
every age: good men have generally been the butt of the world's malice. They
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of the household?
They have had wrestling, not only with flesh and blood; but with principalities
and powers, with the rulers of the darkness of this world, with spiritual
wickedness in high places. Add to this, the constant conflicts in their own
minds, with their infirmities, lusts, and corruptions. Great inward peace and
consolation, I grant, sub^^me and pure joys good men are partakers of,
according to the measure of their seize. But notwithstanding these, they
have their exercises, burdens, fears, their hours of weeping and humiliation,
their deep abasements and self-annihilations, as I may call them, such as the
world knows nothing of. In all which the Scripture is gloriously fulfilled. We
s^^ two sorts of men in the world; some bearing the cross and following Christ,
denying themselves, crucifying the flesh, sowing in tears: others secure,
thoughtless, living in pleasure, putting far from them the evil day, without
care, thought, burden or fear; which is just the scene described in Scripture,
agreeable to the plan and state there laid down.

Further, the Scripture represents the church of God, as immoveably secure and
lafe, notwithstanding all the dangers that threaten it whether without, or from
within. The gates of hell, we are ^old, shall not prevail against it. It shall
never be extinguished and die, whatever extremities it may be reduced to. No,
Christ's sheep hear his voice, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of his hand. And thus it has been hitherto. The bush has been
in flames, but not consumed. The church has been preserved in the midst of all
its adversaries. Two things add a luster and glory to this providence. It has
met with the most powerful opposition. Never had any body such formidable
enemies, and yet it has survived all. And further, other kingdoms have sunk
under a far less weight. The four famous monarchies, the Assyrian,
Medo-Persian, Greek, and Roman, that thought themselves invincible, and had all
external advantages to render them so, are perished and come to nothing. And
yet the church destitute of all human help, headed by a carpenter, as he was
called and appeared in the world, and by a few poor fishermen, has stood its
ground and weathered the point to this day. The billows have raged and the
mountains been cast into the midst of the sea; but God has always been in the
midst of his church, a river has made glad the city of God.

The Scripture represents the Church of God as mixed with hypocrites, a company
of pretenders, joining in profession with the upright followers of the Lord
Jesus; that have the Lamb's mark on their foreheads. This we have in various
parables as well a^^in other texts; as in the parable of the net cast into the
sea, the tares sown among the wheat, the wise and foolish virgins. And I need
not stand to show you, that it has had its accomplishment hitherto, that the
church has herein exactly answered the description of the word, and appeared in
the form, or according to the model drawn by the great Lord and founder of it.

I add, The Scripture represents the church in a great variety of states; as
undergoing sundry changes, and appearing in different shapes. At first it was
like a grain of mustard seed, little and obscure, and then was to grow up to a
great tree, and in different periods to put on different fa^es: sometimes to be
oppressed, its witnesses lying in sackcloth, and prophesying in sable; and then
to be enlarged: sometimes to apostatise and grow lukewarm, secure, and
careless; and then again to revive, and appear in its luster and glory. This we
have described in several prophecies and particularly in the Revelations, under
the type of the seven Asian churches. And the providence of God has been
fulfilling the same in every age since the going forth of the word of prophecy;
part of which we have seen, and the rest we wait for. You read when the church
was only a grain of mustard seed, you have seen it a great tree. You have heard
of its general defection, and have seen its reformation in some measure. And we
have reason to expect it will appear in greater glory than it has ever yet
done, But what I offer, is, that the Scripture points at all these revolutions,
vicissitudes, and changes; and that the Sovereign Ruler of the world has
ordered events answerable to the predictions and characters given of things
therein. Thus it has been with reference to the church in general. And I am now
to remark,

2. That the Scripture has been fulfilled toward particular believers; and
that with reference to their call into the church, their character and
principles, their in firmities, the promises made to them, and the threatenings
denounced against them for their chastisement and correction.

1. The Scripture has been fulfilled in their call into the church. And here I
may take notice that the Bible represents the different characters of the
persons called, some as notoriously wicked, sinners before the Lord
exceedingly; as the prodigal son, Mary Magdalene; some among the Corinthians,
as the apostle tells us, 1 Cor, vi. 9, 10, 11. Some as less infamous and
scandalous, as the apostles of Christ, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, Philip,
and Lydia, who are not mentioned with any notable blot upon them, or mark of
infamy: some as persons of purer morality, walking with greater caution,
according to the light of their own minds, which was the case of the apostle
Paul, and it is likely of other of the converts from among the Jews.

The Scripture also represents the different manner of their call; some with
more terror and consternation, as Peter's converts that were pricked at their
hearts, the jailer who cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? These were
recovered and brought home to God in a more awful manner. He prefaced the work
with the voice of thunder. Others were called with a small still voice, feeling
little of the terrors of the Lord, as Philip, Zacheus, Lydia, and it may be,
most of the apostles. Now as these things happened for examples, they must he
considered as a kind of Scripture type of future conversions in the different
manner and circumstances of them. And I dou^t not but herein the Scripture has
from time to time been fulfilled; as the experience of christians can witness;
whilst some are able to say, this was my case, another that was mine. And no
question, if we take in the whole body of the faithful, every case will be
found touched and described in Scripture. Nor is there a true convert in the
world, but the word of God points to him; shows him in the various postures of
his mind, and in all his tendencies toward God. A glorious argument of the
divinity of the Bible, though all do not understand it, and it may be some will
laugh at, and despise it; glorious will it app^^^ when the church is complete,
and the saints come to compare notes in heaven.

2. The Scripture has been fulfilled in the character, and principles of
believers. A christian has the law of God written in his heart, and is a sort
of living Bib^^. Time will not allow me to enlarge much. But let me remark,
that the Scripture every where speaks of a generation of persons distinguished
from the rest of the world, by an inward sanctification. It calls them saints,
believers, the righteous children of light, the sons of God, the excellent of
the earth, and the like. And as bad as the world is, there still are, and
always have been some that appear to belong to this body, and shall be to the
end of time. Farther, the Scripture describes them by such characters as are a
sufficient distinction between them and the rest of mankind, by which they may
be known certainly to themselves, and probably to others: as that they are not
of the world, that they do not commit sin, that they have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts, that they set their affections on things above,
and not on things on the earth, that they hunger and thirst after
righteousness, that they are sensible of present infirmities, and forgetting
things behind, and reaching forth unto things before, they press toward the
mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. It represents
them as asspiring after God, making him their center, breathing after him, and
resting in him, and as clothed with all divine graces, all glorious within.
Nor are these accidental strokes that belong to some rare saints, but the
proper character of all believers; though indeed with much variety; some having
the several graces in greater eminency and luster, others more faintly and with
greater alloys, according to the distinction the Scripture itself mentions of
babes, little children and fathers.

Well, thus the Scripture speaks of the church, and thus the church has been
from the very foundation of it to this day. There is not one member thereof,
but appears with the characters the word of God has provided for him; he has
the heart, the frame, the principles, there appointed and set forth as the
ornament of believers.

3. The Scripture is fulfilled in their infirmities also. Though they be
saints, that speaks of them, as imperfect saints; represents them as having a
body of sin, a law in their members, waring against the law of their minds; the
flesh lusting against the spirit; as not having yet attained nor being already
perfect. It represents the heart deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked, which is true of good men in some measure, as well as others. The
spirit that is in them lusts to envy, and other vices. Whence they have their
inward conflicts, and frequent struggles with their corruptions.

It represents them in a great variety of frames: sometimes their hearts
following hard after God, triumphing in his favor, and exulting in his
presence; at other times, overspread with clouds and darkness, filled with
fear, and wholly indisposed for spiritual converse and acts of devotion. It
represents the best of them as weak and defectible, as sometimes off their
guard, secure and presumptuous, and thereupon falling into sin. To which
purpose the miscarriages of the saints are left upon record in Scripture; not
merely to tell us what they have done, but what others would be like to do in
the same circumstances, when for their pride and self-confidence, God leaves
them to themselves; and they are written for the admonition and caution of the
church in future ages. In the mean time, they show the frailty of believers, in
their present imperfect state. In short, the Scripture represents them as
falling out by the way, running into parties and schisms; uncharitably
censuring one another, and indulging mutual passions to the disgrace and
scandal of their profession. A great deal of this is hinted concerning them in
the New Testament. And that these particulars are accomplished, is matter of
constant and universal experience; I appeal to every heart and conscience among
the generation of God's children, and am satisfied there are too many witnesses
of the truth to need any further confirmation.

4. The Scripture is fulfilled in the promises thereof toward believers. And
here I have a subject that I could with pleasure employ an hour upon. But I
must be forced to pass it over in a good measure, and leave every christian to
supply the defect out of his own experience. All the promises of God, the
exceeding great and precious promises are in Christ Jesus, yea and amen. All
are true, faithful and sure; as every one has found that has tried them, every
believer from the beginning of the world to this day. Let me observe very
briefly, that there are some general promises constantly fulfilled toward all
believers; as that God will never leave them nor for sake them; that he will
not suffer them to be tempted above what they can bear, but will, with the
temptation, make a way for their escape; that all things shall work together
for good to them that love God, that he will give them his Holy Spirit; that he
will manifest himself to them, be their God, and they shall be his people.

Further, there are occasional promises, as I may call them, adapted to the
circumstances of particular persons, and which they, in those circumstances,
happily experience the accomplishment of; as support under burdens, direction
and conduct in difficulties, when sensible of our own weakness, we trust in the
Lord with all our hearts, and lean not to our own understanding, help in
prayer, answers of prayer, comfort in tribulation, and the like. A multitude of
promises there are in the Scripture, wonderfully suited to all the cases of
christians that I must not stand now to collect: all which have been
accomplished in every age of the church. Every christian can set to his seal in
this matter, though with more or less clearness, according as he is more or
less exercised and experienced in the divine life.

5. I might show, that the Scripture is accomplished in the threatenings of it
toward good men, in the corrections and chastisements frequently intimated in
case of backsliding, the omission of duty, carelessness in the performance,
restraining prayer, want of watchfulness, attention and seriousness in their
walk and conduct. In these cases, God threatens he will visit their
transgressions with the rod and their iniquities with stripes. Nor have we only
general, but even particular threatenings, designed as a rebuke to particular
failings and transgressions. All which, in their time, season and manner, are
fulfilled in God's discipline, toward his children and servants. In short,
this is a general experience, and it is a perfect accomplishment of the divine
word; that if the christian grows secure and careless, less prayerful and
watchful, God withdraws and hides his face; the spirit is grieved and stands at
a distance: in consequence whereof the christian finds his chariot wheels taken
off, he has neither light nor comfort, little strength for duty, and little
enjoyment in it.

Thus the Scripture is fulfilled in all the parts of it: fulfilled toward the
world, toward the church, toward particular believers, in the characters,
promises and threatenings of it.

I promised to make some remarks upon these particulars, in order to show the
force of this argument for proving the divinity of the Scripture. Had it been a
human writing, proceeded from men, without any intelligence from above, it
could never have described the state of the natural and moral world so
accurately as it has done, and so agreeably to the even^^ and issues of things.
The Scripture exhibits and gives us a plan and scheme of the divine government
of the world; of the different states of the world and church; of the church in
general; and of the several members of it; of good men and bad men. It
represents them in their various frames, principles, and dispositions; in their
various outward circumstances and conditions; in their various spiritual
states, their conflicts, trials, temptations, sufferings and comforts. This it
does in such a manner, and with such a perfect agreement and correspondence to
the providence of God in the constant course thereof, making such beautiful
harmony between the divine providence and the holy Scripture, as is a full
evidence that the Bible is from God, and that he who governs the world indicted
it. Now that this argument may appear in its proper light and force, I shall
subjoin a few observations without dwelling long upon them. As,

1. That the great author of nature and governor of the world had in his own
mind a full view and comprehension of his works. A perfect scheme, idea, or
model thereof, as I may call it. This, I think, we may conclude from the exact
wisdom, regularity, and order with which he proceeds in all of them; and the
Scripture gives intimations of it. Thus in the history of the creation, after
the forming the several classes and parcels of his creatures, it is said of
each, God saw that it was good; and at the close of all, when the great Creator
came to review his work, it is said, he saw every thing that he had made, and
behold, it was very good, that is, was just what God designed it, proportioned
and fitted to its place and station among the creatures, and to the end of its
maker. And we are told by the apostle, that God works all things according to
the ^^^nsel of his own will. When he purposed and ^^^ed that there should be a
world, there was a counsel of his will, a wise plan and scheme, according to
which he determined all things should be made, and all things should be
governed. Now he governs all things in nature, providence and grace,
according to this counsel of his will.

2. The counsel of God, this plan of the divine works and government, is in
part laid down in Scripture. I say in part, for I know not that I have warrant
to affirm, that the Bible contains all God's purposes, and the whole scheme of
his counsels and decrees. But it contains what concerns our world, the great
maxims of his government, the different states of his subjects here, and the
chief events of his providence toward them from time to time. In the Scripture
the Book of the divine decrees is opened, as it were. We are there told of his
creating a world according to his purpose; in what manner he proceeded in that
work; and how he would proceed in the government of it. And I reckon the course
of his providence in the main revolutions and changes there would be in the
world, and in the several grand dispensations of it, at least, are there
described as they have been, and will be, from the beginning of the world to
the end thereof.

3. As the Scripture was written chiesly for the use of the church: and it may
be, I might add, the world continued and governed with regard to the interest
and concerns of the church; so the scheme of divine providence exhibited and
laid down there chiesly respects it. Not that the rest of mankind are passed
over wholly. The Scripture frequently takes notice of the affairs of the world
in general, and of particular kingdoms and nations without the pale. Nor do I
suppose all the affairs of the church, nor of the several members of it, are
represented in Scripture and included in its map. But the general state
thereof, its vicissitudes and changes, the main instances of providence and
grace toward it, and the particular members of it; these things the Scripture
represents. It tells us, what the state of it has been, and what it shall be in
the successive ages; what the several members of it always have been, and will
be; what they fear and suffer, and what they enjoy; what their warfare would
be; what their conslicts, toils, and victories: and in short, in what way they
should be disciplined and prepared for heaven.

4. Every thing contained in the Scripture, as part of the divine counsel for
the government of the world; supposing the Scripture is God's word, and really
contains such a scheme, will be infallibly accomplished. The purposes of God
mall stand. His words will not, cannot, fall to the ground. Hence we read, that
such or such a thing was done, or came to pass, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. It is as necessary, according to the hypothesis, or supposition, I
am now upon, that the Scripture should be fulfilled, as that the world should
be made. For as the creation of the world was an accomplishment of God's
purpose and counsel in that particular; the same may be said of every event in
the government of it; especially as it is ensured to us in the Scripture. Not
one iota, or tittle, shall pass till the whole be fulfilled. The reason is, it
proceeds from God, the God of truth and wisdom; and nothing can fall out to
disappoint an infinite understanding. I add,

5. The slfilling of the Scripture is a gradual thing, not done all at once,
but successively. For it contains God's scheme of providence and government for
many generations. Some of it is fulfilled in one age; such parts of it as refer
to particular events, that were to take place at this or that time: as, the
destruction of the old world by water; the slavery of Abraham's posterity in
Egypt; their settlement in Canaan; their captivity and deliverance; the coming
of the Messiah; and the like. Some of it is constantly fulfilled; as, what
concerns the state of the natural world in general; and the world of mankind,
of good men, and bad men; who always were, and will be, such as the Scripture
describes them, answering the characters there laid down of their respective
states, principles, and manner of acting. Some of it, indeed a great deal of
it, as it points out particular events, has been fulfilled; and some remains to
be fulfilled, and will have its accomplishment in its proper time, in the
several successive ages of the church and periods yet to come: as, the fall of
Antichrist; the last great struggle of the followers of the Lamb with the
followers of the beast: the Millennium; the resurrection of the body; and the
final judgment. The Scripture is an entire Synopsis, or general view of the
whole course of providence, toward the church especially; and consequently
will not all be fulfilled till the last scene is acted.

6. When the whole work of God in the method of providence is finished, and the
entire scheme or wise council of God, as laid down in Scripture, is perfected;
and all has taken place in regular and orderly events, the argument from hence,
that the Scripture is from God, or given by divine inspiration, will appear
with greater advantage; partly as it will be more full and strong, being
grounded upon the accomplishment of all the Scripture; partly as it will stand
in a fuller light, without being obscured by that darkness, prejudice, and want
of experience, which now attend persons and hinder them from discerning the
evidence of this matter. I doubt not, but in that more amiable state of things
which we expect in this world, as the church will see more of the
accomplishment of the Scripture, so it will see it more clearly. But, when the
end comes, when the whole mystery of providence is completed, and the Son
shall give up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, this argument will appear
triumphant, the whole Bible stand in a glorious light, and a persect harmony
between Scripture and providence be seen to the conviction of all. The
contemplation of which will probably be some of the business of heaven, and
among the entertainments of the saints there. In the mean time,

7. So much of the Scripture is already accomplished, and evidently appears to
be so; as is sufficient at present to give this argument great weight. There is
a surprising concurrence between the Scripture and providence. They have
hitherto run parallel. The world has been such as the Bible represents it
should be. It has been governed in the manner that describes, and a multitude
of wonderful events have taken place in the very time and way the Scripture
sets forth. Now it ought to be confidered, that these things were foretold,
spoken of there as what should be, certainly be, and be in such a manner, long
before the things themselves came to pass. What David says with referrence to
divine providence in his formation, may be accommodated to this prupose, thine
eyes did see my substance yet being imperfiect, and in thy book all my members
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them: the same may, in a sense, be said of the writers of the Scripture,
they saw, as it were, the substance of all future things, all the great
transactions of providence upon the theater of the world in the various states
and changes of human affairs, and they wrote down all the members and
particulars thereof, which in time come to be finished, and receive their being
while yet there was none of them. Now who could do this but God? or, which is
the same thing, those that saw with his light. In short, the Scripture holds
before our view the various faces of the world: the various states and postures
of affairs therein, and the various tempers of men's hearts. And the experience
of several thousand years, the constant daily experience of all good men
perfectly accords therewith. And this, I think, to be in its kind, next to a
demonstration, that the writers of the Bible did not speak of themselves, from
private impulse, like weak and short sighted creatures, as all men are, not
knowing certainly what shall be on the morrow; but they spoke from God, and as
they were moved and taught by the Holy Ghost.

And thus I have set before you the fourth argument I proposed, to prove the
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, viz. the external marks and
characters that attend it: and have insisted somewhat copiously on one branch
of it, the accomplishment of Scripture. The usefulness and importance of which
argument, I reckon to be such, that it well deserves a volume by itself. Nor do
I think any one could better employ his time, and with more service to the
church of God, than by setting it forth in its strength. Which must be my
excuse that I have said so much upon it; as a regard to your patience is the
best excuse, that I can make, that I have said no more.

DISCOURSE IX. THE DIVINE ORIGINAL AND INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspriration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I HAVE already offered several arguments to prove the divine original or
inspiration of the Scriptures, and having gone through those I proceed now to
another.

V. This truth may be argued from the testimony that God gave to the penmen of
the Scriptures, as by miracles, prophecy, the spreading of their doctrine, and
the glorious effects of it upon the hearts of men in their sanctification.
Hereby he has set to his seal that the Scripture is true, is divine, and is his
word. I shall go over the particulars in their order, beginning with the first
of them.

I. God has borne testimony to the writers of the Scripture, and to the things
there written, by miracles. I have stood too long on former arguments to insist
largely on this. I shall briefly represent the matter of fact; show that the
penmen of Scripture wrought miracles, and what miracles they wrought. And then
consider the argument from hence, how this proves they were inspired.

1. I shall briefly represent the matter of fact, show that the penmen of the
Scripture wrought miracles, and what miracles they wrought.

What a miracle is, what are the proper distinguishing characters of those
works that we admit as miraculous, it must be owned, is a matter of some
difficulty to determine. The common difinition of a miracle, is an
extraordinary operation, contrary to the settled laws of nature, wrought by the
infinite power of God. "It is," says a learned man, Bishop Kidder.
a work above the power of nature, and above the reach of any creature
whatsoever And another says, Sir Charles Wolseley.
it is that which properly can have no second cau^^^ for its author. Such as no
second cause, in the judgment of reason, can effect. Another calls it, Stilling
fleet.
a production of something out of nothing, either in the thing itself or manner
of producing it; which he affirms can be effected by no less than an omnipotent
arm. And on this account some critics remark, miracles are termed in Scripture,
powers, being works of a divine and infinite power. And this is the more
generally received account of the matter. A miracle is thought to be something
above the ordinary power of nature, as it is contrary to the laws of it. And
whenever it is wrought, or by whatever instrument, it is the work of God and
proclaims omnipotence.

It must be granted, that some others are willing to come lower. The ingenious
Mr. Lock defines a miracle thus: It is, says he, a sensible operation which
being above the comprehension of the spectator, and in his opinion contrary to
the established laws of nature, is by him taken to be divine. But acknowledging
there is a real difficulty in stating this point, arising from our not
understanding fully the laws of nature, and the power of second causes; and,
consequently, what things are contrary to those laws, and above the capacity of
created beings; I do not think this much affects the present argument, for
certainly many of the facts we have to allege, as performed by the authors of
the Scripture Revelation, and those that were employed in it, must be admitted
to be such as could proceed from none but God. Either they are divine works,
extraordinary miraculous operations, or never any such were laid before
mankind, and offered to the test of human judgment. So that, with^^t
philosophising over nicely here, and fixing the exact bounds between created
and uncreated power, determining the utmost that a creature, a man or an angel
can do, and what God only can do, I think it must be allowed, the facts
recorded in Scripture, and that we place to the head of miracles, must pass for
miracles, or I cannot see that there ever were, or can be, any miracle in the
world, or that any use can be made of those extraordinary phenomenon and
displays of divine providence that have always in the accounts of mankind been
esteemed miraculous. Since these discourses were composed, the notion and
nature of miracles has been much better stated, than ever before by the
Reverend Mr. Samuel Chandler, in his ingenious vindication of the christian
religion. Who defines a miracle in genneral, an action done, or an operation
visibly performed, by any being, that is really and truly above the reach,
power and capacity of that being who does it, to perform of himself, and
without the assistance of some superior agent. And a miracle when done by a man
in confirmation of a divine mission, is, according to him, somewhat visibly
performed by him in order to prove himself to be sent of God, which is strictly
and truly above all his natural powers and capacities, and which he could not
of himself perform without the influence and assistance of some superior agent.
So that what is or is not a miracle is to be determined by the agreement and
proportion between the action performed, and the capacities and powers of the
agent. If the action done be certainly above all the powers of the agent, of
himself, and unassisted to perform it, is a true and proper miracle, and proves
the cooperation and assistance of some invisible and superior being. That may
therefore be a miracle in regard of one agent that is not so with regard to
another of greater ability and power; that may be a miracle when done by a man,
that would be none if done by an angel. For since no beings can possibly of
themselves perform any thing beyond their natural powers and capacities,
whenever they are instrumental in doing any thing of this kind, it must argue
the concurrence and assistance of some other and higher being. If a man does
what is above the reach of, human abilities, he performs a real miracle, and
must necessarily be assisted by some superior agent. Now this is manifestly the
case of that wonderful works here urged in behalf of christianity and the Bible.


Having promised thus much for stating the point and obviating cavils, I shall
briefly touch the facts themselves, those things which the Scripture records as
miraculous operations. And here I would observe, that all whom God employed to
make known any new laws, or reveal any new doctrines to the world, came with
the power of miracles, which were their credentials, or the certain tokens that
he sent them. Thus did Moses, thus did Christ, and thus did the apostles. Moses
delivered a body of laws to the Jews, which he professed to receive from God;
to prove which, he wrought miracles among them.

Let me observe again, that the miracles, which these persons wrought, were
numerous, open, and manifect in the face of the world; and had the highest
characters of divinity in them that any facts ever had, that have been proposed
to the world, under the character of miracles. I shall not give you the list of
them. They are known to such as are conversant with the Bible. Moses offers a
specimen of his power immediately upon his call to his office; his rod is
turned into a serpent, and then turned into a rod again. The ten miraculous
judgments inflicted on Pharaoh and his people, every body has heard of. You
have them recorded in Exodus vii. 8, 9, 10, 11. He afterward divides by his rod
the waters of the Red Sea. In the wilderness he appears glorious, as the
minister of heaven, by a power of miracles that constantly attended him, and
which he exerted on all occasions. Thus he cured the bitter waters at Marah, by
casting a tree into them, Exodus xv. 24, 25. brought waters out of the rock by
smiting it with his rod, Exodus xvii. 6. subsisted forty days on the mount
without food, when by his heavenly converse, his face acquired an angelical
luster. And you find when his authority was disputed, and his pre-eminence
unreasonably cavilled at, God was pleased to interpose, and by a miracle, make
a decision in his favor, punishing Miriam with the leprosy, Numb. xii. and
afterward upon occasion of another instance of the contempt of his authority,
and of an affront to his mission, the earth opens and swallows up the
contenders; and Aaron's rod is made to blossom as a public signal of God's
election and appointment of him and Moses, Numb. xvi. 17. Thus you see Moses
the first lawgiver to the church, and first writer of Scripture, was a worker
of miracles. God hereby bore testimony to him, owned his ministry, and sealed
his mission.

And what miracles Christ wrought, who came to establish a new law, and deliver
a new system of religion to the world, I need not tell you. Go and show John,
says he, to one of his disciples, those things which ye do hear and see, the
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the leapers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to
them, Matt. xi. 4, 5. In short, he showed a power over universal nature,
wrought all sorts of miracles, and that in the most surprising manner. He did
the works that never man did; and yet tells his disciples, the same, and
greater works they should do in his name, which their history confirms.

It is further observable, that this power of working miracles was continued
with the church, and was exerted by those that professed the christian religion
for some ages. Many instances I might give of this, but must forbear.

I shall only take notice of a bold challenge which the christians sometimes
made to the greatest emperors, that if they were brought before the seats of
their gods, if they did not force them to depart and make them confess
themselves to be devils and wicked spirits, they would suffer all sorts of
punishments. They pretended to cast out devils in the name of Christ, to
triumph over the heathen oracles; and so confident were they of their power
herein, that in their disputes with their heathen adversaries, they offered to
put the credit of their cause upon their success in this matter.

I add, the most considerable miracle of all was the resurrection of Christ
from the dead. This he himself foretold before it came to pass, even when his
disciples themselves neither understood it, nor believed it. He bid them
destroy that temple, viz. his body, and he would build it up again in three
days. And he did so accordingly: which single fact is a sufficient confirmation
of the christian religion. It does not indeed directly prove, that the
Scripture is inspired, that the prophets and apostles, and the several books
that go under their names were inspired; but it proves Christ was what he
professed himself to be, the son of God: that the doctrine he preached was
true; and that he had authority from heaven for all he did.

I cannot stand to prove the certainty of this fact that Christ rose from the
dead. It has all the evidence that a thing of this nature is capable of. And I
am consident, no reasonable person can lay any weight upon the sorry pretense
of his enemies, the assidavit they hired the watch to make, viz. that while
they slept his disciples came and stole him away. It was utterly unlikely, that
the disciples should attempt such a thing. Next to impossible that they should
succeed in it: and besides the very pretense is senseless. Men asleep, are as
men absent and at a distance, or even men so far and so long dead; and what
^^edit is to be given to their testimony? how cou^^ ^^ey tell what was done
when they were asleep?

These, and the like, were the miracles by which the doctrines of the Bible
were ratified and confirmed. Moses, Christ, the apostles, and primitive
christians for some ages wrought miracles. I am now,

II. To consider the force of the argument from hence, and to show how miracles
prove the inspiration or divine mission of those that wrote the Scriptures. And,

1. We find that miracles were wrought for this purpose, as an evidence of a
divine commission, and accordingly appealed to. Thus when God enabled Moses to
work miracles, he tells him it was that the Israelites might believe the God of
their fathers had appeared to him. And accordingly we see the miracles he
wrought in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness, were the great means,
not only of establishing his authority, but of vindicating it when called in
question. When Corah, Dathan, and Abiram mutinied against him, he has recourse
to miracles, as his credentials, and puts the decision of the dispute between
himself and his competitors thereupon. Hereby, says he, ye shall know that the
Lord has sent me: if these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent me But if
the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up,
with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick in the pit; then
shall ye under stand that those men have provoked the Lord. In the following
verses you have this new thing, a wonder of providence, as God attestation to
his servant Moses. And it came (...) pass as he had made an end of speaking,
that the ^^^nd clove asunder that was under them: and the (...) opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, (...) And the same may be observed in a multitude
(...) instances concerning Christ and his apostles. They appeal to miracles as
God's witness to them. Believe me, says Christ, for the work's sake. And again,
if I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not
had sin. The apostle Paul pleads for himself and in behalf of his mission, that
the signs of an apostle were wrought by him. And the evangelist remarks with
reference to all the apostles, that they went forth and preached every where,
the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. They
preached in the name of the Lord, and he owned them by the power of miracles
that attended them.

I might here observe that the famous impostor Mahomet, as he was defective in
all other proofs of a divine mission, so particularly in this. When some of his
countrymen that were aware of the vile designs he was carrying on, under the
specious pretense of a call and revelation from heaven, set themselves to
oppose him, the more effectually to try and gravel him, they demanded he would
show them some miracle. Moses, say they, and Jesus, and the rest of the
prophets, according to your own doctrine, wrought miracles to prove their
mission from God. And therefore, if you be a prophet, and greater than any that
were sent before you, as you boast yourself, make the dead to rise, the dumb to
speak, and the deaf to hear. Let us see come down from heaven, some of those
punishments you threaten us with. Let us see the book come down from heaven
that you would have us believe you receive from thence; or ^e the angel descend
thence which you tell us, does (...) it unto you; and then we will believe
(...) words. But nothing of this could he pretc^^^ (...) Nor indeed did he ever
venture upon a (...) miracle, but knowing himself to be utterly disqualified
for any such work, he endeavors to evade the objections they brought against
him on that account, as well as he could: sometimes insinuating, that he was
only sent to preach to them, the rewards of paradise, and the punishments of
hell. Sometimes he insinuated, that their predecessors contemned the miracles
of Salek, and the other prophets, and that for this reason God would work no
more among them. At other times he told them, that those God had ordained to
believe, should believe without miracles, and that those whom he had not
ordained to believe, should not be convinced, though all the miracles they
required were wrought in their sight. And when he found this would not satisfy,
he goes to work another way; takes up the sword and resolves to make use of
that as his only argument for the future.

But the writers of the Scripture, and those that were employed in delivering
to us the doctrines thereof, do not put us off with such flames and sorry
pretenses as these are. They do not desire we should believe them upon their
bare word, but appeal to their works, the power of miracles they were entrusted
with, and exercised as there was occasion.

2. Let me observe, that the miracles these persons wrought, are certain
evidences of a divine power concurring with them. It was the just reasoning of
Nichodemus, Rabbi, we know thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can do
these miracles that thou do, except God be with him. A miracle supposes the
course of nature suspended and altered, which can be done only by the author of
nature: it is the finger of God, an operation of infinite power, whoever may be
the instrument in it. The apostles went forth and preached the ^osgel, says the
evangelist, the Lord working with th^^, and confirming the word with signs
following. (...) worked with them, or they had never wroug^ (...) things they
did. Now,

3. I think the argument hence fully conclusive, that these persons were
undoubtedly sent of God. They wrought miracles, and that by a divine power; and
we may be sure God would not lend his power, as I may express it, to confirm an
imposture. Had the persons we are speaking of been cheats, forged the doctrine
which they delivered to the world in the name of God, can we imagine that he
would have concurred with them in the manner he did? have enabled them to speak
all sorts of languages they had never learned, and that on purpose that they
might propagate and spread the religion they had contrived and forged; enabled
them to heal all sorts of diseases, and raise the dead, as we know they
frequently did? would God have been thus present with cheats and impostors,
that came to abuse mankind in the grossest manner? would he have supplied them
with power for such a horrid purpose? we cannot suppose this, without changing
our ideas and notions of God, and destroying his essential characters of
wisdom, holiness, and goodness.

In short, the miracles wrought by Moses, the prophets, Christ and his
apostles, are the strongest proof and evidence that can be given, so far as we
know, of a divine mission. None ever did such works as they. And I reckon, when
any come in the name of God, with such a power accompanying them, mankind not
only may receive them, but are under a necessity of doing it; otherwise, they
reject the testimony of God, and oppose his authority.

What shall we say, for instance, of that great confirmation of the christian
religion, the resurrection of Christ? had he not rose from the dead, his
religion had died with him. Whereas the miracle of his resurrection is such a
proof of his commission, as one would think the most stubborn infidel could not
withstand. Had he been an impostor, it is certain, he could not have raised
himself. And can we suppose, that God would have raised him, that is, have
employed his power, the exceeding greatness of his power, to establish a lie,
and give credit to a cheat: no, all the notions we have of God oblige us to
believe, that if Christ had not been the faithful witness, sent and approved by
him, he would never have given so high a testimony to him: but rather have
withdrawn from him, and left the temple of his body, when it was destroyed, to
have lain in its ruins forever. I remember a passage, which may serve for the
illustration of this argument, of an impostor, called El-David, that gave out
he was the Christ, and drew many followers after him. I^ ^s related by Maimon
in a letter to the Jews at Ma^^^illes. His pretenses making a noise in that
part of the world, he was brought before an Arabian prince, who asked him, what
miracle he showed, that they might believe in him? He answered, "cut off my
head, and I will live again." To which the prince replied, thou can not give
us a greater sign, and if it so fall out, that thou do rise again to life
after I have cut off thy head, I and all my people, nay, all the world sure,
will believe what thou say is true. And presently the experiment was made.
He commaned him to be beheaded, and there was an end of the cheat. But it was
not thus with our blessed Lord. He put the credit of all upon this one single
event, and came off with glorious success. He told them often he would rise
again on the third day. Accordingly, he did so at the time appointed; triumphed
over the grave, and was declared to be the Son of God with power thereby.

Now this miracle, and the others so wonderfully shown in the ministry of Moses
and the prophets, of Christ and the apostles, are such public authoritative
vouchers for the persons concerned, that God acknowledged them, owned them, and
sent them; that their doctrine was true and divine; that nothing can be
greater. It may be affirmed of all the rest, what was said of Jesus of
Nazareth, namely, that he was a man approved of God by miracles, wonders, and
signs, which God did by him.

I am sensible many objections may be and have been raised against this
doctrine; and it is granted, it is not without its difficulties. But as I am
determined to hasten through this subject as fast as possible, I must not enter
upon the consideration of these things, which would not only require more time
than I have for them; but it may be, more attention and judgment, than I can
promise myself from the generality of the auditory. In the mean time, I hope
none will think this is an evasion, and that I am willing to pass over
objections, because I know not what to say to them. I can truly declare, I know
no difficulty, that may not easily be removed; no objection against miracles,
that does in the least invalidate, and disable the argument from them. As an
instance of this, though I cannot now stay to examine all the objections, or
cavils that are brought in upon this account, I shall however mention the chief
and strongest of them.

1. It is objected, that we do not understand the extent of created powers; do
not so well comprehend the philosophy of nature, as to determine what is a
miracle, according to the common definition of it, that is, what is contrary to
the established course and laws of nature, what can or cannot be done by any
finite being, men or angels. Consequently, should it be granted, that God only
can work a miracle, yet if a cheat can do such things, as no skill of ours is
sufficient to distinguish from a real miracle, we are left under the same
difficulty; a miracle can be no satisfactory proof of a divine mission: since
an impostor can perform things so like miracles, that we know them not from
miracles.

This is the strongest objection, that I know, against the doctrine, and I have
given it in the strongest terms. In answer to it,

1. I grant, that created beings, evil spirits for instance, may do a great
many strange and surprising things. We find juglers among men, can by mere
legerdemain, perform feats that puzzle the nicest observers. And no question,
the devil can do far greater things. He understands more secrets in nature,
than the most skilful philosophers or physicians do, the virtues of natural
means, and knows when and how to apply them with more advantage; and
consequently may be allowed to perform, what may be to us utterly
unaccountable; what we may think above the powers of nature, though it may not
be so. But then we must consider for what purpose these things are done, in
what manner they are done, and what other evidences of divinity go along with
them. We are to attend to the circumstances of such signs and wonders, that we
are now supposing may possibly be done by wicked spirits; and thence make a
judgment of them, which we may not be qualified to make, upon the mere
contemplation of the facts themselves. But I add,

2. That no powers but those that were divine, ever performed such things as we
have recorded in Scripture. Neither men nor devils ever wrought wonders any
thing parallel to the miracles there related, or that deserve to be compared
with them. Suppose any could give the color of wine to water, make it look like
wine: did ever any turn a great quantity of water into real wine, into the more
generous sort thereof, as our Lord did at the marriage of Cana in Galilee. Thou
have kept the good wine till now, says the governor of the feast, speaking of
the wine to which Christ had miraculously converted the water. Supposing any
could by magic, or the devil by his own power, could calm the sea; yet, who
ever knew this done by a word speaking? Supposing a person of skill could open
the eyes of the blind; yet to do this as Christ did, by clay and spittle, is a
thing unknown in the world. Who ever attempted to speak a dead man into life,
or call him out of his grave? What virtue has a Lazarus come forth! to commend
back a departed spirit, and reunite it to its b^^^y? Life cannot be restored,
but by the author of life; at least we have no instances of any power effectual
for this purpose, but the divine power: nor do we find it was ever delegated to
impostors, or put forth by evil spirits, on any occasion. Diseases may be cured
by natural means, and the proper use of medicines. But our Lord cured all sorts
of diseases, and some have observed, such as were naturally incurable. A
learned Physician has wrote a book to prove this. And he cured them without
medicines, or waiting the leisure of nature; only by speaking a word: and
sometimes when the patient was at a great distance. How surp^^zing that, he
stood over her, and rebuked the fever, and it left her, and immediately she
arose and ministered to them?

If it be said, how do we know but spirits, and angels may do as much? I answer
by asking another question, whether God designed to prescribe a distinction
between created and uncreated power? between his own power and that of his
creatures? if not, how should he govern the world? at least, how should he make
himself known in the government of it, since we cannot discern his works from
those of his creatures? In a word, though I will not take upon me to say, how
far the power of this or that creature, of angels, good or bad, may go; and to
fix the precise bounds between the divine power, and that of second causes: yet
I think it no presumption to affirm, there are many things creatures cannot do;
and that the miracles we have an account of in Scripture, both in the Old and
New Testament, are of this sort. They cannot by a rod, or stick, stop streams
of water, and make them stand up like a wall. They cannot command water out of
a rock; make the ground open and swallow up a company of men; rebuke fevers and
other distempers, and make them depart immediately. They cannot make a man that
has been dead four days rise out of his grave by only calling upon him, and
bidding him come forth. They cannot say to a cripple, that has been lame from
his mother's womb, rise and walk, and thereby restore him, as Peter did. These
and the like works are such instances of power, such inroads upon the
established laws and course of nature, and so much above any capacity that
second causes are possessed of, so far as we know; that we can ascribe them to
none, but the author of nature, and great Lord of the world. I answer once more,

3. Whatever may be possible to created beings, it is certain, they can do
nothing without God: and I think it demonstrable from the divine perfections;
his wisdom, truth, goodness; that he will never suffer them to delude mankind
by such works of power, as those recorded in Scripture, employed to confirm
falsehood and lies. Suppose Satan and his accomplices could heal the fick, and
raise the dead; which yet, I am persuaded, none will undertake to prove they
can, in the manner that these things were performed by Christ and his apostles.
I ask, for what purpose they did this? If the Scripture be true, and they
hereby meant to establish it, it makes them take part against themselves,
represents Satan as divided against Satan, and ruining his own kingdom. If the
Scripture be false, and they concurred with the writers of it to give credit to
their fictions; this must be done, at least, by divine permission. It supposes
the great and wise governor of the world standing by, and not only so, but I
think, assisting, every one must own permitting; while the devil and wicked
men, his instruments, abused the name of God, and imposed on mankind in the
grossest manner; performing such things as none in the world can distinguish
from the works of God; and yet all is let pass without any interposition of
providence to discover the cheat. This I think not consistent with an
acknowledgment, that God governs the world, and with those attributes and
perfections of his that are inseparable from his nature and government.

2. It is farther objected that impostors have wrought miracles, Appollonius
Tyanoeus particularly, and the magicians in Egypt that withstood Moses.

I answer, as to the first, we have no good evidence of the truth by the facts
alleged. What is related by Philostratus is manifestly of very doubtful
credit. Besides, those pretended miracles were few, obscure, and in no respect
to be compared with those we have in the Scripture. As to the magicians in
Egypt, supposing they were real miracles, which yet it is not necessary to
grant, nor, so far as I know, is it necessary to deny that they were. But
supposing they were, they are no disparagement to the miracles of Moses, and
others in the Scripture. The case I take to be this: there was a trial of
skill, as I may say, between Moses and these men, Moses works several miracles
before them. God is pleased for the proving of Pharaoh, or for other purposes
and ends known to himself, to enable them to do the like: but then, exerts a
superior power, by his servant Moses, and so triumphs over them. He first sent
them his power and then withdrew from them, leaving them to manifest their
weakness and fraud. For after the specimens they gave, they were nonplussed,
and could proceed no farther. So that the issue of this contest was the defeat
of these pretenders; their conviction of a divine power with Moses, and I may
add, the establishment of Moses's authority. God left the magicians, supposing
they acted before by his power, continued to assist and own Moses; and thereby
declared whom he had chosen. And as Moses was hereby confirmed in his office,
and had his commission sealed from heaven, so it was with the rest of the
writers of Scripture: God bore testimony to them by miracles. But I hasten to
another point.

3. God bore testimony to the penmen of Scripture, and to those that were the
instruments and means of the revelation it contains, by prophecy. Something has
been offered on this head, when I spoke of the accomplishment of Scripture; and
I have at present only room for short hints. The subject is copious and
important; but I shall confine myself. Any one that converses with his Bible
will see how much it runs in a prophetic strain, it abounds with prophecies;
and divine providence has shown us the accomplishment of them: there by
proving, I think, the inspiration I am pleading for. Give me leave to mention a
few instances out of many.

It was prophesied and foretold, that Abraham should become a great nation;
that God would multiply his seed, even as the stars of heaven, and as the dust
of the earth; as it is expressed. And it is to be observed, at the time of this
assurance given him, Abraham had no child, nor had reason in an ordinary way to
expect any. He being old, and Sarah naturally past childbearing. And yet the
word of God took effect, and the prophecy proved a sure word of prophecy. God
built him up into a nation, and increased his posterity above any people in the
world, as we are often informed in their history. The apostle gives us this
summary account of it, Heb. xi. 12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him
as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand
which is by the sea shore, innumerable.

It was prophesied, that the descendants of Abraham should be sojourners in a
strange land for four hundred years; should live in a state of great affliction
and slavery; and that, at the end of that term, God would punish their
oppressors, and work deliverance for them. This was foretold, Genesis xv. and in
other places. How it was accomplished, you read in the book of Exodus. I will
only observe, that God not only visited his people, and visited their enemies
with his judgments, according to his word; but kept day with them: it came to
pass, says Moses, at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the
self-same day it came to pass, that all the hosts of Israel went out from the
land of Egypt.

It was foretold, that great body of men, the people of Israel, whom God had
delivered out of Egypt in so wonderful a manner, should all of them that were
above twenty years old, die in the wilderness; and none of them, save Joshua
and Caleb, enter the promised land; that they should wander in the desert forty
years, and there perish for their frequent murmurings and rebellions. This was
foretold, Number. xiv. the accomplishment of which you have, chap. xxvi. of the
same book.

Jacob foretold the settlement of the tribes in the promised land, and in a
prophetic map, as I may call it, represented their several conditions there;
where they should be fixed; what their state should be; and what changes they
should undergo. This you have, Genesis xlix. and the accomplishment of it in their
after history.

The state of the children of Israel in Canaan, their success, and all manner
of prosperity, whilst they continued obedient; their punishment, frequent
captivities and final destruction, upon their apostasy. This was foretold in
the most exact manner, and was accomplished with the like exactness; as might
be shown had I time to enquire into these things. You have the prediction, Lev.
xxvi. Deuteronomy. xxviii. and other places: and the accomplishment of it in the
constant course of Providence toward that people afterward.

As their captivity, so their return from captivity, with the time and
circumstances thereof, was foretold: that God would deliver them up into the
hands of their enemies for their sins, and afterward bring them back and
restore them. All this was prophesied of, over and over again, and every word
of it fulfilled.

The rise, continuance and fall of the four famous monarchies, the Assyrian,
Medo-Persian, Grecian and Roman, was exactly foretold by Daniel; the heads of
these monarchies described, and the great events and revolutions under them
represented, as if the prophet had been an historian, and had written after the
things were come to pass.

A great many things were foretold concerning particular persons, which were
verified in the even. Thus Josiah was prophesied of by name above three hundred
years before he was born, that he should execute the judgment of God upon the
altar at Bethel, which Jeroboam had set up, and upon the priests that
officiated there, 1 Kings xiii. 2. This was fulfilled, as you see, 2 Kings
xxiii. 15. Cyrus was prophesied of by name above a hundred years before he was
born, as the person that should restore the Jews and rebuild the temple, Isa.
xliv. 28. There are a great many wonderful and unlikely things in this
prophecy; as indeed in all the rest, could I here enquire into them: as, that
his birth should be foretold so long before; his name given him; that he should
conquer so potent a monarchy as that of Babylon; and that though an heathen, he
should favor and restore a religion his predecessors had set themselves to
crush and ruin. This could proceed only from him that knows all things, and to
whom future things are present.

We have a glorious collection of prophecies concerning the Messiah; the
illustrating of which would more than require a discourse by itself, and fully
prove what is said, that the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It
was foretold of him, that he should be the seed of a woman, born of a virgin,
which was accordingly fulfilled: that he should be the seed of Abraham and of
David, born at Bethlehem, and brought out of Egypt. In short, most of the
circumstances of his life, his sufferings, his death and resurrection, the
opposition he would meet with, the success of his doctrine, and the like, were
foretold: every iota and tittle of which predictions was accomplished.

I add, Christ and his apostles were distinguished with the same spirit of
prophecy, and foretold a great many wonderful events, which the christian
church has seen take place in the way and manner described. Thus Christ
foretold his own death with the circumstances thereof; that all his disciples
should forsake him; that one of them should betray him: and this he signified
when none of them had any suspicion concerning the traitor; nor the traitor, it
is likely, any suspicion concerning himself. He foretold the manner of his
death, and his resurrection, with the time of it. He foretold that those who
believed in his name, should work miracles, speak with tongues, heal diseases,
and cast out devils. How punctually this was accomplished, the history of the
New Testament, and the most primitive writings of the church inform us. Nor
were these extraordinary gifts confined to the apostolical ages; but were
common in the ages next succeeding. To restore to health, says Irenaeus,* by
imposition of hands, to cure the weak, the lame and paralitic, and those that
labor under any other malady, is a thing frequent in the church. To the same
purpose Origin. We have seen, says he, people freed from a thousand dreadful
symptoms and calamities, from which neither men nor devils could recover them,
by the invocation of Christ's name. And for the casting out of devils, the
fathers over and over again mention it in their apologies, as a thing confessed
by their adversaries. They appeal to their consciences and knowledge, and tell
them that many hundreds were still living of their own superstition as well as
christian proselytes, who by their personal experience could attest it.

Christ foretold the preaching of his doctrine through the world, that there
should arise false prophets, and false Christ's, that should come in his name
and deceive many, which accordingly was fulfilled. He foretold the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the temple; the signs and prodigies that should go before it,
the calamities that should attend it; and that the destruction should be total
and final; that there should not be lest one stone upon another that should not
be thrown down; that Jerusalem should be trodden down, and the Jews led
captives into all nations. How this has been fulfilled the world has seen. And
was I not now in haste to get through the subject, it would be no small
pleasure to show you the exact parallel between the prophecy and providence,
the prediction and the event. I shall only observe, that the Jews have often
attempted to rebuild their temple, though in vain. The last attempt was by
Julian the apostate, who out of spite to Christ, and to defeat the prediction,
gave orders for rebuilding it; but was baffled by the immediate hand of heaven.
The story is related by several, particularly by Ammianus Marcellinus, an
heathen who lived at that time. He tells us, that Julian endeavored to rebuild
the temple at Jerusalem, and gave it in charge to one Aliprius of Antioch,
assisted by the governor of the province, and a vast treasure by the Emperor to
hasten and promote the work. But, he adds, they were soon forced to desist from
the enterprise, by balls of fire issuing from the foundation, which terrified
and destroyed the persons employed therein. So much authority was there in
these prophecies, that God would not suffer men or devils to interpose and slur
them, or by any acts and powers of theirs, hinder their accomplishment. And how
strong an argument is this of the divine mission and inspiration of the persons
by whose ministry we have the Scripture doctrine and revelation. They had the
seal of miracles as you have heard, and the seal of prophecy, a demonstration
that God was with them, and had sent them. In the one instance he lent them his
power, in the other his knowledge: neither of which he would have honored
impostors and cheats with.

Let me farther remark, that the spirit of prophecy that runs through the
Scripture concerns generally such things, such events, as depended wholly upon
the will of God, and the will of free agents, which could not be known at that
distance by any but God himself, and those to whom he was pleased to reveal
them. Who could foretell, for instance, that there should be a man born called
Cyrus, so long beforehand? that he should conquer Babylon, that he should have
it in his heart to restore the Jews and rebuild their city? There were no
natural causes then existing of such an event: nor could any foresee it but the
infinite all-comprehending mind, who has the whole tract of time and series of
events under his eye at once, and to whom all his works are known from the
beginning to the end. In short, to foretell future events is the prerogative of
God. Hence we find him triumphing over idols upon this account; Let them show
us what shall happen, says he, show the former things what they be, and show
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods.
Intimating, that to be able to foresee and positively declare events and
occurrences of things merely contingent, that depend on the will of man, or the
pleasure of God; to declare these at a great distance of time before they come
to pass, argues divinity, or at least, special communion with and instruction
from the divine mind, who from his throne views and takes a prospect of all
time, and has all events placed in order before him.

I shall not now consider the objections that may be offered from diviners, the
heathen oracles, and the like. It is known there was so much uncertainty in
their answers, as very much disgraced them even with their votaries, and
occasioned the giving the nickname of "crooked speaker," unto the devils that
presided in their oracles. It is true the devil and his prophets endeavored to
imitate God and his prophets. But the whole history of their management shows,
they kn^^ no secrets, but what he was pleased to instruct them with, for the
trial and punishment of mankind. And after all their pretenses, the events
frequently blasted their credit. I think I may therefore with great safety and
assurance conclude, that the testimony of Jesus, and indeed the proof of the
Scripture's divinity and inspiration, is the spirit of prophecy.

DISCOURSE X. THE INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURE PROVED, AND THE CANON OF
SCRIPTURE VINDICATED.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I AM arguing the divinity or inspiration of the Scripture from the testimony
that God gave to the penmen thereof. I have already considered the two
remarkable instances of miracles and prophecy, and now go on to another
particular.

III. God bore testimony to the writers of the Bible by the spreading of their
doctrine, and the mighty success it had in the world. I must here premise, that
it is the christian religion, or doctrine of the New Testament, that this
argument chiefly respects. The revelation God made to the Jews was very much
confined to themselves. Not that others were wholly excluded. They admitted
proselytes, and taught their religion to them. But there was not that general
communication made to the world, as after the coming of Christ. When the
partition wall was broken down, and the enclosure God set about his ancient
people was laid open. The apostles had a commission in the largest terms to go
and preach the gospel to every creature, and proselyte all nations. God
designed the revelation, he made to the world by the ministry of Christ and the
apostles, should be universal for the use of all mankind that would receive it.
And it is this part of the divine revelation that my present argument
peculiarly relates to, the success and spreading of the gospel, the doctrine
and religion of the New Testament.

Though I may further premise, that if the argument from hence be good with
respect to one part, it does by consequence prove the whole Scripture to be
divine. For the New Testament confirms the Old, as I observed before. If Christ
and his apostles were sent of God, it is certain Moses and the prophets were so
too; for the former bear testimony to the latter. Let me add, I do not lay the
stress of the argument upon the mere spreading of their doctrine, but on the
manner and circumstances of it. Having premised these things, I shall set the
argument before you in a few particulars without enlargement.

1. It is a certain and known thing that the christian religion had the most
surprising success when first preached, and was spread through a great part of
the world in a little time. This appears from the ancient mounuments of the
church; from the testimony of friends, and acknowledgment of enemies.
Tertullian tells the Roman senate, that though the christians were but of
yesterday, yet they had filled all places and offices, that they were strong
enough to master the Roman empire; nay, that so great were their numbers, that
if they should but agree to retire out of it, the world would wonder at its own
solitude. And in his book against the Jews, he says, the christian religion had
enlarged its conquests beyond those of the Roman empire, and had subdued those
places that were inaccessible to their armies. Pliny takes notice in his letter
to the emperor concerning the christians, that there were such multitudes of
them, that the temples and sacrifices of the gods were almost forsaken. Tacitus
speaks of an immense number, even in Nero's time, the very first age of
christianity. In short, the prevalency of the christian religion was such, that
it gave occasion to the heathens to call it, "the powerful and prevailing
sect." Nor,

2. Did it prevail among the vulgar only, but among the most inquisitive and
learned. All sorts of persons, Jews, Gentiles, the ignorant and untaught, and
even the greatest philosophers, embraced christianity. Indeed, its success
then, and ever after, has been mostly with persons of a lower station in the
world. But there have always been some of the greatest name that have owned and
espoused it. It was so, particularly, at the first planting of it. I might give
a large catalogue of philosophers and men of same for learning that came into
the church, and employed all their abilities in the service of the christian
cause. Justin Martyr before he became a disciple of Christ, was conversant with
all the sects of the philosophers, and was at last a zealous Platonist; but
left all to follow Jesus, and upon his acquaintance with the doctrine of
Christ, professes, that he sound that to be the only sure and profitable
philosophy. Origin, another father in the christian church, was in so great
fame for his learning, that even after he professed himself a christian, many
of the philosophers attended his lectures at Alexandria, and some of them
dedicated their books to him. It is said of Flotinus, a famous Platonist, that
while he was reading lectures, discovering Origin among his auditors, he
blushed and was dashed with so great a presence, so as to break off abruptly. I
might instance in a great many more of considerable reputation for their
learning; but I forbear. All that I mention these things for, is to observe to
you, that as the christian religion was propagated through the world in a
little time, so some of the greatest men, persons of the highest name for
wisdom and knowledge, became proselytes to it.

3. The success that attended the gospel in its first publication was the more
remarkable and glorious, I might say, divine, on the account of the mighty
difficulties it had to encounter, and which it surmounted. Had I time to pursue
this argument, and to illustrate it with such particulars, as might be insisted
upon, it would amount to a sort of a demonstration, that the christian religion
is of God. For instance, to give a few hints, it had the strongest prejudices
of mankind, of Jews and Gentiles, to overcome.

Among other prejudices among the Jews, there were three that stood directly in
the way of the gospel, and that were so deeply rooted that I cannot see any
power, less than divine, could ever have conquered them.

One of them was, that the Messiah should appear with the character of a
sovereign earthly prince, whose business it was to deliver them from their
enemies, restore the kingdom of David at Jerusalem, and there reign in great
splendour and power over the house of Israel; the rest of the world being in a
great measure subject to their nation. This was the notion they had formed to
themselves of their Messiah and it still possesses their minds, as Maimonides,
one of their own rabbis, informs us.

It was another of their prejudices, that their law should abide for ever; that
the Messiah should be so far from abrogating, that he should establish it; and
that the glory of his kingdom should chiefly consist in the exact performance
of the legal worship. The forementioned Maimonides, tells us this shall belong
to his office, whenever he comes; to rebuild the temple, and gather the
dispersed of Israel; to re-establish the legal rites and Constitutions; to
restore sacrifices, the sabbatical years and jubilees, according to every
precept delivered in the law.

It was also an opinion among them, that had got hold of every mind, that the
Jews only should partake of the blessings of the Messiah's kingdom. The
Gentiles they accounted as dogs, unholy and unclean; and we find in a multitude
of places in the New Testament, they could not bear the thoughts of their
calling and admission to an equal state and equal privileges with themselves.

As for the heathens, they had prejudices too many to be here enumerated; and
which were like mountains in the way of the christian religion. The gods they
worshipped in this or that country, the rites with which they worshipped them,
and all the forms of their religion were become venerable with them by a
pretended antiquity. And so much were they inslaved to antiquity and tradition,
that even the famous Tully Do Natura Deorum; l. 3.
introduces Cotta as thinking the plea thereof sufficient to supply the want of
all other arguments, and to give a sanction to every thing that had obtained
among them; this alone will be sufficient for me, says he, that our
forefathers have thus handed it down to us.

I will only observe, besides the influence of education and custom, and the
slavish subjection, that hereby they were brought into, to their religion;
there were two things in it, that gave it a full possession of their hearts. It
was pompous, and had a glorious exterior, and was calculated to gratify their
fleshly inclinations.

Now let it be considered that before christianity could get any footing in the
world, all these prejudices must be removed. The Jews must quit their darling
notions of a temporal Messiah, and believe in a crucified Savior: the pagans
renounce the gods of their countries, the established rites of their religion;
the maxims they had received by tradition from their fathers; and which was a
further difficulty, renounce their beloved lusts. Upon these terms christianity
was preached to the world, and with all these disadvantages did it prevail and
triumph.

I might show, that it had, not only the prejudices of mankind against it, but
human laws, and all the power and learning of the world. The kings of the earth
and rulers of the people set themselves against the Lord and against his
Anointed. The heathen philosophers, the Jewish doctors, with all the authority
of the greatest emperors, were united against Christ and christianity, and yet
it prevails, thousands and myriads bow the knee to the holy Jesus, and profess
themselves the disciples of a crucified master. I am persuaded you will not put
me upon proving there must be the finger of God in this success. Let me observe
again,

4. The doctrine of the gospel in itself had a great deal in it to incumber it,
and obstruct its success. It was built upon the utter ruin of the heathen
religion; declared the Jewish religion void and antiquated, and decently laid
it in its grave. It overturns all the forms of idolatry and superstition the
world was so fond of; calls from pageantry to simplicity; and from looseness
and fleshly indulgence to the greatest strictness and purity. Some of its
doctrines were not a little shocking to the reason of mankind, as it was at
that time trained up, and blinded by inveterate prejudices. As for instance,
salvation by a crucified christ; this was the great fundamental point of the
gospel, and we know what entertainment it met with in the world: it was to the
Je^^^ a sl^^^bling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness. Pardon of sin,
justification and life, by the death and righteousness of another person, the
resurrection of the body, etc. To say nothing of the duties prescribed in the
christian religion, as humility, meekness, self-denial, forgiving and loving
enemies, and the like: these were things that lay cross in the minds of men,
most opposite to the great maxims of wisdom established among the philosophers,
and promised no kind reception to the gospel.

It may also be remarked here, that instead of honors, preferment, and temporal
advantages; it ever speaks of contempt, sufferings and persecution, as the lot
and portion of them that embrace it. Now, that such a doctrine as this should
obtain in the world, bear down all opposition, gain proselytes without number
among both Jews and Gentiles, is an event that, I think, it is impossible to
account for without having recourse to a divine hand. Especially, if I add,

5. That the instruments of this great work were low, mean, and contemptible
persons. You know the character of the apostles, and I need not insist upon it.
The founder of our religion sent forth not twelve princes or philosophers, but
twelve fishermen; men destitute of all human advantages, void of learning,
arts, language, reputation, power, and authority: these receive a commission
from him. And what was it to do? why, to teach all nations and convert the
world. Now you will please to remember what your Bible tells you, and what is
confirmed by the most authentic records of the church, that these persons went
forth, twelve poor fishermen, preaching the gospel in the name of Christ. And
in a few years they overturn Satan's empire, silence his oracles, baffle all
the philosophy of the heathens, and cavils of the Jews; and subdue a great part
of the world to their Lord and master. I leave every one to make the inference
from hence which I design, viz. that God approved them, that it was his
doctrine they published, that he sent them, and was with them. The whole
history of their proceedings, I think, demonstrates this.

Two things are evident concerning them, to mention no more, viz. that they had
a supernatural courage, otherwise they would not have undertaken the work.
Suppose twelve mechanics, among us, should now be sent by any to go into Turkey
or Persia, and convert the Mahometans, can we imagine that men in their senses
would engage in such an enterprise? they might object they wanted subsistence,
they wanted a guard to secure them from danger; they could not speak the
language of the country; nor was it likely they should have any other
reception, but to be insulted and sacrificed for their impertinency. The like
objections might rise in the minds of the first preachers of the gospel, had
they not known they were called of God; had they not received power and courage
from on high. Nor would they have persisted in their enterprise, as they did,
through all sorts of terrors and deaths, had not God been with them, and stood
by them, strengthening them by his spirit, with might in the inner man.

Further, it is evident, had not God sent them, and owned them, they could
never have succeeded in the manner they did, and under the difficulties they
met with. So that I reckon I may conclude with good authority, that the success
of the christian religion is a strong argument, that it is divine. And if so,
the Scriptures must have a divine original.

I am sensible it may be objected, that the imposture of Mahomet has spread
over a great part of the world. But I shall easily show this does not at all
weaken the force of my argument. The case of the one is no way parallel with
the other. Though, as I determine now to conclude the proofs I design to
mention of the inspiration of the Bible, I shall defer the consideration of
this objection taken from the spreading of Mahometanism, till I speak to the
objections in general; and hasten to another particular.

IV. God bore testimony to the writers of the Scripture, by the glorious
effects thereof upon the hearts of men, in their constant sanctification. This
is a standing proof of the truth of christianity, and indeed of the truth and
divinity of the Bible. And as it is an argument that every christian, ho
unskilful and unlearned soever he may be, may understand, and which he carries
in his own breast, it well deserves to be distinctly considered. I shall only
at present take notice, that the christian religion, wherever it came and was
heartily embraced, wrought a very glorious change. As it teaches to deny
ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
the world; prescribing the most exact rules of holy living. So it was attended
with an inward power and efficacy; subduing the minds of men to a conformity to
those rules. This was eminently seen in the first ages of the gospel show me a
drunkard, says one of the fathers, show me a passionate man, one that is
lustful; and with a few words of God, I will make him sober, calm, temperate,
chaste, etc. Such was the divine energy and virtue that generally went along
with the gospel at that time. And though we have reason to lament it, that the
word of God has not so sensible, and visible an effect upon those that profess
christianity now, as it seems then it had; yet still the gospel of Christ is
the power of God to salvation to every one that believes. God still owns it as
his instrument in renewing the minds of men; and thereby gives testimony to his
word. But as this is a testimony of the highest importance, and what tends not
a little to confirm christians of every sort in the behalf of their Bible, I
shall resume it upon another occasion; and therefore now dismiss it without any
farther enlargement.

There is one thing more I shall subjoin, as the last argument I intend to
offer of the inspiration of the Scripture.

V. That all this evidence is strengthened and confirmed by the gross
absurdities that attend the scheme of unbelievers, who deny the truth and
divinity of the Bible. They allege and object difficulties in believing the
Scripture; and yet they themselves believe against Scripture with far more
difficulties in their way. This might be shown in a great many instances. I
shall mention and touch upon a few. As,

That God notwithstanding, the confessed bounty and goodness of his nature, and
his gracious and merciful inclinations toward mankind; should yet suffer them
to remain under their present darkness, ignorance, and prejudices, without
affording them any supernatural revelation. That mankind need a revelation from
heaven, I have at large proved. I have proved, that if the Bible be not that
revelation, there is no such thing in the world. So that this is one absurdity
that attends their scheme, who reject the authority of the Scriptures, that God
has given no revelation of himself to the world.

Another is, that a book should be offered to mankind, attested in such a
manner as the Bible is, so full of strong evidence, and yet be false.

Again, That so great a part of the world, the wisest and best part of the
world, should he under a delusion for so many ages; embracing the Scripture as
a revelation from God, when it is a mere imposture, and yet the cheat never be
discovered.

That the persons concerned in delivering to us the doctrines of the Bible,
should impose upon us by known designed juggle and imposture; and that without
any prospect of advantage to themselves. This is to make them guilty of the
greatest wickedness, the vilest iniquity upon no motive, but to be undone in
this world, as they found would be their case, and undone in the next,
supposing they believed any thing of another world.

Farther, that so many impostors and cheats should unite in the same black and
horried designs; invent lies and impose them upon the world in the name of God;
and that none of them should ever recant, and discover the fraud, that neither
the love of life, nor the terrors of a violent death, which was the lot of many
of them, even on the account of their religion, should have any influence upon
them to make them confess the truth; but that they should persist in their
testimony concerning their doctrine, and their mission to the last.

And that such wicked men as the persons I am now speaking of, the unbelievers,
must suppose them to be, should with such an evil conscience set themselves to
do the greatest good; I mean, deliver the most excellent doctrine to the world,
that has the highest tendency to promote the honor of God, and the happiness
of mankind. Certainly had they been knaves, they would have dealt in other
matters, and have appeared in a different form; have flattered mankind, and
have endeavored to recommend themselves to their favor. In short, according
to the fancy of our unbelievers, here are a company of the worst of men in the
world, doing the greatest good in the world; and that with a certain prospect
of bringing upon themselves the greatest present evils and sufferings. Can any
believe this without infatuation?

Again, That these deceivers and cheats should be able without any human
advantages of learning, subtilty or secular power to persuade so great a part
of mankind to believe their fables; and upon terms of self-denial and
sufferings, embrace the doctrines and stories they had invented on their own
heads.

That all the experience that thousands and millions of sober, grave, and wise
men have had of the truth and divinity of the Scripture; of its power to
convince, reform, and change mankind; to comfort in their greatest distresses,
to direct and guide in doubts and difficulties, etc. should all be mere
delusion.

That there should be a sovereign, wise, and good God, the constant governor of
this world, and inspector of human affairs; and that he should stand by and see
so great, so plausible an imposture prevail among mankind, and never interpose
for its defeat; but instead thereof, by strange, surprising providence, give
open countenance to it.

I add, That the Bible should be false, and yet the discovery of this remain
the special, peculiar attainment and privilege of persons of our unbelievers
character. This, I think unaccountable, and know not why I may not number it
among the absurdities that affect their scheme. I would not aggravate matters
here. But I think it evident, they do not reject the Bible because they approve
of an higher and more excellent scheme of religion; because they have something
better to advance in the room of the Bible. It is generally suspected
concerning them, they had best see upon what principles they go that they
quarrel with the Bible, because it quarrels with them, would disturb their
pleasures, and abridge them of their liberties. And that these should be the
only men favored with the judgment and taste to distinguish things, or that
have the greatest share of honesty to profess and own the truth, is some what
strange, and the belief of it, I perfume, not a little absurd.

Well, these are some of the difficulties that clogg the unbeliever's scheme.
Whether they do not amount to absurdides, I leave it to be considered. If they
do, it will be allowed, they serve the purpose I mention them for, confirm the
authority of the Bible, and assist and strengthen the conclusion I have been
drawing from sundry topics and heads of argument, namely, that the Scripture is
given by inspiration of God.

Thus I have not only shown that the Scripture is true; but that it is
inspired, and of divine original; which are two of the points I undertook to
prove. It remains,

III. That I vindicate the cannon of Scripture, or prove, that the present
books of our Bible are the originally inspired books of Scripture. And for the
clearer proceeding in this matter, I shall, 1. Premise a few things for stating
the point about the canon of Scripture. 2. Prove that we have the original
inspired books in our canon, or catalogue of sacred books of Scripture: and
then, 3. Answer some questions, or objections, with reference hereto.


1. I shall premise a few things for stating the point about the canon of
Scripture, and to give you some clear notions of the matter. And,

1. When I say the books of our present Bible are the original inspired books
of Scripture, I do not mean they are the autographs, or the very books in the
hand writing of the inspired authors. It may indeed be questioned, whether
there were any great number of them together in this sense? whether Moses at
first wrote the five books, that were delivered to the Jews, with his own hand?
or, whether the prophets and apostles wrote, with their own hands, all the
sacred volumes, the church received from them, and in their name. They might
employ amanuenses, some to write from their mouths. This seems particularly to
have been the case of the apostle Paul, and it might be so of others; as
appears from 2 Thessalonians. iii. 17. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand,
which is the token in every epistle, so I write: intimating, that he used to
employ others to write the epistles themselves, ordinarily, at least, that he
sent to the churches: he dictated, and they wrote: and then he added with his
own hand the salutation, which was a token and sign that the epistle was from
him, and that he owned it. And this, I say, might be the case of the other
sacred penmen. But however that be, whether they wrote themselves, or others
from them, we do not now pretend to have the several first original volumes, or
any of them. The individual ink and parchment, with, and on which they wrote,
could not be preserved to our time without a miracle. As to the original book
of Moses, or the Pentatcuch, we find it was, by the special appointment of God,
laid up by the side of the ark, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 25, 26. The text adds, that it may
be there for a witness against thee. It was deposited there as a public
authentic record, that if any should attempt to corrupt the law, this divine
copy might be produced against them. Some think it remained by the ark till the
destruction of Jerusalem, but after that, it is in vain to enquire further
about it. As to the rest of the inspired books, I mean, in their first and
original manuscripts, we know less of them; how long they were preserved, or
when they perished. What we pretend to is, that they were wrote out for the use
of the church in their respective ages, and communicated in faithful copies
from one generation to another. But as to the original or first books, they are
long since perished and lost. Nor could it be otherwise, as I said, without a
miracle. Again,

2. I would premise, that I do not suppose the copies we have of the first
original books are so absolutely perfect that there is not the least error
therein. This is what can be said of no ancient book in the world. Tully
complains of the Latin authors, that they were published with many blunders and
mistakes in his time: and the same complaint has been made of all others,
whether Latin or Greek historians, poets, and philosophers. And though more may
be said in behalf of the sacred books, than of any of the rest; yet it would be
extravagant to assert, they are brought down to us free of all mistakes. It is
but about three hundred years since printing was sound out: and before that
time they were transcribed, I may say, almost an infinite number of times. And
I think it not possible in an ordinary way, and without inspiration, that there
should be no errors in the several copies. The ignorance, haste, carelessness,
etc. of transcribers would probably betray them into mistakes. And we find in
fact, that there is some difference, there are some various readings, even
among the most ancient and authentic copies. But then I have two things to add,
viz. that we have reason to conclude, that the mistakes would not be many, and
that they would not be great. They would not be many. The high importance of
the things themselves would excite more than common care. The church in every
age received those writings as divine, and had a mighty veneration for the
contents of them: and, consequently would be watchful over them that they might
not be corrupted and depraved. And as God designed them for the use of the
church in all ages, one cannot but expect a special superintendency of
providence over them. So that we have reason, I say, to think the errors would
not be many. And I subjoin, we may expect they would not be great. It is
certain, they are not in matters of any great importance. All ancient copies
agree in every article and doctrine of religion. And what various readings
there are, are only in things of less weight, in which the christian faith and
religion is not much concerned. And even here the skilful critic is able, by
comparing the several copies, to discover which is the true and genuine
reading. Often it may be done; and where it is otherwise, and it yet remains
uncertain which copy is the true reading, which is most likely to be the
original inspired text, it is in such minute matters that religion runs no
hazards, suffers no damage: all copies agreeing not only in the essentials, but
even in the substance and all important circumstances of divine doctrines and
histories of fact.

3. I do not know that it is necessary to maintain, that all that was ever
written by inspired men, is preserved and contained in our Bible. This, I am
sensible, is a controversy of some difficulty. But as I do not think it proper
for the auditory, I shall not trouble you with it. Some have thought the Bible
mentions several sacred pieces, which we have not, as the three thousand
parables or proverbs of Solomon, and the thousand and five songs; besides his
books of natural philosophy; for we are told, that he spoke of trees, from the
cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the hyssop that springs out of the
wall. He spoke also of beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and of
fishes. These they think might be inspired books, but now are lost. As also the
books of Nathan the prophet, and of Gad the seer, mentioned 1 Chronicles. xxix. 29.
The prophecies of Ahijah the shalonite, the visions of Iddo the seer, 2 Chronicles.
ix. 29. The book of Jasher, Josh. x. 13. To which some have added several
gospels whose names occur in the primitive writers: and the epistle to the
Laodiceans, spoken of Col. iv. 16. as they would understand the text. These
they think were the works of inspired men; but by some means or other now lost.

But others are of a different mind, and think none of these writings were
inspired. However, I shall pass over this debate, and the arguments produced on
the one side, or the other, for the establishing their different opinions. In
the mean while, I do not think it any prejudice to religion to suppose, though
we have no sufficient evidence of the fact, that there might be some divine
writings, some narrations, or gospels, for instance, and some epistles, drawn
up by inspired men that are not included in our canon, or catalogue of sacred
books. The apostles had their distinct provinces, were dispersed through a
great part of the world to spread the christian religion, they could not stay
long in a place, and it is not improbable they might all of them, or most of
them, leave abstracts of their doctrine behind them in the places where they
had been; and when they took leave of the churches they had gathered, being
called elsewhere. Now should it be granted, there might have been more of these
than are now come to us, this is neither an argument against the authority of
the books we have, nor against their sufficiency. There were many more things
that Jesus did, than those the evangelists have written, as St. John tells us.
And no doubt there were many discourses he delivered, many sermons of his
apostles, which they delivered by inspiration, that were not recorded. And some
that were occasionally written, which answered the end for which they were
published; and yet not being intended for general and universal use, are not
preserved and continued in the church. This may be granted without any
disadvantage to the authority, or sufficiency of our Bible. Though, as I said,
we have no certainty of it, and it is more than can be proved. Hereupon,

4. What I intend, when I say, that the books of our Bible are the original
inspired books of Scripture, is in short this; that the books we now have and
embrace as inspired, are those that the church of Christ has all along owned as
such, and received into the canon, or catalogue of sacred Scriptures. It has
received all these books as inspired, and received none else. And further, that
they have come down to us in the main incorrupt. None of those that were once
admitted into the canon are lost; and none of them corrupted in any points of
consequence, or importance. Let me add,

5. The sacred canon, 'or catalogue of inspired books, was not composed and
finished at once; but gradually, and at different times. This may be affirmed
with respect both to the Old Testament and the New. The books of the Old
Testament were delivered to the church at diverse times; first the decalogue,
or ten commandments; the two tables wrote by the finger of God, with the other
laws revealed on mount Sinai; and afterward the whole pentateuch, or five
books of Moses. When and where Moses wrote these, with other questions of the
like nature I pass over, and shall only observe, that the first and original
book of the law was laid up in a chest or coffer, as is supposed, by the side
of the ark, and kept there as the sacred standard of their religion under that
dispensation: copies of it being dispersed among the people. And this was the
first part of the scripture canon. The other books of the Old Testament were
added afterward, as they were occasionally written; the persons that tendered
them to the church having first given satisfaction concerning their
inspiration. How this was done, is a question of too great nicety, now to be
considered and resolved. Sometimes, it is likely, they came with the power of
miracles; sometimes the persons, that offered any revelation to be received by
the church, were established and known prophets; or they had the testimony of
allowed and approved prophets. They spoke in the name of God, and brought
sufficient credentials with them: God giving testimony to them in a
supernatural way that he sent them, and that their message was divine. Let me
only observe farther, with reference to the Old Testament, that it is probable
the canon of it was settled: all the books of it reduced into one volume, and
delivered to the church after the captivity. This is the common opinion of
learned men, and they make it the work of the great synagogue, as it is called,
in which were present Ezra, Haggai, Zachary, Malachi, Nehemiah, and Zerubbabel.
These collected all the inspired books, such as were written during the
captivity, as well as before, and committed them to the care of the church.

The like observations might be made concerning the canon of the New Testament.
It was at first published to the world, by Christ and the apostles in their
sermons, before any part of it was committed to writing. Nor was it written all
at once, but gradually some at one time, and some at another; in what order,
and way. I am not now to enquire. I would only suggest, that as several persons
were extraordinarily called to preach the gospel and publish the doctrines of
it to the world; so some of those were stirred up to write for the use and
service of the church, at different times, as it pleased God by his spirit to
direct them. It is supposed the gospels were written first, and that in the
order in which they now stand in our Bible: and the epistles occasionally, as
the affairs of the church required, and the inspiring Spirit conducted. At
last, before the age of inspiration ceased, and toward the close of it all the
writings of the New Testament were collected into a volume, and left as a
sacred trust to the church in future ages. This is supposed to have been done
by St. John, who outlived all the other apostles.

I have given these hints in an hasty, superficial manner, the illustrating and
confirming of which would require more time and discourse, than I doubt would
be agreeable to some of my hearers, upon a subject so much out of their way.
They may however, afford you an imperfect view of a very important subject. And
so I proceed,

II. To prove, that the present books of our Bible, are the originally inspired
Scriptures, that is, the books are the same that were at first given by
inspiration of God. We have the same pentateuch that Moses delivered to the
Jews. We have all the rest of the books both of the Old and New Testament, that
the inspired writers left with the church. We have the same in number and kind,
and they are not corrupted or depraved in matters of moment, much less, in
points fundamental. I will evidence this with respect to both the Old and New
Testament: yet very briefly, that I may not too long try your patience. Though
methinks, if you would consider the matter, I might expect your attention, our
faith and hope, our eternal all, depend upon the truth and divinity of the
Bible, and to prove the books of it genuine, is the same thing with regard to
your spiritual interests, as it is with regard to your temporal concerns, to
prove your deeds and conveyances are genuine.

1. I will begin with the Old Testament, and prove that could not be changed,
or corrupted; but that we have the same original books, that Moses and the
prophets delivered to the Jews.

To which purpose let it be considered, that it was morally impossible, that
the books of the Old Testament should be changed or corrupted. The law was
published and revealed in a very solemn and awful manner, at mount Sinai. The
original book was laid up, as you have heard, in the sanctuary, to which they
might have recourse upon occasion. Copies were delivered out for the use of the
people, and dispersed among them, with a special charge that they should not
add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. iv. 2. and again, xii. 32. What things
soever I command you observe to do it. Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish
from it. And as they had the law in their hands, so they were obliged to have
it in their hearts, to teach it diligently to their children, and talk of it
when they sat in their houses, when they walked by the way, when they lay down,
and when they rose up; to write it upon the doer-posts of their houses and upon
their gates, Deuteronomy. vi. 6, 7, 9. And Chap. xi. 18, 19, 20. And so conversant
were they, and so expert in their law, that Josephus tells us they had it
constantly in their mouths, and knew every thing in it as well as their own
names.

And as the law was matter of every one's study, so the public reading of it
was a constant part of their worship. We are told, Moses had in old time them
that preached him, being read in their synagogues every Sabbath day. Add to
this, that in the year of the release, at the end of every seventh year, the
book of the law was produced, and solemnly read before all the people. They
read their law every week by distinct portions in their synagogues, or places
of religious worship. And on this occasion the whole volume was brought forth,
and read before the people. Now these circumstances, and many more might be
taken notice of, make it next to impossible, that the law should be changed, or
corrupted. They had authentic copies of it among them. Some of the Jews tell
us, Moses wrote thirteen copies thereof with his own hand, that he delivered
one to the priests to be preserved in the holy place, and one to each of the
twelve tribes to be kept by the elders of each tribe. The design of which, it
is likely, was that the people of each tribe might have an authentic copy to
have recourse to, if any thing was thought to be amiss in the more private
copies; as the whole nation upon the like occasion might resort to the copy in
the sanctuary. This being the case, it is, I say, morally impossible that a law
thus promulgated, in which a whole nation had so great an interest, their
government, polity, civil as well as religious interest depending upon it; a
law so constantly read, so universally studied and known should be altered.
None could attempt to do it without being discovered; nor would they escape the
punishment due by the law to such a wickedness.

Again, as a farther argument, it is considerable, that they had the utmost
veneration for their law. They reverenced it even to superstition, as might be
shown in many instances. Some have told us, that they thought every private
man, that could, was obliged to write a copy of the law with his own hand. And
they were strangely superstitious in the manner of their writing, which however
let us see in what high esteem their law was with them, and that they thought
they could not pay it reverence enough. But to omit other particulars, I will
only take notice that they had an order of men among them, their Masorites,
whose business it was to watch over the sacred text, and take care that not the
least change should be made in it. And the pains they took to this purpose were
very extraordinary. They numbered not only all the verses, but words and
letters of the law; took an account how often any word occurred therein;
criticized upon the form of every letter, how differently it was written; and
employed an industry and art that was almost incredible. Now was it likely, was
it even possible, that a book thus guarded should be corrupted?

I might farther urge to the same purpose, that our Savior, who so freely upon
many occasions censures the Jews, particularly the Scribes and Pharisees for
their faults, never once accuses them of corrupting their Scriptures, or of any
designs of that kind. He tells them of their hypocrisy, their oppression and
pride; of their making void the law by their traditions; but never charges them
with changing it, or corrupting any of the books of it. But rather bears
testimony to them in this particular, whilst he directs to the searching the
Scripture, that is, the writings of the Old Testament; for these were all the
Scriptures extant at that time, and says, that therein they had eternal life;
which he would not have said, had they either changed or corrupted it. And we
find the apostle mentions the Jews, as having the sacred trust of the Scripture
lest in their hands, without hinting one word of their unfaithfulness, unto
them were committed the oracles of God. Now as this crime, the corrupting the
sacred oracles, would have been the greatest of all crimes, we cannot imagine
our Savior and his apostles would have passed it over in silence, had they
been guilty of it.

Farther, the New Testament frequently intimates, that the text of the Old
Testament was not corrupted. This is implied in that our Lord and his apostles
so often confirm their doctrine thereby, and appeal to the authority of Moses
and the prophets. The apostle in the text declares, all Scripture, meaning the
Scripture of the Old Testament, was given by inspiration of God. And speaking
of Timothy's knowing the Scripture from his childhood, he says, they were able
to make wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. An
argument that they were entire and not depraved. I might subjoin the testimony
of their own writers, as Josephus, for instance, who, notwithstanding he
upbraids them for their many crying iniquities, and imputes the dreadful
judgments that came upon them to their sins and apostasies, yet clears them of
any guilt in corrupting their law; and indeed, applauds their zeal in and about
it. And, which is very much to our purpose, he gives us a catalogue of the
divine books they had preserved; the very same that now we have. Philo, another
of their learned writers, bears testimony concerning them; that from the going
forth of the children of Israel out of Egypt, from the giving of the law, until
his days, which was about two thousand years, there was not so much as a word
changed or altered therein: and adds, that there was not any Jew but would
rather die an hundred times over, than suffer his law to be changed in the
least. And this I think sufficient to prove that the Old Testament is not
changed; but that the same original inspired books are communicated to the
christian church, that the church of the Jews received from Moses and the
prophets. I must hasten through the other class of argument, viz.

2. To prove, that the books of the New Testament remain the same and
uncorrupted. I shall only mention the heads that might be insisted upon more
fully.

It is a good argument that the books left by the evangelists and apostles were
the very same we now have, in that we find in the most early writers of the
christian church quotations out of them, in which the very same words are
produced we now find in them. We have several of these quotations in the very
first writers; which shows that the books, the christian church then made use
of, and received as the writings of the inspired apostles, were the same and
not different books, from those we have in our hands and receive as such. We
have testimonies to this purpose above one thousand five hundred years old.

And then it is observable, that we have in the writers of the primitive
church, even in the very first ages, lists of the sacred books of the
New Testament. They not only quote them, but number them; mention the four
evangelists, Paul's epistles, and the rest as the works of such and such
persons, whose names they bear. I cannot here produce the evidence of this; but
dare be accountable for it at any time.

Again, Tertullian, one of the first of the fathers, who lived within a little
more than an hundred years after the apostle John, takes notice of the original
writings under the hands of the apostles; as what remained in some churches in
his day. Now if this was so, the church at that time had a full opportunity of
satisfying themselves concerning any book, or passage, by appealing to those
churches as to such particular books, or passages.

Further, we have the canon of the New Testament owned and declared by an early
council in the primitive church, which has left it as it now is. They place
the same books, and no more in it than what are now received in the protestant
churches.

Some of the keenest enemies of the christian faith owned many of the books of
the New Testament, that is, that they were written by such and such persons in
whose names they appear. Thus Julian the apostate mentions the gospels of
Matthew and Mark, of Luke and John. And others mention other books; an argument
that nothing could be objected against the fact, that these books were wrote by
such persons. They herein grant, that the christians did not forge their books,
but received them from such authors.

I might add, that some of the fathers argue against the here^^es they oppose,
that their doctrines did not agree with the unquestionable writings of the
apostles.

In a word, it is not probable, nor indeed possible that these books should be
forged, be changed or corrupted in any material points. For, 1. they could not
be corrupted during the lives of the apostles, while the church was under the
conduct of an infallible spirit, and under the authority of the prime ministers
of Christ's kingdom. Should any then have attempted to impose spurious writings
upon the church, there was an easy remedy at hand. We cannot suppose any books
would then be admitted, but what were approved by the apostles and apostolic
men. And consequently, for the first age the canon of Scripture must, I think,
be allowed to be secure. 2. When the divine books were communicated to the
church, they were received with great reverence and veneration, and esteemed as
their glory and treasure. They looked upon them as a revelation from heaven,
and charter for heaven; the rule of their life, and foundation of their hope.
And we find that generally they would submit to any tortures and deaths rather
than renounce or part with them. And can we imagine they would corrupt them
themselves, or willingly suffer others to do it? No more than you would allow
knavish men to tamper with the writings by which you hold your estates. 3.
There were great numbers of copies spread abroad through the several churches
of Christ, and in several nations. Now it cannot be thought all should agree in
a design of changing or corrupting the original books. And if some only should
endeavor it, the uncorrupted copies would remain to detect them. 4. They were
very early and soon translated into different languages, and a multitude of
learned men made it their business to teach, explain, and write comments upon
them. Now supposing there was something wrong in one version, or in this or
that copy, something changed, added, or taken away; there were many other
copies, and other versions by help of which the neglect or fraud might be and
would be corrected. 5. They were constantly read in their public assemblies. As
the primitive christians used to be very conversant with them in private, so
the reading of them was always a part of their solemn and joint worship. By
which means, they could not but be well acquainted with them, and have them
fixed in their minds and memories, which would be a security against any
remarkable corruption of them. 6. Christians were soon unhappily divided into
different parties and opinions, had many disputes among themselves about some
articles of their faith; in all which they appealed to the holy Scripture as
the standard of their faith, and the judge of their questions: and consequently
no one party could corrupt the same, but the rest would complain of them, and
expose them for it. 7. Add to all this, the watchfulness of divine providence,
which we have reason to be satisfied would interest itself in this matter, and
not suffer the word of God to be altered or corrupted in things of moment, that
concern the salvation of mankind, or that would affect and destroy the design
of his affording such a revelation to the world. In short, it is as reasonable
to suppose, that a crafty lawyer could forge a new statute book, and a new body
of laws for the people of England, and bring them into our courts, as that any
men, whatever their designs were, could change or corrupt the books of the New
Testament, which were received by all sorts of christians, as the rule of their
religion, and charter of their happiness.


And thus, I hope, I have cleared in some measure the question relating to the
canon of Scripture; have shown you that the books of our present Bible are the
original inspired books thereof. I promised to take notice of some objections:
but must leave them to another discourse.

In the mean while, what has been said, is matter of no small satisfaction and
comfort to the judicious and inquisitive christian. The Bible is his
inheritance; its testimonies the rejoicing of his heart; and it cannot but give
him a pleasure, the greatest pleasure, to see this well established, and its
authority vindicated. And should we not value, study, and endeavor to improve
our Bible, and the several books of it; when we have so good assurance that
they are divine. The high importance of the things contained therein should
recommend it. The blessed tendency of its doctrines, should recommend it. And
methinks it should exceedingly raise our esteem of it, that it is a book sent
from God. O learn to receive it, and reverence it as such; and to answer the
apostles character of the Thessalonians, in which he so much rejoices, and with
which I shall conclude, For this cause thank we God without ceasing, because
when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God.

DISCOURSE XI. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED, AND THE USEFULNESS OF SCRIPTURE DISPLAYED.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I HAVE endeavored to clear and vindicate the canon of Scripture, have proved
that the books of our Bible, are the Scriptures that were given by inspiration
of God. I am sensible that several objections have been made to the account I
have given. But as I am in haste to come to a conclusion, and cannot suppose
many of my hearers so well acquainted with these matters, as to desire a full
discussion and examination of them, or likely to receive it with advantage; I
shall in a great measure pass them by, and only mention a few of the most
considerable.

1. It is objected, that we know not when or by whom the canon of the Old or
New Testament was settled and established. I answer, we have very probable
evidence that the canon of the Old Testament was supervised and settled by Ezra
after the return of the Jews from captivity: and that of the New Testament by
the apostle John, as I observed before. However, it is sufficient if we can
prove both were settled whilst the church was under the conduct of inspired
men; who, we may be sure, would admit no books into the canon, but such as were
authentic and divine. Let us lay the scene among ourselves, and in our own
nation: suppose we had had a succession of prophets, and several books of
religion had been written among us, some in one age, some in another; and
offered to the church as inspired, at least, before all the prophets, or other
inspired persons, were gone from among us, and that extraordinary order ceased,
all the divine books were gathered into a volume, and delivered to the church,
as the rule of religion. Supposing this the case: I cannot see we could
reasonably doubt of our canon, though we knew not certainly when it was
received in the church whilst it had inspired guides. And this is really the
case with reference to the canon of Scripture. There were several prophets in
the Jewish church, as Haggai, Zachary and Malachi, after the canon was
finished, as we now have it. And we may conclude, that these men would neither
suffer inspired books to be rejected, nor spurious ones to be obtruded on the
church.

2. It is objected, that there are some books both of the Old and New Testament
that we know not the writers of; and had they been inspired, surely we should
have them under the names of the inspired authors. To omit other instances, it
is uncertain, say our objectors, by whom the epistle to the Hebrews was
written, neither by the apostle Paul, by Luke, his constant companion, or by
Clemens his fellow laborer, as he is called; or by Barnabas. Some of the
ancients ascribe it to one of these, and some to another. I answer, that though
the writer of this or that book might for reasons, which then had their weight,
be suppressed for a time; yet at last it was generally known. Thus, for
example, almost all antiquity agreed that the epistle to the Hebrews was wrote
by the apostle Paul. But I answer further, the character of the book itself is
of far greater moment, than the name of the writer. If it brought evidence that
it was a divine book, the question, who wrote it? is not very material. And if
it was received as an inspired book in the age when it was wrote, and whilst
the church was governed by inspired men, as I said before, this would be
sufficient to satisfy the church in any after age concerning it.

3. It is pretended, there were many other books besides these we retain in our
canon, that went abroad in the primitive church under the name of inspired
authors; and how come those in our canon only to be admitted, and the rest
rejected; when they claimed equal authority? I answer to this, I grant there
was in the first ages of christianity a great number of apocryphal writings. It
may well be supposed, that when so admirable an institution as that of the
christian religion first took place in the world, its professors would be
commenting upon it in a great variety of books, which they did under different
titles, as acts, epistles, gospels, intineraries, recognitions, martyrdoms, and
the like. And as these would be read by all sorts, so it is not improbable, but
some of them might for a time pass for divine and inspired. But I add, when the
church came to examine and try them, they were rejected, as being different
from the genius, spirit, and manner of the apostles, as Eusebius gives the
reason; they were not sufficiently recommended, were not approved by any
apostle or apostolic men; were found destitute of internal characters, in some
things contrary to the unquestionable writings of the apostles, etc. And
therefore whatever esteem they might once have, they were upon good reason
afterward set aside, and of no authority, and became neglected.

4. It is farther objected, that some of the books in our canon, were not owned
and received in the first age of the church. I answer, this may be granted
without any prejudice to the authority of these books. The canon was not
completed at once, as I have already observed, but was a gradual thing. The
books of the New Testament were written some at one time, some at another, upon
different occasions. The apostles, you know, were sent forth to disciple all
nations, to preach the gospel to every creature, and in their journies up and
down, they wrote many of their epistles. And as the church was under
persecution, and one part lay at a great distance from another, we need not
wonder that some churches had inspired writings, which others at first knew
nothing of; and hence might proceed the scruples that those had with reference
to particular books. They were but lately come to their hands; they had not
sufficient opportunity of examining them, and of receiving the testimony of
their brethren concerning them. But then I add, after due examination, the
books referred to in the objection, were universally received. So that in
reality, this is so far from being an objection against the canon, that it is
an argument in favor of it. The church first questioned some books, and doubted
of them; which shows they were not credulous. But afterward they admitted them
as divine; which shows they had satisfaction concerning them. In a word, the
first christians engaged in the profession of their religion, not with the
looseness, indifference, and treachery of our times; but with an extraordinary
warmth, zeal, and selfdenial. Religion was the greatest thing in the world with
them. They would not betray the christian church, part with any doctrine, or
any rule of practice in the New Testament, much less any book of it, for all
the world. The sacred volumes were dearer to them than their lives. No
inducement, promises or threatenings, rewards or terrors, could prevail with
them to give them up, or suffer them to be depraved. I might subjoin, that all
the books of the New Testament seem very much of a piece; all written with the
same spirit, and worthy of the same divine author. Not one of them has any
internal character that disgraces it, or brings it under suspicion. So that as
the books we at present have, are the same the first christians owned, after
great caution, serious and strict examination, when there was any room for
question, owned as divine, and gloried in as a treasure from heaven, we have
abundant reason to own them as such too. Our Scripture is the same with theirs,
both given by inspiration of God, both have that gospel, which, as the apostle
expresses it, the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven.

And thus I have finished the third thing proposed under the head of
vindicating the canon of Scripture. What remains in the course of the general
method, is to answer objections against the inspiration thereof. A great deal
has been offered to prove that the Scripture is given by inspiration of God.
Many volumes formerly, and of late, have been filled with the argument. But
notwithstanding all that has been said, or can be said, there are some that it
seems are not, will not be satisfied. And I shall now consider what these
persons have to allege as the reason of their infidelity; if one may suppose
they have any thing for it that deserves the name of reason. Was I here to
defend the cause of religion at large, I should divide the objectors into
different classes; for they seem to be of different thoughts, and act upon
different principles in their opposition to the Bible. Some insinuate, that
supernatural revelation is needless, and that natural religion, as they call
it, is not only sufficient, but really preferable to that of the Scripture,
which they represent as dull, absurd, involved in difficulties, and
unintelligible.

Others speak a little more modestly. They allow the Bible has its
excellencies: but then they think it wants evidence of its divinity. They would
be willing, they pretend, to see it well proved; but there are difficulties in
their way that they cannot get over.

And some of those that would be thought more in earnest, have collected from
ancient and modern writers all the exceptions and cavils they can meet with
against particular passages of the Bible. These they set off with such
ornaments of language and oratory, as they are masters of, and send them abroad
into the world as reasons against the Scripture.

Others attack our arguments by which we support the authority of the Bible,
and endeavor to raise difficulties, and show the weakness of them; such as are
taken from miracles, prophecy, the spreading of the christian religion, and the
like.

But the main body of the antiscripturists act a different, and even a meaner
part. All their strength lies in a few quirks of wit, that they have picked up
in common conversation, or in the clubs of their companions. They neither read,
study, nor understand any part of the Bible, nor do they concern themselves
with the reasons that are offered in its behalf. They have received prejudices
against it, and these they run away with without ever examining matters. They
get hold of a few topics of raillery, single out a few texts and phrases, which
they have learned in their manner to represent as ridiculous; and from the
abuse of these, they condemn the whole, and even think they have gained a
victory.

I am persuaded, you do not expect that I should examine all their pleas, and
lay open the cavils that each class of them bring against the authority of the
Scripture. This would take up more time than I design to employ in the
remaining part of the subject. And, as I would hope, I am not at present
speaking to any of this unhappay character, it is less necessary to insist
largely on these things. I shall however for the confirming your faith, take
notice of, and endeavor to remove, some of the more plausible objections. I
shall run through them briefly, and so pass on to what may be thought more
useful.

1. Some of these persons take offense at the style of the Scripture: they
pretend it is low, flat, and dull; has none of that vivacity and spirit that
might be expected in an inspired book. I answer, this objection is not true
with respect to the whole Bible. There is as true rhetoric, as strong figures,
as much pomp and grandeur of style, in some parts of the holy Scripture, as in
any book in the world. Job is thought to be not only the first, but the finest
specimen of poetry that has yet been produced by any, either ancients or
moderns. Several of the prophets deliver themselves in the sublimest strains of
oratory. And it has been observed of the apostle Paul, that there is often not
only a great purity in his language, but much art in his style; and that in his
defense before Felix and Agrippa, he outsoars the highest flights of Cicero and
Demosthenes.

But I grant, the main of the Bible does not run in this strain of an orator.
But then this is so far from being an objection against it, that it is rather
an argument of its divinity. It speaks from God, teaches, commands, enacts,
promises, and threatens in the name of the great Sovereign of the world. The
importance of its matter, and the authority of its author, are its oratory. And
indeed, these considered, human oratory would be an abatement to it. When a
prince speaks from the throne, he does not assume the style of a common
declaimer, nor use arts of persuasion; his authority supersedes all the
necessity of these things. And so it is in the case before us.

Others farther object, the difficulty and obscurity of Scripture. They think
had it been a revelation from heaven, it would have been plain to all, and upon
a level with every man's understanding; as every one is so much concerned in
it. To this I answer, that what is absolutely necessary, is easy and obvious.
None can misunderstand the Scripture in the great essential points of religion,
without wilful and wicked neglect. In the mean time, I acknowledge there are
difficulties, considerable difficulties in the Bible; and as it deserves, so it
requires a good degree of pains and diligence rightly to understand it. So it
has pleased God to order and state his revelation. Some things are exceeding
plain and easy; some things profound, intricate and difficult; which demand the
closest attention, and are fit to employ the strength of the greatest genius's
and strongest capacities: a dispensation that, I doubt not, has a great deal of
the wisdom and goodness of God in it. But this is a matter that needs farther
explaining; and it would be for many reasons proper more fully to consider it.
But I have not room here to make the necessary enlargement.

2. It is an objection against the Bible, that some who are fond of so unhappy,
and one would think uncomfortable a cause, as that of infidelity, seem to
triumph in that it contains doctrines, and relates facts, that are not only
absurd and unreasonable, but downright impossible. And consequently, cannot be
inspired, or a revelation from God. Many instances are given us under this
head; as, the universal deluge, the preservation of such a number of creatures,
with proper food, in so small a vessel as the ark; that an ass should speak;
that the sun should stand still, and yet the frame of nature not thrown into
confusion; that Jonah should live in a whale's belly so long without
respiration, and not be digested in the stomach of the fish, etc. And what
difficulties they find in some doctrines of religion, is well known; as, the
trinity, the incarnation, a virgin bringing forth a son, God and man united in
one person, the resurrection of the dead, and the like. These, say they, are
not only above our comprehension, but impossible; from whence they conclude,
they are sufficient to sink and ruin the credit of any book that delivers them
as true. To which I reply, 1. That many things appear incredible, and
impossible for a time, that afterward are well enough understood; appear
impossible to some, yet are certain and easy to others. A multitude of
instances may be produced to illustrate this from the discoveries that have
been made in natural philosophy. It was once thought impossible there should be
antipodes; and yet now no body questions it. The king of Siam, it is said,
thought himself affronted by the Dutch ambassador, when he told him that in
Holland the water would become so hard in cold weather, that men or elephants
might walk upon it. 2. We believe a great many things we do not understand,
cannot account for, and have reason to think as impossible as any of the things
the objection refers to in Scripture. What notion have we of the infinite
divisibility of matter, the union of soul and body, a vital union between
spirit and matter. This every one believes, and yet no wise man will undertake
to explain. Nothing is more universally agreed upon, as absolutely necessary,
than the eternity of God; and yet the very notion is amazing, shocks the
faculties, and almost overwhelms the mind; that any thing should exist without
a cause of its existence, as God does, is utterly inconceivable, and were we
not constrained to say, it must be so; we should be ready to say, it is
impossible. And the like difficulty might be observed of the divine
omnipresence, or infinite extension. The thing itself is demonstrable, and yet
the mode inexplicable. In short, we live in a world of mysteries: A multitude
of things we see and believe are so; that they are, is plain and certain; yet
how they are, we know not; and should be apt boldly to pronounce they could not
be, but that we are sure they are. How unreasonable is it then to object
against the Bible, because it delivers to us some things we do not understand;
especially if they refer to the incomprehensible, unsearchable nature of God,
or the extraordinary acts of infinite power. But 3. I would ask the objector,
whether he believes God made the world? If so; all his cavils upon this head
must be absurd. For nothing can seem more impossible, and can be more hard to
be believed, than the doctrine of the creation; that something should be made
out of nothing. The famous philosopher Aristotle laid it down as a maxim,
against which there was no contesting, that nothing can be produced from
nothing. Nor indeed can it be denied, without having recourse to infinite
power. Now since it is granted by many, at least, that reject revelation, that
God made all things out of nothing; or more properly, when there was nothing,
did, by his sovereign word and command, bring all things into being. Since this
is not thought impossible; nothing else certainly ought to be so; nothing, I am
sure, related in the Bible. I proceed to another objection.


3. Some allege contradictions in Scripture, and thence infer it cannot be
inspired. I answer, the contradictions objected are only seeming, but not real.
Nor do I know one particular that is not capable of a rational solution. A
little skill in criticism, in the Hebrew and Greek languages, their idioms and
properties, and the antiquities and customs of those countries, where the
scenes mentioned in Scripture lay, and the affairs were acted, will clear the
main difficulties. A distinction of the different senses of words, of the
different subjects and times, will often do it. Thus when it is said, it is
appointed for all men once to die. And elsewhere, if a man keep Christ's
saying, he shall never see death. There is no contradiction. The one place
speaking of natural, the other of spiritual or eternal death. So when Moses
says, God rested on the seventh day from all his work. And Christ says, my
Father works hitherto. There is no opposition or contradiction: Moses
speaking of the works of creation, and Christ of the works of providence.
Christ says, John the baptist was Elias that was to come. And yet John the
baptist when he was asked, whether he was Elias? answered, I am not. He was not
Elias in person, but was Elias in office and spirit, as I may say, and
consequently, here is no contradiction. Samuel tells us, God will not repent.
And yet elsewhere we read, that he did repent, that he made man on the earth.
That he made Saul king. But here is no contradiction: repentence signifies in
the one place a change of mind and council, from want of foresight of what
would come to pass. And thus God cannot repent. But then he changes his course,
as men do when they change their minds; and so he may be said to repent. And in
the like method most of the rest of these appearing contradictions may be
reconciled, viz. by distinguishing ambiguous words, distinguishing different
times and respects, etc. Let me add, that considering the nature and quality of
the Bible, that part of it is the most ancient book in the world; that it is
written in a language but very imperfectly understood; that it contains a great
variety of matters; treats of subjects of exceeding difficulty as well as
importance, it is not to be wondered at, if some passages occur not easy to be
understood, and that may appear at first sight inconsistent. In the mean time
it must argue a base humor of cavilling, and a strong prejudice against the
cause of the Bible to reject it on this account; when it comes recommended to
us with such a torrent of Evidence.

4. It may be objected, that if the Bible be divinely inspired, and the
subjects of it of that importance to mankind as is pretended; matters would not
sure have been left under so much uncertainty, and so much in the dark: but a
revelation intended for the good of all would have been accompanied with an
evidence convincing to all. I answer, the evidence is sufficient. Had it been
overpowering, there had been no virtue, no excellency in believing. God
designed to try the tempers of men; that as is said in another case, they that
were approved might be made manifest. But I answer further, this objection
rudely arraigns the sovereignty of God, and prescribes to infinite wisdom. It
is like the clay rising up against the potter, saying why have thou formed me
thus? indeed such cavils would be endless, should we indulge the vile temper.
We might as decently ask, why did God make mankind liable to sin? why did he
suffer him to sin? why did he not make every man an angel, and every angel a
seraph? but as such a humor as this is utterly inconsistent with the
subjection and reverence due from a creature to the author of his being, so it
would undo him even in heaven could it find a place there. Presently cast him
down, as the like it may be did the apostate angels, and lay him in chains of
darkness. We have abundant evidence of Scripture revelation, all that God saw
fit to grant, and all that is necessary. He requires in order to believing, an
humble, teachable disposition. If instead of this, we allow ourselves
unreasonably to carp and find fault, the guilt of our Infidelity will lie at
our own door, and our blood will be upon our own head.

5. It is objected, that notwithstanding all that is said in behalf of the
Bible, and of christianity, mahometanism pretends to as glorious things, and
has spread as much in the world, and yet is a vile imposture. But it would be
easy to show, that there is nothing in this objection, could I allow myself to
stay upon it, and to show that the case of christianity and the religion of
Mahomet vastly differ. The one has all the marks of imposture imaginable in it,
and the other none at all. Let me suggest a few things here.

Mahomet accommodated his religion to the humors of the Arabians, and
therefore retained therein such rites and ceremonies as they were fond of, and
had been accustomed to, and indulged them in such sins as he found them most
addicted to. But nothing of this can be charged on christianity. Christ and his
apostles strictly forbid all sin, required of all without exception the
mortification of their most beloved lusts, cancelled the ancient ceremonies of
the Jews, and all the foolish superstitions of the Heathens. Our Savior made
no allowance, granted no indulgence here. And yet his religion prevails against
the strongest corruptions and most inveterate prejudices.

Mahomet changed his religion, altered his laws and ceremonies; as he found the
humors of the people required. He sometimes established one law and manner of
worship, and then superseded it; pretending divine revelation for both; though
they were inconsistent. But Christ was always the same and his laws invariable.

Mahomet introduced his religion among a people of the most stupid ignorance,
and consequently prepared to receive any delusions that should be artfully
carried on. It is said, there was but one person in Mecca, where he began his
forgeries, that could write or read. Whereas, on the other hand, Christ
appeared among the most learned people in the world, and when learning was at
the greatest height.

Mahomet never durst venture either upon prophecy or miracle; though urged and
strongly pressed on that head; being conscious of his own inability. But you
know how much of both these attended the ministry, and established the
authority of the Lord Jesus.

Further, Mahomet forbad under pain of death all disputes about his religion.
Whereas Christ submitted his to a free examination and enquiry.

Lastly, the religion of Mahomet owed its support to the power of the sword,
and was by that means propagated. Whereas Christ and his apostles neither had,
nor would accept of any such auxiliaries and helps. The weapons of their
warfare were not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God.

So that though it must be granted, that mahometanism has prevailed in a great
part of the world, God having in his just judgment given up a people to strong
delusions, that had the christian religion among them, but woefully perverted,
and grew weary of it. Though this must be acknowledged, it can be no diminution
of the honor of the christian religion, or argument against its divinity, since
it is so evidently of a different nature, and made its way through the world in
a very different manner. Several nations believe and receive mahometanism, but
such are subdued, and the conqueror may impose what laws he pleases upon the
conquered. Once more,

6. It is objected, if the Bible be the word of God, if the christian religion
be divine, if the Son of God came from heaven, as is related therein, and
introduced and established his religion in the manner, as is there pretended,
it is strange it has had no greater and better effects in the world. If it be
so excellent an institution; how come they that profess it to live no better
than other people? To this I answer in a word or two, and I have done with the
objections. (1.) Multitudes profess themselves christians that are not so. And
we must not judge of christianity from the conduct of such that only usurp the
name. Suppose a company of men should enter themselves among the strictest sect
of philosophers. Yet if they never acquainted themselves with their doctrines;
never enquired into the precepts, nor regarded the rules of the profession; how
excellent soever the institution was, it could have no influence upon such
votaries. And this is the case of large numbers that are called christians.
They profess the Bible, but they know little or nothing of it. They bear the
name of Christ, and pretend to be his followers; but they never received his
doctrine, nor his spirit. And, consequently, by measures ought to be taken from
them in judging of the christian religion. I answer, (2.) Christianity has
wrought a glorious reformation in the world. That body of men, that receive the
Bible, differ as much from the rest of the world, as Jerusalem from Kedar. The
church though it has great corruptions, yet has great excellencies; The
Scripture, wherever it has come, ever has, in one degree or other, and with
respect to some at least, brought a blessing along with it. But (3.) I confess,
the christian religion has not had that effect which might be expected; and I
must own this is one of those providence, that appear to me dark and
surprising; and, as much as any thing, inclines me to believe there will be a
more glorious state of the church, than we have yet seen; when christianity
will look more like itself, and shine forth in the lives of those that profess
it with greater luster. In the mean time the objection does not conclude. The
world is exceedingly the better for the Bible. I verily believe most of the
virtue and religion, that remains in a corrupt degenerate world, is owing to
it; and is to be found among those that embrace and profess it: and, I doubt
not, a time will come when the beauty and power of the christian religion will
appear more illustrious, than it has yet done; at least than now it does.


Our duty, in the mean time, is to retrieve the credit of our profession by the
purity, integrity, and holiness of our lives. The christian apologists in the
primitive church (O that we could do it more universally now!) used to appeal
to the professors of their religion for the excellency of it; intimating, that
their enemies might there behold a beautiful idea of christianity. This
argument is too much obscured and lost among us. Let us study every one of us
to do our part toward recovering it, waiting for a more abundant effusion of
the divine spirit to revive decayed religion, in our hearts and in our lives;
that others seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven.

I have now finished the first general observation from the text, viz. That all
Scripture is given of God. And as I have treated the subject more at large than
I intended, I shall endeavor to make some amends by a more quick dispatch of
what remains. I hasten therefore to the next thing observed from the words,

II. That the inspired writings of the Old and New Testament are of great use
to he church; are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness. As I design but a sermon or two more upon the
subject, I shall not take any great compass; but shall, (1.) Consider the
usefulness of the Scripture in general. And then, (2.) Consider the use of the
several parts thereof. All Scripture, says the text, is useful; every
particular, every book and portion of it.


I. I shall consider the usefulness of the Scripture in general; for what
purposes it is useful. And I shall confine myself to the particulars the text
speaks of and directs to. It is useful for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and for instruction in righteousness. There is some difference
among the critics about the sense of these words; though most I think agree in
referring the two first to doctrines, or opinions; the two latter to manners.
As thus the Scripture is useful or profitable for doctrine, that is, to teach
us what to believe: for reproof, or conviction, namely of errors; it is useful
for correction of faults in practice; and for instruction in righteousness;
that is, in the whole compass of our duty both toward God and man. The m^^^ing
in short is, that the Scripture is a complete ru^e both of faith and practice.
It directs us what we are to believe, and leads us in the way of duty. Thus
complete is the Scripture. And therefore it is added, that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. I shall go over the
particulars, and begin with the first.

1. The Scripture is profitable for doctrine. And here I shall hint what
doctrines the Scripture teaches, and with what advantage it teaches such
doctrines.

1. What doctrines the Scripture teaches. In general, I would suggest, that the
Scripture being inspired of God, must be a sufficient rule of faith, and
contain all the necessary points of divine knowledge and belief. We cannot
suppose that a God of infinite wisdom and goodness should indite a book on
purpose to direct us in the way to heaven, and yet that book be defective in
any necessary article of religion. No; the Scripture is profitable for
doctrine, for all doctrine. How this is to be understood, I will let you see in
a few propositions; therein comprising what I design upon the head.

1. I do not affert, that the Scripture teaches us arts, sciences, and
philosophy. There is indeed a great deal of philosophy in Scripture, a great
deal of rhetoric, and oratory; and many specimens of curious speculation and
learning interspersed. But there is no system of any of these; much less a
system of all of them. The Scripture was wrote or the use of all sorts of
persons; the vulgar and ignorant as well as higher genious's; wrote to instruct
us in the way to heaven, and not in the niceties of human learning. It is
profitable for doctrine that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good words; that the christian may be instructed in every
thing that concerns religion, and may be a perfect christian; not the
philosopher instructed in his theorems, at least, not in all of them, or in
every problem, that may fall under his examination. Nor,

2. Do I suppose the Scripture teaches the doctrine of politics. I remark this,
because I apprehend it a mistake in some that treat on this subject, and that
it is attended with ill consequences, to found their doctrine of politics on
the Bible. I grant it lays down general rules concerning civil government, and
concerning the duty both of magistrates and subjects. As, that they, that rule
over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. magistrates are the
ministers of God for good, a terror to them that do evil, and a praise to them
that do well. Such are the magistrates which God appoints and approves. And as
those that are under them, enjoy the protection and many advantages of their
administration, they are to be subject not for wrath, or merely through fear of
punishment; but for conscience sake. This the Scripture enjoins, and the
obligation hereunto is evidently founded upon the nature and reason of things,
and results from the very end of society. But it does not determine the
necessary form of civil polity, much less prescribe one and the same for all
states, and all people in every age of the world.

Different forms of government are lawful in different places, or in the same
place at different times. And, I apprehend, any form of government may be
lawful, though not found in Scripture; provided it be fitted to answer the
general ends of government, and be managed consistently with Scripture rules.
In short, as God has in nature, and by the ministry and help of human reason
afforded sufficient means for human learning, so far as it is necessary in the
world; the same may be said of civil government. It is included in the law of
nature, the reason of mankind directs to it, furnishes rules for its
management; and it is left to the wisdom and prudence of every nation or
community to choose the form, to specify and model it as they please. All that
the Scripture does here is only to superintend it, as I may say, and prescribe
the duties of the several parts of society in general.

I will not affirm our text positively excludes the usefulness of Scripture in
things of this kind. But I think, it directs us to expect and attend its
teachings in things of a different kind. It is useful for doctrine, that the
man of God may be perfect, not the politician; at least, that he may be perfect
as a christian, not as a politician. The Scripture describes God's church,
gives us the plan and form of that, and lays down rules for the management of
it; teaches how to govern our hearts, and order our lives and conversations;
that we may be fitted for the heavenly hierarchy, the city above. But it does
not meddle so much with the affairs of this world, as to lay down a system of
politics. Here human wisdom, and human laws, have the chief interest.

3. When it is said the Scripture is profitable for doctrine, we must not
understand it, that it teaches us every thing about the doctrines of religion,
that our curiosity may lead us to enquire after, There are a great many
doctrines that men have brought into religion, which the Scripture says
nothing of. They are mere human figments, and framed out of their own heads.
But as the Scripture is not profitable for these doctrines, I think we may with
clearness and authority infer, the doctrines themselves are not profitable. Of
this sort are a multitude of the doctrines the church of Rome would obtrude
upon us under the notion of traditions. I may add, of this sort are many
speculations, upon which no small stress has been laid, in protestant churches,
and which they borrowed from the schools.

Let me observe, that in the doctrines the Scripture does reveal, even in the
most important of them, there is a reserve. It teaches us something of them,
but not every thing that belongs to this or that subject. It acquaints us with
all that is necessary to ground our faith, and direct our practice; but not all
we may desire to gratify our curiosity. It gives us, for instance, the most
excellent notion of the divine being. But as his nature is unsearchable, there
are an hundred questions men indulge themselves in with reference to it,
wherein it affords us no light and satisfaction.

It teaches us the doctrine of the trinity, that sublime and distinguishing
doctrine of the christian religion. But then it does not descend to all the
particulars, the nice questions, and bold decisions, with which we have, if I
mistake not, perplexed and obscured it. The Scripture is profitable for this
doctrine. And the doctrine is a very profitable and comfortable one, if we will
be content with what it teaches. But if we leave our guide here, and pretend to
be wise above what is written, we shall soon find ourselves out of our depth,
and to our own and others prejudices, darken council with words without
knowledge.

The same may be said of many other doctrines of the Bible; as the doctrine of
God's decrees, the state of future happiness, the resurrection, the nature,
quality, and circumstances of the resurrection body, the condition of angels,
their order, government, officers, and the like. God has in great wisdom and
goodness afforded us a revelation, in which he instructs us in all things he
thought proper and convenient for us, and so far as they are so. He considers
our occasions, necessities, and capacities; and accommodates himself thereunto.
The best here, know but in part, prophecy but in part; and, indeed, how should
it be otherwise, when God has revealed things to us but in part. Let us
therefore confine ourselves within the limits God has set us, be thankful he
has revealed so much; be contented that he has revealed no more. The Scripture
revelation is sufficient to employ our most diligent enquiries, at the same
time that it must bound them. The apostle censures some for intruding into
things they had not seen; referring to the doctrine of angels, into which it
seems they pried and searched, as the word signifies; pretending to know what
the Scripture has not taught concerning them. Let us be cautions and modest
here; receive the doctrines the Scripture has delivered, and as they are
delivered there; believe what the Scripture has told us of this or that
doctrine; but not take upon us to know what it has not told us; proceeding in
our assertions and decisions, where the Scripture does not go before us, with
its light and instruction. This humor has occasioned no small mischief to the
church; and indeed is the source of the most of those contentions that have
disturbed its peace.

4. When it is said, the Scripture is profitable for doctrine, the least it can
intend, is, that it contains all necessary doctrine for us to know and believe,
in order to salvation. This may be concluded from its being inspired. Certainly
if it be given by inspiration of God, and delivered to the church as a divine
rule, it is not a defective and imperfect rule. Nor are we left to infer this,
and make it out by reasoning. We find the Scripture often asserting its own
sufficiency. Our apostle in this chapter, referring to the Scripture of the Old
Testament, at least chiefly, says, they are able to make wise to salvation. And
if so, they must include every necessary article of faith. And when in the text
he affirms, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, etc. He adds, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good works. This, as I observed, is asserted of the Old
Testament. And we have the same abundantly proved, with respect to the New.
Christ told his disciples, that he had made known all things, he had heard of
the Father. And when he was about to leave them, he assures them, he would send
the spirit, who should teach them all things, and bring all things to their
remembrance, whatsoever he had said to them. That the spirit should guide them
into all truth. Now it must be considered, that as the apostles had a
commission, being thus furnished and instructed to go, and proselyte all
nations, and teach them all things whatsoever their master had commanded them;
so they committed these things to writing, for the future use and service of
the church. So that in the holy Scripture we have all necessary doctrines of
religion. What Christ heard of the Father, that is, concerning the way and
method of man's salvation, this he communicated to his apostles. This the
spirit in them, revived, confirmed, and commented upon. This they preached to
the world. The apostle Paul tells the Ephesians, he had not shunned to deciare
unto them all the council of God. And this doctrine, the whole and entire
doctrine, they communicated to the world in inspired writings, which I have
proved are the very same, that we, by the good providence of God, have in our
possession. The Scripture we enjoy is profitable for doctrine, and sufficient
for all divine and saving doctrine. He that studies, understands, and believes
his Bible, and lives according to it, is wise unto salvation.

5. The Scripture is profitable not only for absolutely necessary doctrines,
but it teaches us many other things for our greater improvement and comfort in
religion, there is no book, no chapter, no doctrine of the Bible, but what is
useful in its place, and for its proper end and purpose. But we must not say,
that it is all necessary; that if we had wanted any, we could not have been
christians; the consequence of which would be, that if we are ignorant of any,
we cannot be christians. And then how few would be approved? For who is
acquainted with every part of the Bible; knows and understands it all. As in
the natural body, there are some parts more essential, necessary, and vital;
others that have their proper office in the body, and highly useful, but not of
equal necessity with the more noble parts. A man would be maimed, imperfect,
and uncomfortable without them; but yet might live without them. Thus it is in
the body of Scripture doctrines and revelations. It has its vital and essential
points; and these are often inculcated, delivered over and over again, in one
place and another; and indeed in a multitude of places: that as all are
concerned in them, none that are competently attentive and inquisitive, may
miss them, and overlook them. Beside these, there are a great many doctrines in
the Bible that serve to enlarge and confirm our faith, to enrich our minds with
a treasure of divine truths; to excite and employ our devotion. It delivers
many doctrines of eminent use, which yet cannot be said to be absolutely
necessary; that tend to adorn and perfect the christian's faith, to assist and
conduct him in all the parts of the divine and spiritual life, and it highly
concerns us to attend to these.

Some people, I have observed, notwithstanding the veneration they profess for
the Bible; content themselves with a very scanty knowledge of it. They learn a
short creed, or some of the general abridgments of duty contained in the
Scripture; as, that it is required of us that we do justice, love mercy, and
walk humbly with God: Or that of our Savior, Whatsoever we would that men
should do to us, we must do even so to them; that he who believes shall be
saved, and the like. These and such like maxims and general propositions they
receive; and it is the stock of Scripture knowledge they set up with. All that
is necessary, say they, lies in a little compass; is easy and plain; and as
they persuade themselves they have sufficiently learned that, they enquire no
farther. But these persons should consider that a little knowledge of the
doctrines of the Bible is not sufficient, and all that is necessary to those
that are capable and have opportunity for understanding more. Fundamentals are
different according to the different state of persons. That ignorance which is
excusable in one, I question not is destructive in another.

And then, a good measure of diligence and care is requisite to the
understanding aright even those few plain and important doctrines of religion
that these persons think sufficient. A man, it is granted, may soon learn the
propositions that contain the essential doctrines of faith. But the doctrines
themselves are not so easily learned as they may imagine. To instance in one of
the propositions I mentioned before: he that believes shall be saved. Before
we can understand that, we must know what faith is; and in order to this we
must be acquainted with the great objects thereof, as God, Christ, the Holy
Spirit, the inspired Scriptures: we must know God in his nature, attributes,
and relations to us; Christ in his mediation and offices; the Spirit in his
work and office; the revelation that God has made of himself in his word. Faith
respects all these; and no man can be said to believe that does not in some
degree know what he is to believe; I might add, and upon what grounds. Besides,
we must understand the several acts of faith, its properties, and effects; the
salvation promised to it; what it is, what it includes: and here is a large
field, great scope for our enquiry and study, and which will necessarily lead
the christian to a frequent, diligent conversation with his Bible. So that
however easy, how few soever, the essential, necessary doctrines of religion
are, it is certain they cannot be learned without the Bible, nor without a
faithful, and diligent use of it. They do not require indeed a great capacity,
and strength of genius in every one to understand them; but they require an
humble, teachable disposition, an honest heart, and a diligent serious search,
according to every one's ability.

Again, according to the principle the persons, I am now concerned with, act
upon, I cannot see but the greatest part of Scripture is rendered useless. If
no more be necessary than a few short, general propositions; why did God indict
a book so copious, and full of divine matter? Commit it as a favor and trust to
the care of his church? if a few short sentences and propositions, be all that
are needful and useful, what serves the rest of the Bible for? why was it
given? and how will these persons reconcile their notion with the reverence
they pretend to of the holy Scripture and its author.

However, if but a little of the Bible be absolutely necessary; the rest is
highly useful and valuable, and therefore should not be neglected. And it must
argue a vile contempt of sacred truths to despise any of them under a pretense
they are not necessary; that we may be christians without them; be saved
without them. We do not act at this rate in secular concerns, are not content
with just so much food as is necessary to support life; with such attire as is
barely necessary to answer the end of clothing; nor with so much estate as is
absolutely necessary to subsist us. And why should we act so in the affairs of
religion? I am afraid this moderation does dot proceed from a nicer head in
distinguishing what is most important in sacred things; but from a distemper of
heart that leads us to despise them. David no doubt understood, as well as most
others, the essential and necessary doctrines of religion; had well digested
them, and was in full possession of them; and yet how vigorous was his desire
after divine knowledge? how diligently did he pursue the study of divine
subjects? that part of sacred revelation, which God had then favored the church
with, was his constant meditation and delight. Read cxix Psalm, and you will see
the temper of that great and good man with respect to the law of God, or that
system of revelation the church then had. And if you rightly compare his spirit
and your own, I am persuaded you must either censure David or yourselves; and I
leave you to consider which is most reasonable. I have staid the longer upon
this matter, though it may look like a digression, because I apprehend the
discourse seasonable to some, and that there may be occasion for admonition and
caution here.

But to return, the Bible, I say, teaches us not only all that is necessary,
absolutely necessary, but many other things for our greater improvement and
comfort. It gives us an entire system of divine truths. You cannot expect I
should enumerate them; though it may be proper to offer a few general hints.

The Scripture delivers to us the great doctrines concerning God; his nature
and attributes; his relations to us, and government over us; concerning the
trinity of persons in the godhead; concerning providence and the properties of
it; that it is constant, sovereign, universal, reaches to all persons and
things, and circumstances of things. It delivers to us, the doctrine of the
creation: that the world was made, by whom, when, in what time, order, and the
like: the state and circumstances of man in innocence; his fall, sentence, and
condemnation. It acquaints us with the provision God made for the relief of
apostate man, by the promised seed. It teaches us the great doctrines of
morality; which we have abridged in the decalouge, commented upon in the Old
Testament, and more fully in the New. It acquaints us with the great and
glorious transactions of the Mediator; lays before us the plan and scheme of
our redemption as it was accomplished by him; gives us an account of his
incarnation, life, doctrine and miracles, his death, resurrection, ascension,
and sitting at the right hand of God; with the beneficial offices he sustains
and executes. It acquaints us with the new covenant in the last edition of it;
its duties and privileges; the office of the Spirit; his gifts, graces, and
consolations, with all the sublime and excellent rules and laws delivered to
the church by the Son of God incarnate; and by his ministers. It makes known a
future heaven, and in some mensure unvails the glories of it. Thus the
Scripture is profitable for doctrine. It delivers all the great important
doctrines of religion; and that so fully and particularly, that if we receive
its instruction; we cannot be ignorant of any thing necessary for us to know.

I would here observe, that these things are contained in sereral parts of the
Bible, and often repeated there. The Old Testament has the fame doctrines with
the New; that more obscurely, this with greater clearness and explication.
Moses speaks of Christ though with a vail on his face The one was a preparatory
dispensation, and included very much the same things with our gospel, but under
types, and symbolical representations. In short both had the same religion. But
we have it in a more perfect state, and in a clearer light.

I might farther take notice that whatever some may object to the contrary;
there is a great deal of method and order in Scripture. It begins with an
account of the original of all things; with the state of innocence, the fall of
man, the early discovery of God's purpose of grace. It proceeds to acquaint us
how the world was peopled; with its degeneracy; with the choice of a family,
that of Abraham, which God enclosed as his church; and the progenitors of the
Messials. It gives an account of the particular revelations God made to this
family from time to time, gradually; and of the laws and ordinances established
among them, of the many additionnal hints concerning the Messiah; the types and
prophecies that insured him till the fullness of time came, and God sent forth
his Son made of of woman. The New Testament begins with his pedigree, genealogy
and birth; carries us through at the circumstances of his life, his death and
resurrection; gives us the history of the church in the first age of it; its
constitution, laws, and administration; and foretells the state thereof in
after ages.

In a word, though the doctrine of Scripture be not delivered in the method of
our systems, there is a great deal of beauty even in the method of it. And I
dare say, whoever will study it with competent helps, and with humility,
diligence, and a suitable reverence of God; with th^^ deference a worm owes to
infinite wisdom; will find himself not a little instructed and entertained, and
his faith consumed and established: will see cause to admire even the method of
Scripture doctrines, which the proud and censorious so much carp at.

You will allow me to make a remark or two under the other head, and I have
done, viz.

2. With what advantage the Scripture teaches us these things; it is profitable
for doctrine: and it is in a special manner so; more so than any other book,
exceeds all other revelations; and no wonder, when it is given by inspiration
of God. It may be expected a book from heaven should appear with bright and
distinguishing characters upon it; and that it should teach in a way worthy of
its author. And thus does the holy Scripture. This has been shown in part
already in the foregoing discourses. I shall only touch a few things here just
to let you into my meaning.

The Scripture teaches us many doctrine that we could not otherwise have known:
as the fall of man, the original of sin, the trinity of divine persons in the
godhead, the incarnation, and whole doctrine of the mediator, the offices of
Christ, and of the spirit, and indeed every thing that is properly gospel: the
entire method of our intercourse with God through a redeemer. All this, with
all its particulars, we owe to Scripture revelation. And then,

The things that we might otherwise have understood something of, the Scripture
teaches more fully and certainly. I might instance in the creation and whole
scheme of providence. It is known and I took notice of it before; how darkly
and confusedly the greatest philosophers talked upon these subjects. Some
thought the world was made by chance; others thought it was not made at all,
but was eternal. Some denied all providence; others confined it to the heavens,
leaving this lower world to its own care and government. And all of them so
distinguished providence and limited it, as to make it a very useless and
uncomfortable doctrine at best, if indeed it imported any thing. I might carry
the like remark through a great many other instances; as the attributes of God,
the immortality of the soul, and a future state of rewards and punishments.
These subjects the philosophers, who cultivated natural religion, talked of;
but plainly discovered they knew very little of them. They talked backward and
forward, as men in the dark, that could not tell what to say, or what to
believe.

But the Scripture is profitable for doctrine. It comes in here for our relief,
and in a few texts scatters all these mists, and gives a satisfaction in these
great points, that in vain we seek for in all the books of the philosophers.
One of the ancient fathers triumphs on this head in behalf of the Bible. By
virtue, says he, of faith, and the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, rustics
and mechanics exceed the deepest philosophers. Ask a boy educated in the
christian religion, who made him? he will tell you God, which is more than
Aristotle or Democritus would have told. Demand of him, why he was made? he
will answer to glorify God. And hardly would Plato or Pythagoras have replied
so wisely. Ask him concerning his soul, he will tell you, it is immortal, must
be judged according to the deeds done in the body, and be happy or miserable
forever. About which points such great men as Socrates and Seneca could say
nothing positively. So much are we beholden to the Bible, and so great the
advantages we receive by it. It clears difficulties in such doctrines, that the
greatest men in the world, destitute of its light, were puzzled with, and
delivers the great things of religion to us with extraordinary clearness and
certainty.

I might add, it teaches with great ease. The philosophers scheme of natural
religion, as it was very imperfect, and uncertain to themselves generally; so
it was hammered out with much pains and labor. But divine doctrine distills as
the dew; and the Scripture comment makes all the rules and principles, they
disputed so much, plain and easy.

In short, it teaches with authority. God's spirit is promised to accompany the
Scripture revelation. It did so, in some degree, under the former part of it,
the Old Testament: It does so more eminently under the New; which is therefore
called, the dispensation of the Spirit. And his office is not only to reveal
the object, but to assist the eye, to remove prejudices, open the heart,
enlighten the mind, and carry home divine truths to the consciences of men. And
indeed the more glorious effects of Scripture, are owing to the concurrence and
influence of the Holy Spirit. The Bible is his book and allow me to say, he
continues to be the teacher of it. O let us wait for, and depend on his
instruction. You have heard how much you owe to the Bible, and what use you are
to make of it. Be thankful for it, improve it for the purposes it was given;
read it often, and diligently acquaint yourselves with all its doctrines; and
while you do so, beg for divine instruction, that the Holy Spirit may unvail
your eyes, that you may behold wondrous things out of God's law.

DISCOURSE XII. THE SCRIPTURE SHOWN TO BE PROFITABLE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


TWO things I observed in these words, namely, the divine inspiration, and
great usefulness of the Scriptures; and having treated somewhat largely
concerning the first of these, I proceeded to consider the other, which I
entered upon in my last discourse. The proposition I laid down, is, that the
holy Scriptures, or the inspired wrilings of the Old and New Testament, are of
great ^^se to the church. Where I proposed to speak of the usefulness of the
several parts thereof. In considering the former point, I told you, I would
confine myself to the particulars specified in the text, and make it appear
that it is profitable, or useful, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness.

I. The Scripture is profitable for doctrine. This I have already shown you,
suggesting what doctrines the Scripture teaches, and with what advantage it
teaches such doctrines. And now I go on to the next particular.

II. The Scripture is profitable for reproof, for conviction of errors, as I
before took notice. The word is understood by many in this place. And, indeed,
this does not seem so much a new and another property of the Scripture, as a
necessary consequence of the former. As the Scripture is the rule and measure
of truth, teaches us all necessary truth; what we are to believe and know in
order to salvation; (...) loath in consequence hereof, detect error, and show us
what we are to reject; what is contrary to this rule, is false; what is beyond
it, is superfluous; and what is short of it, is defective.

So that here I have a fit occasion to discourse upon the sufficiency and
perfection of the holy Scriptures. But as I have detained you too long in
speculation already, I shall not handle the subject in a controversial way, nor
trouble you with the arguments or ^avils of the church of Rome upon this head,
who, as they set up another rule besides, and contrary to the Scriptures; so
they advance a great many things highly derogatory and dishonorable thereto.
But that I may dispatch what remains in a discourse or two, as is my intention,
I shall not enter upon a debate with them; only offer a few remarks for
clearing the proposition before us. The Scripture is profitable for reproof, or
useful to detect and discover errors, doctrinal errors. And,

1. Let me observe, that we must not extend it too far. It is not profitable
for reproof and conviction of error in all cases, as in philosophy, polities,
and the like. It is no argument that this or that problem in philosophy, this
or that theorem in mathematics, is false, because not taught in Scripture; or
that this or that system of politics is wrong, because we do not find it there.
The reason is, the Scripture was not wrote to instruct us in these things, nor
does it deliver all the doctrines that concern them. The usefulness of
Scripture for reproof, is parallel to its usefulness for doctrine. It extends
as far in the one case as in the other: but no further. In short, it teaches
the doctrines of religion, and convinces of errors in religion, but not in
human sciences.

2. As the Scripture is a divine rule given by inspiration of God, all those
doctrines that are contrary thereto, or inconsistent therewith, are condemned
by it, they fall under its reproof and censure. We must have recourse to the
law and to the testimony, whoever speaks not according to this rule, it is
because there is no light in them. The Scripture is the standard of divine
doctrines, and whatever is advanced in religion, by whomsoever, or by what
authority soever, if it does not consist therewith, it is to be rejected; it is
an error, the Scripture reproves and convicts it as such.

Thus the doctrine of Polytheism, or of many gods, with the worship and service
paid them, which overspread the heathen world, is reproved in Scripture, which
teaches us that there is but one God. The doctrine of the unitarians, that deny
three divine persons in the godhead, is reproved there also. The same may be
said of the doctrine of the Pelagians, that deny original sin, contrary to that
of the apostle, by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. And again, by the offense
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation. And by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners. The Scripture is profitable for reproof
here. If any shall (as many have both formerly, and at this day) question this
doctrine on account of the difficul^^^s of it, they stand convicted and
reproved by the holy Scripture. Thus God has taught in his word, and we are not
to oppose our reasoning to our rule. The doctrine of the Antinomians, that
discharge men from any obligation to the moral law, making it void as a rule of
life, and substituting, what they call faith, instead of obedience; this also
is reproved in Scripture, not only in a few texs, but it is indeed contrary to
the scope and design of the whole of it. The doctrine of the Semi-Pelagians, or
more rigid Arminians, that deny special grace, the immediate concurrence,
operation, and influence of the Holy Spirit, is reproved there likewise. The
apostle, I think, understood nothing of their doctrine, if he understood his
own motto, as I may call it, by the grace of God I am what I am. He adds, I
labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which
was with me. And again, it is God which works in you, both to will and to do
of his good pleasure. If it be suggested, that we are reasoning creatures,
capable of judging what is right, and choosing what is best. I grant all this:
but then, I say, we are sinful, depraved creatures, and stand in need of the
grace of God, of supernatural help and influences; this the Scripture teaches,
and this, I think, every good man's experience confirms.

I might instance in a multitude of doctrines, that the Romanists brought into
the church, and by which they have in the grossest manner corrupted the
christian religion; as the doctrine of transubstantiation, expressly confuted
by our Savior, who calls the bread in the sacrament bread several times, even
after consecration. They say, no bread remains, but that it is turned into the
body of Christ. Now if the Scripture be true, this doctrine is false. So their
doctrine concerning worshipping saints and angels, concerning many mediators,
to whom they make application for succor and relief, the Scripture reproves,
when it commands us to worship the Lord our God; telling us, that him only must
we serve. And assures us, there is but one mediator between God and man, the
man Christ Jesus. I might mention several other doctrines, as the sacrifice of
the mass, their doctrine of merit, indulgence, communion in one kind, denying
the cup to the laity, and the like. All which are contrary to Scripture, and
cannot be received without in^^enching upon, and indeed destroying its
authority is a rule of faith and practice. And, to mention no more, what shall
we say of their Latin service, or praying in an unknown tongue, which is a
direct contradiction to what the apostle teaches and enjoins, 1. Cor. xiv. If
the apostle was herein inspired, we may be sure these new teachers are far from
infallible, whatever they pretend, and that their doctrine is false and
erroneous.

In a word, the Scripture being given by inspiration of God, is a sacred rule,
a divine standard and measure of doctrines; and whoever would impose upon us
any articles of faith, or rules of worship, that cannot bear an examination
thereby, or that contradicts our rule, are to be rejected.

3. As the Scripture is a complete and perfect rule, so all doctrines that are
besides this rule, and not included in it, come under reproof. It is argument
enough against them that they are not taught there. Of this nature are many
circumstances of divine doctrines, in which we are apt to add to the word of
God, under a pretense of explaining it. I might instance in the free and too
bold, as I apprehend it, explications of the doctrine of the trinity, the
incarnation, the personal union of the word, with the man Christ Jesus, the
reasons and ends of infinite wisdom in the mediation of Christ and atonement
made by him, the manner of the spirit's operations upon the souls of men, the
nature and several ingredients of future blessedness, the manner and quality of
the resurrection of the body. I am mistaken if the Scripture be not profitable
for reproof here, if we would harken to it. It reveals these doctrines, but it
does not reveal all we may be inqisitive to know about them, and if we insert
in our explications what the Scripture does not warrant, insert as necessary
parts of these doctrines, we are exposed to the reproof and censure thereof.
For if that be a perfect rule, it needs not our supplements, and when we go
beyond it in our doctrines we offend as well as when we go contrary to it.

I add, as some transgress by supplying circumstances of divine doctrines, so
others by inventing new doctrines, about which the Scripture says nothing at
all. In which respect the Romanists are notoriously guilty. They teach for
doctrines the commandments of men. As in their doctrine concerning the headship
and sovereignty of the Pope, infallibility, the seven sacraments, and the rest
of the twelve additional articles of their Trent creed. The Scripture reproves
these doctrines and convinces them of error. They ask sometimes, where does the
Scripture condemn them? but supposing we could not show them where they are
condemned, as often we can; it is sufficient that it does not command them,
has not revealed them. The Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, etc. The apostle adds, that the man of
God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works, Now, how should
the man of God be perfect by the help of Scripture, if any thing necessary for
his knowledge and belief, was wanting therein. It cannot be a rule to us, nor
can we conclude it given by inspiration of God, if it does not teach us all
that is necessary to salvation.

4. As the Scripture is a divine and perfect rule, so it is a necessary rule.
We are not to receive doctrines contrary to it, nor ingraft doctrines upon it,
and add them thereto; no more must we neglect the doctrines it teaches. Go
forth, says Christ (...) his apostles in their commission, and disciple all
nations, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
We must not make any thing necessary, which the Scripture has not taught and
made necessary; neither must we overlook and dispense with any thing it has
taught and made necessary. A great many are reproved here by the authority of
the Scripture, as well as in the other particulars mentioned before. We have
gross instances of this with reference to the sacraments. Some, you know, deny
both of them, water baptism as they call it, and the Lord's supper? though we
have the institution of both in Scripture, and that in most express terms; and
have both recommended to us by the constant practice of the apostles and
primitive church. Others, though they own the sacraments, yet take a liberty
with them to change and model them at pleasure. Thus, when Christ in the
institution of his supper delivered the cup as well as the bread, and said,
drink ye all of it, they with a strange presumption interpose here, and forbid
the cup to the laity. These errors the Scripture condemns and reproves. Nor can
I see it is consistent with the veneration we owe to it as an inspired writing
to assume this liberty to ourselves of dispensing with its rules. If it be a
divine revelation we must neither add to it, nor take from it. I may add,

5. The Scripture is profitable for reproof and confutation of practical
errors, as well as such as are doctrinal, as we call them, and such as are more
speculative. It delivers a great many divine maxims for the government of the
hearts and lives of men, and consequently lays open such errors as are contrary
thereto. Thus that fatal error of covetousness, or dividing our affections
between God and the creature, is condemned by that passage, thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, with all thy might, and
with all thy mind; by that of the apostle, love not the world neither the
things that are in the world; for if any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. an indifference and coolness in religion, preferring any
present little interest to that of our souls, is reproved by that Scripture,
that bids us, seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
other things shall be added to us, by that which bids us, labor not for the
meat which perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life. And by
that which censures the unreasonable solicitude of Martha, even when she was
ministering to the Lord Jesus himself, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and
troubled about many things, but one thing is needful.

There are certain divine principles of wisdom and religion recommended in the
word of God, by which it not only directs us in our choice and conduct, but
reproves and censures us when we act contrary thereto. O endeavor to attend to
the admonition and reproof of the Scripture, bring your hearts under the
authority of God's word: believe, choose, and act according to the precepts and
rules of it. Admit nothing contrary to it as a doctrine of religion, nothing
besides it, nor neglect any thing in it. We are to receive it as a divine,
perfect and necessary rule; and submit to its reproof in all things as we stand
obnoxious thereto. It follows,

III. The Scripture is profitable for correction. This, as I observed before,
refers to manners: it corrects the disorders in the conversation. Concerning
which let me observe a few things briefly.

It condemns all sin without exception, and grants no indulgence to any
iniquity. The law of God is perfect, converting the soul, Psalm. xix. 7. It is
persect in this respect, as it searches out all iniquity, points it out and
censures it, and if we harken to its admonitions and teachings, converts the
soul from it. Hence it follows, ver. 11. that the Psalmist, speaking of the
judgments or statutes of the Lord, adds: Moreover by them is thy servant
warned; warned of sin, and warned of danger. This property is often ascribed to
the holy Scripture, or word of God, particularly in Ps. cxix. Thy word, says
he, have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee, ver. 11. And
again, ver. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word. The word of God is a sovereign remedy against
sin, when it is received with faith and treasured up in the heart, as a
governing principle there. It helps to cleanse the way and course both of young
and old. The rules and maxims of the moral philosophers were in some things
profitable for correction. They laid down many excellent rules for the
government of the passions; but with such a mixture and alloy of sinful
tolerations, that their best systems were altogether insufficient to accomplish
a thorough reformation. Pride and vanity were virtues with them: revenge
allowed, when a provocation was given and an injury received; and some very
gross vices were pleaded for by many of them, as I had occasion to observe
before. But the correction, the holy Scripture is profitable for, is more
entire and complete. It extends to every corruption, and is levelled against
every sin, against the whole old man. It teaches to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, Tit. ii. 12.

Farther, it strikes at the root of sin in the heart and affections. Never did
any institution of religion proceed with so much purity and divine authority,
as the Scripture does in this respect. Beware that there be not a thought in
thy wicked heart, says the law of God, Deuteronomy. xv. 9. It lays restraints upon the
inward desires, the first motions of the heart, discerns and condemns sin
there. Hence, according to the doctrine of our Savior, rash anger is murder,
and a wanton glance adultery, Matt. v. 22, 28. It purifies the fountain, and
mends the principles from whence our actions flow.

Again, it furnishes the strongest motives against sin, opposes it with all the
force of argument and persuasion. It represents, how much it is against our
present interest, our peace and comfort, our honor, and even our profit in most
cases; and how utterly inconsistent with our future and eternal interest. He
that sins against God wrongeth his own soul. The wages of sin is death,
everlasting death. In short, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven in
Scripture against all ungodliness of men. It sets a flaming sword, as it were,
to discourage sinners, and throws terrors and deaths in their way. No book in
the world does or can appear against sin with so much authority as the Bible
does. Did we believe its reports and consider its threatenings in their utmost
extent, view sin in its connection with death and hell, according to the
Scripture account of the matter, we should not make so light a thing of it, as
we are many times too apt to do: the very appearance of it would give us a sort
of horror. In a word, the account the Scripture gives of sin, of its original,
nature, tendency, present miseries and torments, and future punishments is a
very proper means to keep us from it. Herein it is profitable for correction.

I will only add, that the Scripture is profitable for correction, as it is
attended with an inward efficacy and force. The word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart. It not only speaks against sin and
condemns it, but ransacks the heart, penetrates the conscience, and rises
against it with a majesty and authority that is peculiar to itself. Good men
find this divine efficacy in the word. A text of Scripture will have more force
to check and control an unruly passion, than an hundred smooth harrangues of
human composure. David experienced this sovereignty and mark of divinity in the
Scriptures, and celebrates it throughout Psalm cxix, and in other places. And
sometimes it pleases God to give it the like efficacy toward sinners. The
weapons of our warfare, says the apostle, are not carnal, but mighty through
God. The word of God discovers vice and dethrones it, It has done so in a
thousand instances. Particularly at the first preaching of the gospel, which
made one of the fathers glory of it in this respect. Show me a passionate man,
says he, and with a few words of God I will render him mild as a lamb, and the
like with respect to the unclean, etc. Thus profitable is the Scripture for
correction and reformation.

IV. the only head that remains to be touched is, that it is profitable for
instruction in righteousness, that is, for instruction in all the parts of our
duty toward God, toward our neighbor, and toward ourselves. It teaches us,
as is said more particularly of the gospel, to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world. We have there rules of perfect holiness set before
us, directing how to govern our appetites, senses, desires, affections, and
passions; rules of temperance and chastity in thought, speech, and behavior;
of meekness, humility, and the like: rules of justice toward men, in all our
commerce or intercourse with them. Our Savior comprises the substance of all
in two maxims, that we love our neighbor as ourselves, and that whatever we
would that men should do unto us, we should do even so unto them. These are
enlarged and commented upon in a variety of particulars, all tending to exclude
injuries, oppression, and every thing that is hurtful, and to establish an
exact decorum and equity in our mutual correspondence. And with equal beauty
and persection, it prescribes to us the scheme and method of converse with God.
It directs us to love him with all our hearts, to fear him, to trust him, to
delight in him, to worship him, to devote ourselves to him, to choose him and
rest in him, as the only felicity and happiness of our souls, to make him the
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end of our
actions, and indeed the all in all.

This is the general use of the holy Scripture. It was given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for these high and noble purposes, for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

A reflection or two upon what has been said shall conclude this point. And,

1. We may see hence the vanity of that plea the church of Rome advances in
behalf of oral tradition. They own with us, that the Scripture is given by
inspiration of God; but they pretend, that there are several divine doctrines,
necessary truths not contained in the Scripture, which the apostles delivered
to the churches by word of mouth. To this we have to answer, that it is not to
be supposed God should indite a book, for the use of his church, and that book
should be defective in any necessary point. That the Scripture every where
witnesses to its own perfection. The text tells us, it is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for doctrine, etc. that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And in the foregoing verse,
it is said, that the holy Scriptures are able to make wise to salvation.
Farther, we have express caution against these unwritten traditions. Thus in
the Old Testament, You shall not add to the word that I command you, neither
shall you diminish from it. And we find the whole Bible has a seal set to it,
in shut up with this awful saying, that if any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues written in this book. And if any man shall
take away from the words of this book, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life. It is an inspired book, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
and for all the purposes of religion, is able to make the man of God, the
minister, the christian, perfect: perfect in faith, and perfect in all duties
and offices. God has not left it to the caprice and humor of men to add to it,
and change it at pleasure. If he had, it would be no complete rule, and would
soon cease to be any rule at all. I might subjoin a multitude of arguments
against this sorry pretense of the Romanists, was this a place to debate that
matter. I shall only take notice farther, that the tradition they boast of has
always disgraced itself, and proved itself an imposture. Their most early
traditions have the most palpable marks of fable in them. As that of Papias
concerning the Millennium; that of the primitive church, which occasioned so
scandalous a division among them, relating to the time of keeping Easter. Had
tradition been any good rule, surely we might have expected it would have run
clear, and not been so muddy at the very fountain head, as we find it was.

Nor has their tradition only failed them, but betrayed them into a direct
opposition to the holy Scripture. For upon this s^ock they have grafted several
doctrines contrary to the inspired writings, as purgatory, indulgences, their
Latin service, the sacrifice of the mass, etc. Not to say, that they have among
them traditions inconsistent one with another. In one age they establish
doctrines, as sacred and divine, by virtue of a pretended tradition, which in
another age are condemned as heresy and loaded with an anathema: as, the eating
of things strangled, and blood, the immaculate conception of the virgin Mary,
and the like.

But I shall not enlarge on these things. You have your Bible, christians, and
there you have a perfect rule of faith and practice. Study that, and you will
find it profitable for you in all respects. It will make the man of God
perfect. If you neglect that, you will lose yourself in the labyrinth of human
fictions, and neither know what to believe, nor what to practice.

2. Is the Scripture given by inspiration of God, and profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness; let us use
it for all these purposes, receive its doctrines, receive all its doctrines,
acquaint yourselves with what it teaches, and resign to its authority therein.
This is a matter of no small importance, and will require no small industry and
humility. Do not object against any of the doctrines of the Bible, because they
do not seem to stand upon a level with your understanding. Whatever God teaches
is true; and it is enough, should be enough to us, that he teaches it, whatever
difficulties there may seem to be in it. We should learn to reverence infinite
wisdom, and submit our narrow faculties to the conduct thereof. And then
endeavor to receive all the doctrines of Scripture. It is profitable for
doctrine, and ^^ere is no doctrine of the Scripture that we should esteem
unprofitable. Such a temper is profane, and includes in it a sort of blasphemy
against the divine wisdom. God knows better than we do what is necessary and
good for us, and wherein he has condescended to be a teacher, we should be
cheerful and humble learners. Study therefore your Bible, and endeavor to be
complete in all the will of God. Whatever God speaks, we should be ready to
hear. All Scripture is profitable for doctrine, and it very ill becomes us to
neglect the greatest part of it under a pretense that it is not necessary.

Farther, use it for reproof. Reject every doctrine contrary to it, and that is
against what it does reveal, and every thing that is besides and above what it
does reveal. Let it be the measure and boundary of your faith. Endeavor to come
up to it, and not go beyond it.

Use it for correction. Mind its admonitions, and allow yourselves in no
thoughts, desires, words or acts the Scripture sets a mark upon as sinful or
unlawful. This is to be christians indeed. And according to our care and
exactness herein, we are more or less christians. Hearken to it, and let it
correct every sinful motion and disorder in the soul, and every wry step in
your course of life.

Once more, use it for your instruction in righteousness. As it prescribes to
you in every part of your conversation, teaches you how to conduct yourselves
in your whole converse in the world. To which purpose, it will be of exceeding
advantage to you, if you collected and wrote down the principal rules that
refer thereto both under this and the former head. For instance, the Scripture
rules for correcting the iniquity of our thoughts, desires affections and
actions, and the rules for the conduct of all these, write down the most
pertinent Scriptures that refer thereto. Frequently peruse them, commit them to
your memories. Set them before you as matter of daily duty. Look upon it as
your great business to practice according to these rules. Endeavor to be good
proficients herein. And in proportion to your seize in this matter, so is
your stature in religion. O that I could prevail with you to do this. Nothing
in the world would be more your interest. And indeed without some attention and
care this way, you lose the main advantage of the Bible; you only profess
religion in a general confused manner; all you hear, and all you read in the
Scripture will turn to little account. Take this method, christians. God has
given you a book full of glorious excellencies. Use it for its proper end. And
consider for your encouragement, that if you believe it, study it, live it, it
will be in every respect profitable to you: it will be a light to your feel,
and a lamp to your paths; will support you under your difficulties, fortify you
against temptations, guide you in your duties, and carry you safe to heaven.
Therefore make the holy, inspired Scripture your rule, live under its conduct
and influence, and you shall die with its comforts.

II. I come now to consider the usefulness of the several parts of Scripture.
It is all profitable, says the text, every book and part of the Bible has its
use, and is of service to the church. What its usefulness is, I am now to
enquire. The subject is copious, and of no small importance; and yet I must
very much pass it over. Though I own it was one thing I had principally in view
in the choice of my text. If nothing prevent, I may endeavor the satisfaction
of those that desire it another way, and upon other occasions. What I have
before me, is, to show the usefulness of the several parts of the Bible.
Concerning which I shall, first premise a few things, and then speak to the
subject more directly in another discourse.

I shall at present only premise a few things concerning this matter. As,

1. That we have great reason to conclude that all Scripture is profitable and
useful, in that it is given by inspiration of God. Since he is the author of
it, we may suppose it is useful and pertinent, even though there were some
parts and passages of it that we could not understand. A wise man will not
write a book of no use and value; much less, the only wise God. We find the
prophet celebrating God in his common providence, as instructing the husbandman
in the management of his affairs, and inferring, that there must be wisdom in
the management since it was from God. This comes forth from the Lord of Hosts,
who is wonderful in council, and excellent in working. What comes forth from
God, who is wonderful in council, and excellent in working, cannot be worthless
and insignificant. And thus does the Scripture, all Scripture, every part of
it. And yet,

2. Though all Scripture is profitable, it is not alike so, nor all useful for
the same purposes. Some part of Scripture was written for one, other parts for
a different end. It is not all useful for one and the same end: but all
excellent and useful for its proper end. As in the work of creation God
pronounced all things good, very good: not that every creature or species of
creatures have the same degree of excellency, or answer the same purpose: but
all are good in their place, and answer the particular end God designed them to
serve. There is a mighty difference between a man and a brute, a seraph or an
insect; and yet both are good. So it is with respect to the holy Scripture, it
is all divine, excellent, and good; but it is not all alike important and
excellent, nor does every part of it afford the like instruction. I cannot
therefore understand the humor of some devout men, that when they have read a
chapter of the Bible, think themselves obliged to enquire what they can find of
Christ there. We have a great deal of Christ in the Bible, but not in every
chapter of it. And we should not look for him where he is not to be found. The
Scripture is useful for many purposes. Some parts for one, some for another
purpose. And we then make the truest and best use of it when we refer every
part to its proper purpose, what God intended in it.

3. Let me observe, that the Bible was not delivered at once, as a complete
system of divinity, and body of religion, but contains various, successive
revelations, gradually made, as seemed good to infinite wisdom. God, who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke to the fathers by the prophets, at
last spoke to us by his Son.

Was I to illustrate this, I should give you a short view of the different
dispensations of religion, the different states of revelation in the several
ages and periods thereof; as, under Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the Son of
God incarnate. Adam had a revelation from God b^^h before his fall and after, a
plan of religion delivered to him, upon which his intercourse and acceptance
with God was founded. This was continued among the patriarchs with enlargements
at several times; as under Noah and Abraham. And under Moses a new peculiar
dispensation, a theocracy was introduced; not to set aside any former
revelations, laws, and methods of religion; but to serve the wise design of
providence at that time, and to prepare for a fuller and more glorious state of
religion under Christ. These several dispensations make up the Bible, and the
survey of them would show you the progress of divine revelation, the usefulness
thereof, and, I reckon, would direct to the best method of explaining it. But
this is what I must not now pretend to.

4. Every revelation God made to the world was designed for the use of the
church, not only in the age when it was given, but in all future ages. The
apostle tells us, that the things which happened to the Jews were written for
our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come. Indeed the church of
God, strictly speaking, is but one body, subsisting at different times, and in
different forms. First in its infancy, then in a more improved state, till it
was brought to a state of maturity under the gospel, and at last shall be
brought to a state of full perfection in heaven. Now the revelation vouchsafed
to the church, at any time, was for the service of the whole body at all times.
When any new revelation was given forth, it did not make void any thing that
went before, but supposed it was built upon it, and was supplemental to it,
except in the case of the gospels vacating the typical and temporary
dispensation of Moses. And consequently those that live under the last
dispensation of religion, when revelation is finished and completed are
distinguished by special advantages, which is our case that enjoy the gospel.
We have the benefit of all foregoing revelations, the light, instruction,
admonition, and examples of former ages, the whole treasure of the holy
inspired Scripture, all the glories and excellencies of the Bible are committed
to us and lodged in our hands. Let us be thankful for our privileges, and
endeavor to improve them. If every part of Scripture be profitable and useful,
to be sure the entire Scripture must be so. But I must leave what remains on
this subject to another opportunity.

DISCOURSE XIII. THE USEFULNESS OF THE SEVERAL PARTS OF SCRIPTURE.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I PROCEED now to enquire into the particular usefulness of the several parts
of Scripture. It cannot be expected, that I should examine the usefulness of
every book. That would require a volume rather than a sermon. Nor can I go
through the several dispensations of religion and distinct periods of
revelation, and give an account of those parts of the Bible that fall under
each. How much advantages soever there might be in such a method, I must here
decline it. All I can do, is to make some observations upon the Bible, as
divided into the several subjects of it. And I shall consider it under the
following heads, as containing histories, prophecies, ceremonies, matters of
morality, and doctrines.

1. Let us consider the historical part of the Bible. This is highly useful to
the church. A great deal of it you know is wrote by way of history, and there
is scarce any history in the Scripture but what affords abundance of divine
instruction. Reflect a little on the first book in the Bible, Genesis. A few
chapters of that sacred history are of greater use to the church than any large
volumes of common writers. I will only take notice of three or four things of
which we have an account in this book, and, I may add, in no other book in the
world, but what borrows from it. As

1. The creation of the world. The philosophers, that wanted the conduct of
revelation, were utterly at a loss and in confusion about this matter, and run
into wild and absurd hypotheses, as I had occasion to observe before. Some of
the best of them, that believed and acknowledged one God, supreme and eternal,
and that he was infinitely good, thought his goodness must necessarily
communicate itself, and thereupon concluded it did so from eternity, and
consequently that the world must be eternal. Now this history removes all
scruples here, and satisfies all questions in a few words, tell^^^ the world
was made, made in time, and made by God, by a free, and yet powerful act of his
will. Let there be, says God, and there was. His fiat or sovereign word
brought all things into being. This clears all difficulties, and at the same
time has such a grandeur and majesty in it, that Longinus allows it to be an
instance of the true sublime. In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth, and God said, let there be light, and there was light. Let there be a
firmament, etc. and it was so. With how much majesty is this spoken, and how
fit to convey to the mind an idea of God's greatness, his infinite greatness.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts thereof by the
breath of his mouth. How glorious a being is the author of this amazing work?
how justly may we say of him as Job does, I know that thou can do every thing.

We have here also an account of the degeneracy of the human nature, that lapse
or fall of mankind: a point about which all the philosophers were puzzled and
nonplused. They found in themselves, and observed in the world, a strange
disorder in the human mind, that the passions and affections were become
headstrong and impetuous, and that reason was not strong enough to curb and
master them. And hence some of the wisest of them inferred, that reason had
been some how weakened and hurt, and thereby lost the dominion they supposed it
originally had; though how to account for it they knew not. But this the
Scripture history clears up. It tells us that man fell, and how he came to
fall. In which it represents two things among others that suggest matter of
admiration and caution to us, viz. The danger of pride and sensuality, the
devil making use of the body of a seraph, or bright shining serpent, insinuated
to the woman, that if they eat they should be advanced to an higher station, be
as God in wisdom and independency, and thus flattered their ambition and took
with them, and then the fruit appeared pleasant to the eye, as well as
desirable to make wise; both their rational and sensitive appetites were
flattered at once, and this hurried them into the transgression, and occasioned
their fall. See here the danger of pride, and of pleasing the senses. It undid
man in paradise, man in innocence, and continues the great danger of mankind to
this day. Another thing suggested in this history of the fall is, the shame and
cowardice consequent upon sin. No sooner had Adam sinned, but he hid himself
among the trees of the garden. Before the presence of God was his life and his
joy, but now he runs away from it. I heard thy voice, says he, and hid myself,
for I was afraid because I was naked. Sin had stripped him of his innocence and
his ornaments, and now the presence and voice of his maker fills him with
terror. And this is the natural fruit of sin. However it appears during the
temptation, when the pleasure is over and the mask is thrown off, it issues in
bitterness, shame and horror. It is said of our first parents, that the eyes of
them both were opened and they saw that they were naked, they saw their guilt
and were filled with confusion upon it. And thus it still is with sinners when
conscience is awakened.

I might take notice of the institution of marriage between one man and one
woman, in opposition to polygamy. That practice which generally obtained in the
world, and is attended with so much mischief, stands here condemned by the
original appointment of God. And of the institution of the sabbath, or a
seventh day of sacred rest and religion, after six days of labor. This was set
apart by the example, benediction, and command of God immediately upon
finishing the creation. It was instituted before the ceremonial law was in
being, and consequently, is of a moral nature, and of perpetual obligation.

I might add the original of the soul. It was not created with the body, and
out of the dust, as the body was, but created immediately by God, He breathed
into him the breath of life, and man became a living soul. Plainly intimating,
that it is distinct from the body, and consequently can subsist without it.

Now these are points of such high importance, that the little order and
religion there is among mankind very much depends on them; and they are wholly
owing to the history of the Bible. The three first chapters of it give more
satisfaction in these, and the like great principles and doctrines of religion,
than all the philosophers in the world, that are destitute of Scripture light.

I mention these things, not only as an argument of the great worth and
usefulness of the Scripture; but with design they may recommend and endear the
Bible to you. Read the first, second, and third of Genesis, and there you may
learn, what you may travel the world round in quest of, and never learn unless
you find a Bible, or converse with those that have lighted their lamps at this
torch.

And how valuable an hint is that, Genesis iii. 15. concerning the promised seed.
When God was proceeding against the several criminals, in the midst of that
more awful scene he discovers the purposes of his grace, The seed of the woman,
says he, shall bruise the serpent's head. The purport of which is, that an
eminent and extraordinary person, who should be the seed of the woman alone,
should appear in the world, destroy Satan's kingdom, rescue and deliver fallen
man. This the apostle four thousand years after refers to and owns the
accomplishment of; When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. A glorious sentence! of more
consequence to mankind than all the victories and triumphs recorded by the
Greek and Roman historians.

I might take notice of the universal deluge, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrha, with many particulars relating to the patriarchs and their religion,
in which we have not only several wonderful and important events described,
with a certainty and clearness, that in vain we seek for in other histories;
but the divine providence set forth in the government of the world, the divine
attributes displayed, his knowledge, wisdom, justice, holiness, and hatred of
sin manifested in such a manner as is most fit to strike the minds of men and
beget in them a fear and reverence of God, and lay the foundation of divine
worship and religion.

You see I can only give you a taste of things, and of the great usefulness of
the Scripture under this head. Should I pursue the subject, even in this
superficial manner, it would require many sermons.

I will therefore only observe farther, that besides the instruction the sacred
history affords from the matter of it, its several narratives are generally so
many confirmations of its predictions and prophecies. The history of Abraham
and his posterity, for instance, their sojourning in Egypt, their deliverance
from thence, their settling in Goshen, their apostacies, captivities, and
restoration afterward, are the fulfilling of the promise made to Abraham, of
the prophecies uttered by Jacob when he was leaving the world, and the
predictions of Moses. So that this part of the Bible, which indeed is a
considerable part of the Old Testament, is exceeding useful to the church; it
shows the divine providence governing the world in a sovereign manner, shows
the divine knowledge in all events, and the truth of all his promises, and
confirms our faith in the belief of the Scripture.

As to the New Testament history, it is full of glorious events; your own
knowledge will furnish you with the particulars, and a little reflection
convince you of the usefulness of them. It relates the incarnation, life,
miracles, sufferings, crucifixion, resurrection and ascension of the Son of
God; the pouring out of the spirit, the ministry of the apostles, and the
surprising success that attended it, and herein lays the foundation of the
christian faith and religion, strictly such, and at the same time confirms and
establishes a great part of the Old Testament.

But I must not enlarge, you see by these hints, that the history of Scripture
is profitable. Was it not besides my present purpose, I might show it was
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness. But I rather choose to take notice of its usefulness more in
general.

2. As the historical, so the prophetical part of the Bible is profitable and
useful. You must not expect, and I dare say, do not desire, I should make a
collection of the prophecies, and go through every one of them, to show their
meaning and usefulness But as you have a good deal of the Bible in this strain,
it cannot be improper, I am sure not impertinent to the subject, to touch upon
the general uses of the prophecies.

And it may be affirmed of them, as is said of all Scripture in the text, that
they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness. The prophets though they insisted much upon predictions,
donouncing judgments, foretelling deliverances, salvations and the like; yet
they did not confine themselves to these subjects. They were a sort of divine
and extraordinary preachers to the people; one design of whose ministry was to
preserve a sense of providence and religion among them; accordingly, we find
their sermons full of instruction, admonition and reproof.

They give us noble ideas of God and providence, and call upon those to whom
they were sent, to consider their ways, to repent and reform. The Jews had a
large body of ceremonial laws, in which they were very much employed, and we
find they were apt wholly to place their religion therein. This the prophets
take notice of, and frequently censure, calling them to mind the weightier
matters of the moral law, justice, mercy, and the love of God, letting them
know all their ritual services would signify nothing, whilst they neglected the
great moral duties of religion. We have a multitude of instances to this
purpose in the discourses of the prophets; particularly, Isa. xiii. 14. Bring
no more vain oblations, says he, in the name of God, incense is an abomination
to me, the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away
with: it is iniquity even the solemn meeting; your new moons and your appointed
feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. He
adds, ver. 16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

And in the like strain many of their discourses run. Their office, in short,
was to guard and reform religion, to teach just notions of God and providence,
and to inculcate the important duties of the moral law. And for this purpose
their writings are of lasting and constant use. The sermons of the prophets
concern us, as well as the people to whom they were immediately sent, and we
shall find no small advantage in a diligent perusal of them. Here we meet with
the most lively representations of God in his nature, attributes, providence,
and government. What an awful description is that of the Supreme Being, Isa.
xl. 12, 15, 16. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? meted
out the heaven with the span, comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure,
weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? behold the nations
are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance:
behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. Lebanon itself is not
sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. All
nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him as less than
nothing and vanity. And how majestic and yet comfortable is that representation
of him, Isa. lvii. 15. Thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him
also, that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the hearts of the contrite ones.

And as we are furnished with suitable apprehensions of God, so we are
instructed in our duty in an admirable manner; our duty toward God, our
neighbor, and ourselves. Micha sums up all in a few words, chap. vi. 8. What
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God. These great branches of our religion are here
enlarged upon, the contrary sins pointed out in a way that is very proper to
awe the consciences and strike the passions. Glorious is the advantage of the
prophetic writings in this respect. Nor, it may be, can the man of God, the
believer, the christian be better furnished any where for every good work than
from hence. This part of Scripture is profitable, and it is well worth our
while to study it diligently, to acquaint ourselves with the doctrine, the
language, style and phrase of the prophets, hereby our minds will be enriched
with excellent divine notions, armed against sin, and not a little assisted in
devotion.

Again, the prophetic part of Scripture, as consisting in predictions, is of
mighty use, particularly, as it manifests the infinite knowledge of God, and
his sovereign providence over the world. We find there a multitude of
surprising events at a vast distance foretold, which accordingly took place in
the very time and manner signified in the prophecy. Now this shows, that all
things, even future, as well as present are naked and open to the eyes of him
with whom we have to do; that known unto the Lord are all his works from the
beginning unto the end; that his eyes run to and fro throughout the earth,
conducting with a steady sovereign hand all things to such issues, as he has
foreseen and appointed. With what sovereignty, how becoming is that spoken,
Isa. xlvi. 9, 10. I am God, and there is none like me; declaring the end from
the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying
my council shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And when we see this
done in the accomplishment of numerous prophecies, it serves to give us high
and exalted thoughts of the Deity, a reverence of his providence, and should
teach us to commit all affairs with faith, dependence and full resignation into
his hands, the affair of the church, and our own particular affairs.

Farther, the prophetic part of Scripture is useful as it affords a strong
argument against sin, and unto obedience. Some of the prophecies are
declarations of God's free and gracious purposes toward his people in this or
that event; many of them denunciations of judgments against transgressors; or
assurances of deliverance and salvation to the penitent or obedient. Now, if we
consider these prophecies aright, consider the design of them and their
accomplishment, we cannot but look upon them as so many standing testimonies
against sin; of the evil and danger of it, of the good of obedience, and the
like. He has destroyed kingdoms, families, persons, for their iniquities, he
has published his purpose before hand, and at last accomplished it in terrible
vengeance. Stand in awe, O my soul, and sin not, says the believer. This use we
should make of the prophecies of Scripture, and shall make of them, if we read
them with attention, understanding and faith.

I might add. though I cannot stay to enlarge upon it, that the prophecies were
to those that first received them, insurances of future events. They brought
distant things as it were before their eyes, and into present view. And
consequently, were a trial and exercise of their faith, their hope and trust,
and a direction in many particulars of duty.

Besides, the prophecies accomplished, and so viewed by the church in
after-ages, are a glorious confirmation of faith. They show us not only that
the Lord is God, Elohim, governor of the world, that he rules in the armies of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; but they show us also the truth
of his word, the inspiration and authority of those that were employed to
deliver it. We cannot have a greater evidence of the divine commission of the
penmen of Scripture than the spirit of prophecy that attended them; especially
when we see their predictions come to pass. No man could say and declare such
things so long before hand, unless God was with him. So that when we are
reading the prophecies we are reading the credentials of those divine ministers
from whom we receive our religion, who have spoken to us by the word of the
Lord, and in the name of the Lord. On which account, as well as others, we
should exceedingly value them, and delight in them.

Once more, the prophecies are highly useful as they are a pledge and earnest
of the accomplishment of such events as are yet future and waited for. There
failed not ought of any good thing, says Joshua, which the Lord had spoken to
the house of Israel, all came to pass. Now when we see all come to pass which
God has spoken, in so many instances heretofore, we may rest secure that all
which yet remains to be fulfilled, shall come to pass also. God speaks of our
deliverance by Christ four thousand years before the event, and this wonderful
thing was accordingly made good. He has spoken of the revolutions of kingdoms
and nations, their rise and fall long before they were in the world, and all
has come to pass. Hence our faith may argue and conclude, even with a fort of
triumph, that all God's promises and predictions in behalf of his church, shall
have their accomplishment in the time and manner he has appointed. For
instance, antichrist shall be destroyed, all rule, authority, and power be put
down under the feet of the Lord Jesus Christ's little flock shall be preserved
receive a kingdom; the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and the living
saints changed. This a christian may look for, and conclude upon with as much
assurance as if he had heard the voice of the archangel, the trump of God, and
saw the Lord Jesus descend from heaven in his Schekina and glory. So many
wonderful things foretold in Scripture have been already wonderfully
accomplished, that we cannot reasonably question any thing that remains to be
accomplished. No, heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one iota of the
divine word shall fail. O be thankful for every part of Scripture, particularly
for the prophetic part of it, and when you peruse these glorious testimonies of
God's wisdom, knowledge, power and providence, endeavor to make a useful
improvement thereof: celebrating and adoring God in what is past, depending
upon him for what is future; remembering that of the apostle, Whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

3. The ceremonial or ritual part of the Bible, is of use to the church. The
Old Testament religion was much concerned in these things, in sacrifices,
washings, meats, drinks, the observation of days, etc. and so large a portion
of the Bible is employed about them, that it cannot but be worth while for a
man that has a reverence for it, to enquire into the meaning of such
institutions, All Scripture is profitable, and surely this. Otherwise it had
not been given by inspiration of God. What the use and profit of it is, I am
briefly to represent. You cannot expect I should descend to particulars, and
consider the several rites of the Levitical law. All that comes within the
compass of my design, is, to offer a few general remarks upon the subject.

The ceremonial or ritual part of Scripture, was of use to the church, when the
particulars thereof were in force, as they were the matter of their obedience;
tokens of God's sovereignty and dominion over them, and expressions of their
subjection. Though neither we, nor they that received the ceremonial services,
should be able to account for all of them, the will and appointment of God was
reason enough to determine the obedience of those that were enjoined to observe
them. The church was then in its nonage and infancy. And as parents sometimes
prescribe to their children such and such services, the design and end of which
they do not understand, why might not God deal thus with his people at that
time: and as the compliance of children in this case is acceptable and
pleasing, and of use to train them up to subjection, so, no question, it was in
these institutions of religion. Though the Jews knew not what God intended by
some of the ordinances established among them, they knew they were the laws and
prescriptions of their sovereign and wise creator and governor, and
consequently that their obedience would be acceptable to him and profitable to
themselves. And if we consider the ceremonial law in this view, it is still
useful even to us, as it affords us an important admonition and instruction,
viz. to be subject to the will of God in all things, even when we do not
clearly apprehend his particular design therein. There was a great deal of this
in Abraham's says and obedience; for which he is so justly celebrated, and
mentioned with so much honor in the Scriptures, and in the church of God to
this day. Take now thy son, says God to him, thy only son, Isaac, whom thou
love, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a
burnt-offering, upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of. Strange!
what can this mean? was he not the son of his hopes? the root of that glorious
seed in whom all ^^e families of the earth should be blessed? and must he now
be cut off by the hands of his own father? what then would become of the
promise? and yet Abraham makes no objection, but addresses himself to this
difficult amazing duty; and for this he had an honor put upon him, by which he
has been distinguished ever since. God has a right to command, and it is our
place to obey. And though his laws carry with them generally sufficient
evidence of their reasonableness, and we are convinced of their benificial,
comfortable tendency; yet when it is otherwise, as it might be often in the
case of the Jews, his will is reason enough. And indeed the more we are
disposed even to an implicit subjection to the will of God, the more excellency
there is in our faith and obedience. And when we find a people so long trained
up in such a course of obedience, it should teach us to bow our understandings
and wills to the divine revelation and will, even when we have not a clear
understanding of the intention of the lawgiver.

Again, the ceremonies and ritual services of the law were useful to the
church, as they were a means of absolution, and of obtaining pardon of sin.
There were indeed some exceptions; presumptuous sinners had not the indulgence
of a sacrifice, were not allowed to bring their offerings, but were to be cut
off. Nor could the blood of bulls and goats take away sin, purge the
conscience, and make the comers thereunto perfect. They were not in themselves
of sufficient efficacy for this purpose. But, as they were of divine
appointment, and had a respect to the atonement of the Son of God, they were
tokens and assurances of God's pardoning mercy and grace to them, and to the
penitent and sincere available, no doubt, for their real absolution.

Farther, they were useful as types of the Messiah; as so many sensible
assurances of the accomplishment of the promises concerning redemption by
Christ; The feed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. This was the
foundation of all that friendly intercourse between God and man after the
apostasy. Now every sacrifice they brought and flew, was a sort of a
representation of this great and glorious event. And hence, it may be, he is
called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. He died, as it were, in
a figure, and hung upon the cross as often as the sacrifice died and was laid
upon the altar. So that here was a glorious institution to exhibit Christ. And
when we look back upon these ancient records, as we see the venerable monuments
of divine wisdom; so comparing them with the event, we have our faith not a
little confirmed and established. Christ was to come, to die, to justify us by
his blood. The Jews had the earnest of this in their hands, in their sacrifices
and other services: and many hundred years after we have the thing itself; have
seen the salvation of God. The same rites and shadows that directed their faith
to Christ, confirm our faith in him.

And then, these rites and ceremonies were designed as a distinction of that
nation, to which they were given, from the rest of the world. God chose
Abraham, and called him from among idolators to be the head of a peculiar
people. His family was to be the seat of God's worship in a special manner: of
them the Messiah was to be born, and that his birth and descent might certainly
be known, it pleased God to enclose this family and people, and by peculiar
laws and rites to divide between them and the rest of mankind. They were not to
intermix with the world about them, intermarry with other nations, worship, of
freely converse with them. And to keep up this distinction, the law of
ceremonies was a wall of partition, as the apostle calls it, Ephesians. ii. 14.
which was broken down when Christ came, the end, one end, of the enclosure
being attained. So that whilst we peruse this part of Scripture, we may
entertain ourselves with the contemplation of this great design of divine
wisdom and grace toward the church. God set apart that people and set a mark
upon them from whom the redeemer was to descend. He was to be the son of
Abraham, of the tribe of Judah, of the family of David; and thus the Scripture
assure us he was. It is evident, says the apostle, our Lord sprung out of
Judah. It was a matter of the last importance to know the Messiah when he
appeared, that this was he that was to come, and that we must not look for
another. Now that this might be manifest to the church, God thus separated the
family and nation from whence he sprung.

Again, this part of Scripture revelation is useful, as it tends to give us
high notions and an august idea of Christ and the christian religion. All this
glorious apparatus, and the laws and services of that dispensation, which were
the study and employment of the church for so many hundred years, were designed
to introduce the gospel state. And with what solemnity do they introduce it!
the incarnation of Christ, his sacrifice, and our redemption by him, are among
the chief of the works of God; the greatest mysteries of his grace. And
methinks, when it is considered that the glory of the Jewish temple, and all
the services thereof, all the ceremonies and rites of a law revealed from
heaven, referred to this, and were to issue and terminate in it; and indeed
were contrived on purpose to give notice of the gospel, to proclaim Christ, and
to usher him into the world; when we consider this, and seriously reflect upon
the providence of God therein, we cannot but infer the glory of the gospel
state. Let us make this use of that part of the Bible, that to many appears
useless. We may judge of a building in some measure, by the greatness of the
scaffolding. Certainly such a vast preparation was never designed to introduce
a thing of little moment.

I add, this part of revelation and state of religion is of use, as it may
administer cause of thankfulness to us, that we are under an higher and more
excellent dispensation. The apostle often speaks of the Jewish law in terms of
great diminution. He calls the ceremonies thereof, the elements of this world,
beggarly elements, speaks of the law as a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ;
as insufficient; a shadow of good things to come, and represents the services
and laborious performances of it, as a yoke, that neither the Jews of that age,
nor their fathers were able to bear. Now among other advantages we have by the
levitical law, this is one, the exciting our thankfulness for the more manly,
spiritual, rational religion of the gospel. Not but that there was an
excellency in their religion, and a reverence due to it, as it was the
appointment of God. No doubt, serious upright persons enjoyed acceptance with
God, and intercourse with him in it. But that glory was nothing, compared with
the glory of the gospel which excells. Now when we find in what low services,
comparitively, their religion consisted, we should rejoice and be thankful that
we are called to more noble and divine work.

Once more, the ceremonies and rites of Moses were useful to the church at that
time, and are still useful to us, as they contain many moral documents and
instructions. I might go through a great number of particulars, and at large
illustrate this; but can only him at things in a general way. Circumcision
refers to the inward mortification of sin, and was designed to teach the
necessity of it. Circum-case, says Moses, the foreskin of your hearts, and be
no more stiff-necked. And the apostle plainly intimates the same, when he makes
the true circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. Their various washings and purgations
preached to them their defilement by sin, and the necessity of inward and
outward sanctification. Their thank offerings were an acknowledgment of their
dependence on God, teaching them and us how reasonable it is we should daily
own our daily benefactor. Every offering for sin represented the evil and
demerit of it, and was a signal that the sinner deserved to die, that his life
was forfeited to the justice of God. Accordingly, there was a confession of sin
constantly accompanied such sacrifices, by which the necessity of repentance
and reformation was urged upon the offenders, and was owned by them. In short,
the law was an emblem of the gospel and the religion thereof. It held forth in
a figure the death and sacrifice of Christ, the purity, holiness, and obedience
of christians, their separation from the world, and from all uncleanness. All
the sacrifices that referred to sin, all the laws about uncleanness, and means
appointed for purifying, were public significations of the necessity of
holiness and purity both in heart and life. And we should now read them as so
many admonitions thereto, and cannot better improve them, than by a thorough
compliance with the rules of the gospel, which are the moral of those
institutions. In this sense, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes.

Thus it appears, that even this part of Scripture, which may be looked upon of
least value and use, and that some have very rudely objected against as absurd,
and unworthy of a divine lawgiver; that this is profitable to the church. It
answered wise and great purpose at the time it was given, and was in force, and
continues still highly useful. Let me add,

4. The moral parts of Scripture are profitable. By which, I mean, those books
that concern the direction of our faith, the furnishing us with good
principles, and especially that concern the conduct of our lives.

The book of Job represents a surprising scene of providence, full of great and
excellent instruction. Particularly it represents the malice and industry of
Satan in prosecuting his designs against us; how watchful he is to gain and
improve occasions to our hurt. This appears in his management against Job. He
waits and seeks for a commission against him, which he no sooner obtains, than
he improves it to its utmost extent, and as far as he could go. Here we are
taught what the apostle long after takes notice of, that we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

This book also represents the safety of good men under the divine protection.
Have thou not made an hedge about him, says Satan concerning Job, and about his
house, and about all that he has on every side? Our families, persons, I may
add, our names, reputations, our bodies, and souls, all are in the hands of
God; neither men nor devils can hurt us without permission from heaven. This we
learn from that ancient book, it may be, the most ancient in the world, written
many thousand years ago. And how comfortable is it to find it there,? Good men
are still encircled by the same divine arm. God makes an hedge about them, and
about all that they have. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? says
David, many there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in God. He
^^ds, But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my
head. And says our Savior, fear not, the hairs of your head are all numbered.

Again, It represents the sovereignty of divine providence in the government of
the world, and in the disposal of the affairs of particular persons. The devil
could do nothing against Job without a commission from heaven. And that which I
would here more especially observe, is, that his upright, good, and perfect
Man, as he is called, is by the providence of God brought under a course of
exercises and trials, a severity of discipline, the greatest that, it may be,
any ever met with. God is righteous in all his works, but he is sovereign in
all his providence; and we should learn by this instance, to submit to him an
any, in all his rebukes how heavy soever. He has wise ends in all he does; will
be faithful to his word, and take care of his upright, sincere servants. But
this does not exempt them from trials and sufferings. When you see Job, so
eminent and holy a man, pass through such a series of afflictions, amazing
afflictions; learn to reverence the divine sovereignty. Do not think much at
any of the trials that may be your lot and whatever God does, own his
authority; Be still, and know that he is God.

Father, this book represents to us an example of patience truly glorious, not
without flaws and imperfections, but yet truly excellent and glorious. God
smote Job, lies in the dust, and when he was stripped of all, submits and
adores. The Lord has given, says he, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name
of the Lord. And even after a most dismal train of calamities, it is remarked
of him, that in all this Job finned n^^, nor charged God foolishly. We have
heard of the patience of Job, as the apostle expresses it. We here read the
history of it, and we should set it before us for our admonition in our
adversities.

And then, this divine book represents God in his sovereignty, majesty and
greatness, and that with more life and advantage than perhaps any other book in
the world. It gives us such a view of him in his works and providence, and his
excellencies, and should awe and impress our minds, and silence our complaints.
Even Job forgot himself, and was too bold, till God came forth and displayed
his glory; and this reduced and humbled him. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, says he, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor
myself, and repent in dust and ashes.

Here is represented the weakness and infirmity of good men, even the best of
men. It was one design of God in this dispensation toward Job, to exercise and
manifest the integrity, and uprightness of his servant, to confute Satan, and
show that Job was not an hypocrite, as he insinuated. But though Job showed his
integrity he showed also his infirmity; though Satan was baffled, Job was
humbled. And, it may be, had he stood his ground under such shocking trials,
without discovering any frailties, it might have been more dangerous to him
than his miscarriages. God hereby humbled him, taught him dependence, let him
see his meanness and insufficiency. Good men, the greatest men in this life can
go through no difficult work, no difficult trials, but it will many ways appear
they are men, but men, sinful, frail creatures. And though they are owned,
accepted and honored of God, it is still upon terms of humility and repentance,
and in such a way as leaves the success of all, and the glory of all, to God,
and to the praise of his grace.

I add, here is represented the care of God toward wards his faithful
servants, and the comfortable issue of all their trials and conflicts. We do
not, I grant, always see this at present, and in the manner, as in Job's case:
But it shall be well with the righteous; God will not forsake the soul that
seeks him. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright man, for the end of
that man is peace. God will support persons of this character under all their
burdens, dangers and fears; and in due time and manner deliver them. No
temptation shall befall them but what is common to men, and God will with the
temptation make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it. They may be
obscured for a ti^e, persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, not destroyed.
No, their righteousness shall go forth as brightness, and their salvation as a
lamp that burns. Job was conducted through a scene of sorrows and calamities,
that even his three pious and wise friends, thought it would have been his
ruin. But God meant not so. He had designs of kindness toward him, and he knew
how to deliver the righteous out of temptation, and to save him in it, and
under it. All good men may expect the like superintendency of divine
providence, and supply of divine grace. If your hearts be upright with God, as
Job's was, God will be your defense as he was his. He will restrain your
enemies, pardon your infirmities, though it is fit he should show you them, and
humble you for them, and at last be your salvation.

In short, there are many glorious lessons in this book, a scence of providence
that one may peruse and contemplate with exceeding great advantage. O learn to
understand the use of your Bible, and of the several parts thereof, and I am
confident, you will never think meanly of it.

I might illustrate my point by the like reflections on the book of Psalms, and
the rest, but have not time. One great advantage of that book is, that it
describes the various states, postures and frames of devout souls. It sometimes
shows you the good man low and down, full of fears and despondency, lying in
sackcloth, and watering his couch with his tears. And then rising out of this
state, putting off his sable, and girded with gladness. It is indeed a glorious
treasure of devotion, as well as a directory for life. And I am satisfied it
would be well worth our while, not only frequently to read it, but to commit as
much as we can of it to our memories. This is what many of the primitive
christians have done, and others since, with great advantage. If this does not
turn to better account than furnishing, I might say debauching your minds with
such sorry trash as plays and romances generally, at least, are, I am utterly
mistaken. The one is the food, solace, and entertainment of divine minds; what
shall I say of the other? but that they are husks for swine to feed upon.

The book of Solomon's Proverbs and Ecclesiastes have a great deal of
excellency in them, and are highly useful. The one is a lively description of
the vanity of present enjoyments, and the other affords the most admirable
maxims of wisdom. Many of the discourses of the moral philosophers, as
Plutarch, Seneca, Epictetus, and Antonine, are justly celebrated in the world.
And indeed they want not their excellencies, great excellencies. But here we
have not only higher strains of wisdom, but the precepts of it delivered with
more certainty and authority. The philosophers were, many of them, wise
observers of human nature. They knew its infirmities in some measure, and knew
how to prescribe for a cure. But the writers of these divine books were
conducted by the author of nature, that perfectly understands man, knows what
there is in him; and therefore their maxims are recommended to us, not only by
the intrinsic excellency of them, but by this distinguishing circumstance, that
they are all true, infallibly true. And we may be sure, as they are true, so
they are pertinent to the cases they refer to, and by the blessing of God shall
be effectual to those that receive and apply them.

Let these hints recommend the Bible to you, and the several parts thereof. If
there be some things in it, we do not well understand, we should not cavil
against the whole on that account, but say as the philosopher did when he had
read the writings of a man of fame, what I understand is excellent, says he,
and I presume what I understand not is so too. Certainly this reverence is due
to God, whose book the Bible is, due to infinte wisdom. Acquaint yourselves
with the several parts of Scripture, though you should be most conversant in
those parts that are most useful. Besides the knowledge we shall thereby gain,
we may expect the divine presence and blessing with us when thus employed. When
we are diligently and seriously reading our Bible, we are on holy ground, as I
may say, and consequently, may hope, God will be with us, shining in upon our
minds, drawing our affections to himself, shedding abroad his love in our
hearts, pouring out his spirit upon us, more and more sanctifying us by his
word. O endeavor that the word of God may dwell richly in you, remembering the
character of the blessed man, that his delight is in the law of the Lord, and
in his law does he meditate day and night.

DISCOURSE XIV. PRACTICAL REFLECTIONS UPON THE SUBJECT.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.


I COME now to the application of the many discourses I have given you, and
shall dispatch what I further design in a single short discourse, and so
conclude the subject. And here I shall only offer a few practical reflections.
As,

1. If the Scripture be given by inspiration of God, it ought certainly to be
treated with great esteem and reverence among men. As it is the word of God,
indicted by the Holy Spirit, a book sent from heaven; it challenges a peculiar
regard, and should be distinguished from all human writings. This every one
must allow that believes it to be inspired. Let us therefore be careful to
treat this holy book in a suitable manner. The apostle expresses his great
satisfaction concerning the Thessalonians, that they received the gospel
preached to them, not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of
God. Let it appear that we thus receive the Bible, receive it as a divine
revelation, particularly by our reverence of it. If it be asked, how must we
show our reverence? I answer,

1. By a diligent attentive study of it. The excellency and usefulness of the
matter of Scripture demands this of us. But what I now insist upon, is the
consideration of the author. It is from God, and therefore a special reverence
and esteem is due to it; which we should manifest by our attention thereto, and
careful perusal of it.

All writings are commonly received or neglected, according to the
qualifications or characters of their authors. Nothing is expected from books
published by ignorant, trifling, or mercenary writers, and therefore such are
generally despised by men of sense; while the productions of authors of a
different character, of better learning, capacity, and more integrity, are
proportionably better received and esteemed, and more pains is taken to find
out their designs, to take in their schemes, and to understand their arguments
and way of reasoning. They are read with application, and not only once, but
often, it may be, according to the character of the author, or the opinion of
the book itself. And in the writings of those great men, that hold the first
rank, every sentence and line, and almost every word, is thought to have its
weight, and not to be set down carelessly, without a meaning or necessary use.
With what pains and diligence have men weighed the particular words, and even
the situation of them, in the composures of Plato, Tully, Homer, Virgil,
Horace, Terence, and others. Now if the reputation of wisdom and skill in human
books, thus commands our reverence and attention; what is due to the book of
God? I am not comparing the contents of these writings, the important design
and tendency of them; but merely considering the authors, and I know you will
allow me to say, that if we reverence this or that piece of antiquity for the
name of its author, no book challenges so much reverence from us as the Bible.

Well then, let us show our regard to it by the pains we take in it. Many have
spent their time, and the greatest part of their lives in criticisms upon some
of the heathen authors, settling the reading and marking the beauties thereof.
How will this diligence reproach us, if we neglect a book that can claim the
only Wise God for its author?

2. We should show our esteem and reverence for the Bible, by a ready and
universal submistion to its authority, even in such things as we cannot fully
understand, nor are able to account for. We are apt to pay a sort of implicit
veneration to the writings of great men. Much more should we do it to the word
of God. As he is infinitely wise, holy, just, and good; we may be sure he is
neither deceived himself, nor can deceive us; that nothing comes from him that
is false, nothing that is weak, nothing that is imperfect; that all he has
revealed is true, pertinent, wise, and beneficial; proper to answer the end he
had in it. And accordingly we should entertain every part of his revelation
with reverence, knowing from whence it proceeds. The want of this principle has
ruined the faith and religion of multitudes. They object against this or that
in the Bible, because it does not agree with their reason, that is, with their
prejudices and fancies; as if infinite wisdom must be measured and governed by
our narrow and short views. Thus some find fault with the rites and ceremonies
of the Mosaical law. They cannot understand the rationale of them and are ready
to call them absurd; thus measuring God by themselves. Others object to the
great doctrine of atonement by the sacrifice of the Son of God and saving
sinners through his mediation. This they cannot understand and therefore will
not believe. Some from the same vanity neglect the sacraments of the New
Testament. They cannot see of w^^^ advantage it is to eat a bit of bread and
drink a little wine; what this can contribute to the improvement of the mind.
And it is well if some do not encourage themselves in gross sins to the like
consideration. Surely, say they, God will not damn a man for taking a little
pleasure out of the way. What harm can there be in gratifying the inclinations
God has given us in instances agreeable thereto? they cannot see any injury to
the Supreme Being herein, nor believe he will ever punish offenses of this kind
so severely as is pretended. But this is not to reverence the Bible and treat
it as a revelation from God, but to set up our own foolish fancies in
opposition thereto, to make ourselves God's counselors, and even correctors.
And indeed the same principle would carry us to censure any of the works of
nature, and find fault with them as not reasonable, not well contrived, not
well placed. And thus vain men profanely change place with God, get upon his
throne and bring him to the bar. Infinite patience! that bears with such worms,
and does not frown them into hell in a moment. If the Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, what we have to do, is to make all our reasonings submit to
it. Though we do not understand some of its prescriptions, it is enough they
are from heaven. That should determine our faith, and silence all cavils. We
know not what it is to be creatures till it is thus with us, much less
christians.

3. Show your reverence and esteem of the Bible by a firm adherence to it, and
to the religion it prescribes, whatever temptation you may have to the
contrary. It is the most valuable treasure God has entrusted us with, and we
should resolve by his grace, that no terrors, nor death, shall wrest it out of
our hands. The zeal of the primitive christians in this respect, is well known.
They would rather submit to any tortures, than give up their Bibles at the
demand of their enemies. And those among them that through fear complied, and
would quit their Bibles to save their lives, were looked upon as infamous, and
rejected as unworthy of the communion of the christian church. They were called
traditores, such as delivered up their Bibles, a name of the utmost reproach
and scandal among them. Eusebius mentions one Marinus, a military man, who
being discovered to be a christian, was ordered to determine in three hours,
whether he would relinquish his office, or his profession. In the mean time,
Theobectus, bishop of Caesaria, comes to him and showed him a sword, the badge
of his office, and a Bible, the repository of the christian faith, and bid him
choose which of the two he would have, for he must not keep both; upon which he
presently chose the Bible, and was crowned with martyrdom. Should we ever meet
with the like trial, we should make the like choice. We do not treat the Bible
worthy its original, if it be not dearer to us than our lives. Nor should we
part with the religion of the Bible, and give it up in complaisance to the
fashions of the age, or humors of those we converse with. The Bible is from
heaven: believe it, live by it, whatever measures others are pleased to walk
by. Let this prescribe the rules of your conversation, your religious worship,
and of all your actions, and be not ashamed of the religion of the Bible,
because it may be not agreeable to the customs and modes that may obtain in the
world. A christian must herein be resolute. The holy Scriptures are his rule,
and the reverence he has for them, must carry him through all discouragements
and opposition.

4. Show your esteem and reverence of the Bible by the manner in which you read
it and converse with it. Even an outward reverence is due. People should put
their bodies into a decent posture when they read the word of God, and
especially should be careful to possess their minds with reverence and
devotion. Consider it (...) divine book, that God is speaking to you, and that
you are conversing with him in it, and accordingly behave yourselves becoming
such a presence, with a due deference and respect to so high an authority.
Again,

5. Whenever you mention any part of Scripture, let it be with suitable
reverence and esteem. Do not make the Bible a commonplace book of jests, as
the manner of some is, quoting a text of Scripture to divert their company,
which favors not a little of profaneness, and indeed is like Belshazzar's
carousing in the consecrating vessels of the templ^^^ Guard against all
libertinism of this kind. Remember the Bible is a sacred book, and do not
prostitute it to so low a purpose as serving a jest, borrowing its phrases to
adorn a piece of wit, or promote mirth and laughter. Farther,

6. Show your esteem of the Bible, by your delight in it. David was famous for
this, as is known to all that know any thing of his character: O how I love thy
law, says he, it is my meditation all the day. And he himself makes it the
character of the pious man, that he delights in the law of the Lord, and
therein does he meditate day and night. And as this is due from us, in
consideration that God is the author of this book, so it is due on the account
of the excellency and usefulness of it, the tendency it has to improve and
enrich the mind. It is observable, that after the just now mentioned character
of the good man, That his delight is in the law of the Lord, etc. it follows,
He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his
fruit in season; his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall
prosper. He is ordinarily the best christian that is most conversant in his
Bible, and that takes most pains in the survey of it. He is most likely to be
fruitful, thoroughly furnished to all good works. When the word of God dwells
richly in you, you will be able to admonish one another, and to abound in the
fruits of righteousness. Once more,

7. Show your esteem of the Bible, by propagating the knowledge of it, and
especially in your families and among your children. This has been the way of
good people in all ages. Timothy from a child knew the holy Scriptures, as the
apostle observes in the verse before my text. The Jews were commanded to teach
the words of their law to their children, to teach them diligently unto them,
and talk of them when they sat in their houses, when they walked by the way,
when they lay down, and when they rose up. And however defective they were in
many other things, they expressed an extraordinary zeal in this matter. Their
children were trained up in the knowledge of their law, even from their
infancy; and were so expert therein, that Josephus tells us, they knew every
thing in it as fully as their own names. And the like care was shown by the
primitive christians. Nor indeed can it be said, that we treat the Bible as the
word of God, and pay a veneration to it as such, if we neglect to teach it to
our children. The humor of the age, as it runs counter to almost every thing
that favors of true religion, so it has given an odd turn to the education of
young persons. One of the early fathers of the church gives directions in one
of his epistles for the education of a young lady of a noble christian family,
he advises, that as soon as she was capable she should learn the Psalms,
Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; next he taught the four gospels, to have them always
in her hands; then get the Acts and Epistles by heart, and after that pass to
the reading of the Prophets. How little there is of this in the present
discipline of most families, I am ashamed to say. Music, dancing, play-books,
and some light and (...) accomplishments, are the main things attended to now
in education; which no doubt is one great cause of that degeneracy we so much
complain of in the profession of the christian religion. Certainly, we should
either disown this book or make another use of it than commonly we do.

But I must not ^nlarge farther on this point. We should treat the Bible with
reverence, and show our regard to it in the ways I have mentioned. This is my
first rellection.

II. Is the Scripture given by inspiration of God, and profitable to the
church, as you have heard; what reason have we to be thankful for so great a
favor and privilege as the holy Bible, and that we have it in our possession. I
shall briefly mention a few circumstances, as so many motives to gratitude to
the good providence of God on the account of this enjoyment.

You should be thankful not only that you have a divine revelation, but have it
entire. It is accounted among the distinguishing privileges of the Jews, that
they had the oracles of God committed to them. How much greater must our
advantages be who have not only their Scripture, but a great addition thereto;
have a fuller and clearer light, have the darkness and difficulties of that
dispensation they were under removed, and enjoy the entire system of divine
doctrines and laws. Certainly if they were so highly favored, the members of
the christian church are much more favored; and consequently, under greater
engagements to gratitude and adoration. We should be thankful that this
glorious book has been preserved and brought down to us safe and incorrupt. I
before took notice of the rage of enemies against it, and what attempts have
been made to destroy it, by Antiochus Epiphanes under the Old Testament, by
Diocle^^an, and Julian, persecuting heathen emperors afterward. And yet God
has watched over this invaluable treasure, and lodged it safe in our hands. O
rejoice in his providence, and give him the glory of his own work.

Again, we should be thankful that we have it in our own tongue: a privilege,
you know, our forefathers did not enjoy. Some that pretended to be the keepers
of this treasure, locked it up from the people, and took away the key of
knowledge. This glorious light was by this means put under a bushel. Whereas
now it shines among us in all its luster. The heavenly manne falls about our
tent door, and how much are we indebted to God for this. The churches of
Germany in the beginning of the reformation had an anniversary thanksgiving,
which they called, the feast of the translation of the Bible. We should be
often devoutly acknowledging the goodness of God herein, and celebrating the
bounty of his providence in this instance of it.

I might add, that we have reason to be thankful we have the Bible not only
translated, but printed. About three hundred years ago when printing was first
found out, a copy thereof, tolerably written in vellum, would cost at least a
hundred pounds sterling, whereas by the invention of printing, the Scriptures
are put into every one's hand; the poorest christian needs not want a Bible, if
he has but an heart to make use of it.

Again, we should be thankful that we have so many helps to understand the
Bible; as by constant ministry of the word, a variety of useful commentaries,
and other good books written upon the Scripture and the particular doctrines
thereof.

Once more, we ought to consider, that the providence of God in all these
instances, has distinguished us from others. To us are committed the oracles of
God. These are the peculiar glory of the christian church. He has shown his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; he hoth not dealt
so with any nation; as for his judgments they have not known them. This may be
said of us christians, we have the Bible, which the greatest part of the world
are utter strangers to. Let us mind the admonition of the Psalmist hereupon,
Praise ye the Lord, says he. Surely we ought to praise him on this account, to
speak and live his praises. I may add, if we do not praise him in higher
strains, and live in a better manner than those that know not God, than the
unhappy people that sit in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death,
great will be our guilt, and great our condemnation.

III. If the Bible be the word of God, and all Scripture is given by divine
inspiration, how dangerous must it be to reject it? it is not only great folly,
as it deprives us of the light, instruction, and comfort of the Scripture, and
all the glorious advantages of so excellent a revelation; but it is a flagrant
instance of presumption and sin, a high contempt of the goodness of God, and of
his wisdom and authority. On which account the case of our deists must be
exceedingly deplorable. Indeed they seem to put themselves out of the way of
salvation. If they hear not Moses and the prophets, says the parable, neither
will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead: Intimating, that such as
will not receive the instruction the Scripture affords, and comply with the way
of salvation therein proposed, will yield to no other means of conviction,
though never so sensible and glaring, and consequently must remain in their
obstinacy, and perish in their sin. Natural reason, the light and conduct of
conscience, and any other methods these persons may pretend to value and
prefer, will, I am afraid, be sound insufficient. If they will not believe
Moses and the prophets, Christ and his apostles; it would seem there is no help
for them.

And there is this aggravation in the unbelief of our modern deists, who live
in a christian nation, which the mere negative faith of the heathens has not;
that the one never had the Bible laid before them: the other reject it, and all
the strong evidence with which it comes attested, and with which it offers
itself unto them. I leave them to the righteous judgment of God. But to me
their case appears exceedingly hazardous; and, it may be, their guilt
approaches the nearest to the sin against the Holy Ghost of any, men now adays
are capable of committing. O let us not refuse him that speaks from heaven.
If he that despised Moses's law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses: of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, counted the blood of the covenant an unholy
thing, and done despite unto the spirit of grace. If the word spoken by angels
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation;
which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them
that heard him, God also bearing them witness with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. To have the Bible among us, and
yet contemn and despise it, is so great a sin, that, I think, I may say, how
strange soever the expression may look, a wise man would rather choose to be
annihilated, than live and die under the guilt of it. Hereupon I add,

IV. As the Scripture is the word of God, a revelation from heaven, and of such
eminent use to the church, as you have heard, let us endeavor to make a right
use of it; to read it, study it, and converse with it, in a suitable serious
manner. And here several directions might be offered. But I shall only stay to
mention a few very briefly: and indeed it is less necessary to enlarge, it
being a subject I have often touched upon and spoke to.

Endeavor to understand the holy Scripture. It is to no purpose that God has
wrote to us the great things of his law, if they have been and are, strange
things to us. Ignorance will seal up the Bible from us as effectually, as if it
was in an unknown Tongue. Take care therefore to understand your Bibles. To
which purpose sermons and commentaries are useful, a diligent perusal of the
Bible, a comparing one Scripture with another is useful, the laying aside
prejudices, and preconceived opinions, being willing any thing should be true,
and receiving every thing as true, that you have reason to think is taught
there; this is useful and necessary. Prayer and dependence on God, and his
Spirit for illumination is also highly useful; in the use of these and such
like means, study the Bible; often put the question to yourselves, that Philip
did to the Ethiopian Eunuch, Understandest thou what thou read? Acts viii.
30. and never think you read to purpose, unless in some measure you understand
what you read.

Read it with faith. The word preached, says the apostle, did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. iv. 2. Unbelief will
strip the word of all its power and efficacy, and leave it a dead letter, and
altogether useless. The apostle rejoices in behalf of the Thessalonians, when
he observed they mixed the word with faith. For this cause, says he, in the
place I have already cited, we thank God without ceasing, because when ye
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually works also
in you that believe. It works effectually in them that believe, and in them
only. O endeavor for faith, a divine faith. Receive the Scripture as the word
of God; give a firm assent to it; look upon its rules as divine, its promises
and threatenings as faithful and true; and entertain it with the same regard, as
if God manifested himself in a visible manner, or spoke to you with an audible
voice. And remember that your faith, if it be of the right kind, will always
produce obedience. He that believes the wages of sin is death, will be afraid
of sin, and if he is not, it is a sufficient argument he does not believe. I
may apply here what is said of the servants of Pharaoh, when the plague of hail
was threatened, That those of them who feared the word of the Lord, made his
servants and his cattle slay into the houses; but he that regarded not the word
of the Lord, left his servants and cattle in the field. If we regard and
believe the word of God, we shall comply with its advice, avoid the paths it
marks out as leading to destruction; attend to the duties it prescribes, and
walk in the way it directs to, as the way of life and salvation. And if we do
not do this, it is certain we do not believe. And consequently, like Pharaoh's
servants shall fall under the judgment God has threatened. O beg for faith, and
that God would increase your faith. Look upon every thing in the Bible as true,
certain and infallible, being assured, that not one iota thereof shall fall to
the ground till all be fulfilled. If we did this it would have a glorious
effect upon us. What manner of persons should we then be in all holy
conversation and Godliness.

Read and study with humility, as modest learners, prepare to receive all the
instruction there offered. Have a care of a proud, carping, cavilling humor;
and if you meet with any thing that seems to you uncouth, do not censure and
despise it, because you do not understand it. Instead of that, maintain a
reverence of God upon your minds, and wait for his illumination, praying with
David, Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law,
Psalm. cxix. 18. Nothing is more necessary than this. He resists the proud, but
gives grace, yea more grace, to the humble. The meek will he guide in judgment,
the meek will he teach his way.

And then apply what you read; bring it home to yourselves, compare yourselves
with the rules of the word, and endeavor to conform yourselves thereto. The
Scripture is profitable for correction, correct yourselves by it; for instance,
such Scriptures as concern the government of the tongue, the thoughts, desires
and affections; such Scriptures as prescribe to you in your respective
relations; and for the management of your callings and converse. Your doctrines
whether secret, private, or public; lay them before you, measure, and correct
yourselves by them. And I am satisfied it would be well worth while to have a
list of such Scriptures drawn up by you for constant use.

Lastly, beg the assistance of God's holy Spirit in order to the studying and
improving your Bibles. The Bible is the book of the Spirit, over which he
presides, and which he teaches. Many have thought they have got the best of
their knowledge of religion and of the Scriptures upon their knees. And I do
not think there is any enthusiasm in that method of study, accompanied with the
use of other proper means. But I leave these things to your serious retired
thoughts, without further enlargment: and leave you to the divine conduct and
blessing.

FINIS.
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
DAVID ABEEL, New-Brunswick. Peter Addis, Middlesex. Elis;ha Ayers,
Bernardstown. John Ayers, Roxbury.
B.
Rev. Isaac Blauvelt, New-Rochelle. John Bray, New-Brunswick. William
Brackstone, do. John A. Boyd, Princeton. Jacob Bogart, Somerset, 2 Copies.
Daniel Brinsley, do. Evert Brokaw, do. George Boyce, Jun. Middlesex. Isaac
Brokaw, do. Mary Boyce, do. Cornelius Barrickloe, do. Jane Boyce, do. Nathaniel
Ballard, Hillsborough. James Bergen, Ricefield. John Baird, Griggstown. John
Barcalo, Cross-Roads. David Brokaw, Millstone. -- Bailey, Flemingtown, 10
Copies. Thomas Blauvelt, Clarkstown. Ellenor Blauvelt. do. John J. Blauvelt,
do. Isaac Blauvelt, do.
C.
Rev. Henry Cook, Woodbridge. Rev. John Corneliuson, Bergen. Rev. Ira Condict,
New-Brunswick. John Clark, do. Benjamin Cook, do. James Crommelin, do. Francis
Covenhoven, do. James Cooper, do. 10 Copies. George Clark, do. Abijah Coon, do.
Jonathan Combs, Jun. North-Brunswick. Lewis Craig, Monmouth. Harmanus
Cortelyou, Middlesex. David Coriell, Jun. do. Abraham Coriell, do. Davil
Coriell, Sen. do. Eliza Culbertson, do. Henry Cock, do. Tunis Covert, Somerset.
Elisha Coriell, do. Peter Covenhoven, Millstone. Cornelius Clawson. do.
Cornelius Covenhoven, do. John Cortelyou, Ten Mile Run. Moses I. Cantine,
Princeton. David Comfort, do. Israel Crane, do. Conant Cone, do. Wm. H.
Cunningham, do. John Covert, Essex. Gersham Cock, Hillsborough. Edward Cock do.
Jonathan Conkling, Roxbury. Samuel Harker Caldwell, do. Henry Canada, Sourland.
D.
Rev. John Duryea, Raritan, 10 Copies. John Dey, Middlesex. Samuel Drake, do.
John Dear, do. Peter Ditmas, Millstone. Henry Disbrow, do. George Dunn, do.
Abraham Ditmars, do. George Duryea, Bushwick, Long Island. Nicholas Dubois,
Hillsborough. William P. Dear, New-Brunswick. Isaac Davis, Somerset. William
Daily, do. Peter B. Dumont, do. Peter A. Dumont, do. Jeremiah Drake, Roxbury.
Nehemiah Dye, Cranberry. Peter Dereemer, Spotswood. Robert Dayton,
Bernardstown. Insley Daglish, do. Peter Davidson, do.
E.
Luke Edgerton, Amwell, 20 Copies. Wilhelmus Eltinge, Princeton. Cornelius
Ervine, Middlebrook. John Earhart, Spotswood.
F.
Rev. Robert Finley, Princeton. Rev. Samuel Ford, Roxbury. Sarah Fulkerson, do.
Jehiel Freeman, New-Brunswick. William Forman, do. Nathaniel Fitz, do. Francis
Fort, Somerset. Richard Field, Jun. do. Frederick Frelinghuysen, Millstone.
John Frelinghuysen, do. Nathaniel Foster, Six Mile Run. Robert M. Forsyth,
Princeton. William Flagg, Hillsborugh. Dennis Field, Middlesex. Mary Ferrell,
Monmouth.
G.
Rev. Thomas Grant, Amwell. Ebenezer Grant, do. Peter Gerretsen, New-Brunswick.
John Gulick, South Amboy. Joachim Griggs, Flemington. Samuel Griggs, do. James
Griggs, do.
H.
John Hill, New-Brunswick. Luke Hassert, do. Lewis Hardenbergh, do. Robert
Hude, do. Jacob R. Hardenbergh, do. Aaron Hassert, do. Aaron Hagaman, Somerset.
Simon Hagaman, do. Christopher Hoagland, do. George Hall, do. Henry E. Hall,
do. John Hamilton, Elizabeth-Town. Albert Hoagland, Nine Mile Run. John H.
Hobart, Princeton. Benjamin B. Hopkins, do. James Hamilton, do. John Hutchins,
Middlesex. Richard Holtom, do. Harmaunus M. Hoagland, Hillsborough. John Hatt,
do. Albert Hoagland, do. Joseph Hedges, Roxbury. Trustrum Hull, do. Jared
Haines, do. Elias Howell, do. Elijah Horton, do. John N. Hight, Penns-Neek.
Susannah Hight, do. Everit Hogenkamp, Clarkstown.
I.
Robert Jackson, Prin^eton. John Johnson, do. Adam Jobs, Somerset. Barent
Johnson, Middlesex. Peter Lot Jaques, do.
L.
Rev. Nicholas Lansing, Orange Town. Henry Lupp, New-Branswick. William Lupp,
do. Ephraim Loree, do. Matthew Lane, Bedminster. Levi Lennex, Essex. John
Lyall, Princeton. James Lewis, Mendham. Joseph Lewis, Morristown. Alexander
Low, Monmouth. Thomas Lowry, Alexandria.
M.
Rev. Walter Monteath, New-Brunswick. Robert M'Kune, do. Samuel Monday,
Middlesex. Peter Marseiles, Sen. do. Bartholomew Magrath, New-Brunswick. George
M'Donald, Millstone. Thomas Macomb, Princeton. French F. M'Mullen, do. Aaron
Mattison, do. Phineas Manning, Piscataway. William Manning, do. John Miner,
Hillsborough. Cornelius Masselaer, Hunterdon. Andrew Mershon, Millstone. Hugh
Manyham, Spotswood.
N.
John Neilson, New-Brunswick, 2 Copies. Garret Nevius, do. Peter P. Nevius,
Middlebush. David Nevius, do. Roaliff Nafious, Somerset.
P.
Thomas Paul, New-Brunswick. John Plum, do. Peter Probasco, Millstone. John
Perlee, Hillsborough. John Pool, Jun. Raritan Landing. John Pittenger,
Somerset. John Pittenger, Jun. Hunterdon. Jonas Phillips, Morristown. Francis
Peppard, Bernardstown. John Perine, Monmouth. Henry Perine, do. David Pie,
Clarkstown. Daniel Perrine, Middlesex.
Q.
Abraham Quick, Somerset. Peter Quick, do. Peter Quick, South Branch.
R.
John Ryckman, New-Brunswick. Robert Russel, Princeton. Cornelius Rappleyea,
Somerset. Silas Reeves, Roxbury. Matthew Rue, Cranberry, 10 Copies. Israel
Richy, Bernardstown. Jacob Richy, do. Joseph Roy, do. John Reading, Flemington.
S.
Rev. Peter Studdiford, Readington. Moses Scott, New-Brunswick, 6 Copies.
Charles Smith, do. Gabriel Sylcock, do. Joseph Sylcock, do. Abraham Schuyler,
do. Dominicus Stryker, Somerset. John Christion Stineover, do. Isaac Slover,
do. John Simonson, Jun. do. 2 copies. Christopher Stryker, do. Cornelius
Simonson, do. John Simonson, do. John Stryker, Middlesex. Joseph Sparling do.
Jacob Senn, Morris County. Abraham T. Schenck, Morristown. Peter I. Stryker,
Millstone. Peter Stryker, Jun. do. Abraham Stryker, do. Peter P. Stryker, do.
John Stryker, do. Garret Schenck, Middlebush. Cornelius Stoothoff, do. John
Stoothoff, do. John Spader, do. David Smally, do. Benjamin Sulard, do. Peter
Stoothoff, Six mile Run. Ryke Suydam, do. Joseph Warren Scott, Princeton.
Thomas Stockton, do. Samuel Stout, Jun. do. Peter Suydam, Hillsborough. Rem
Stryker, do. Bergun Spader, do. Silas Stilwell, do. Adam Smith, do. Jonathan
Sharp, Quibble Town. David Sweezy, Roxbury. James Skinner, do. Benjamin
Skilman, Griggs Town. Thomas Skilman, Sourland. Joseph Stryker, Roxbury. John
Slaback, Penns-Neck. Peter Schamp, Hunterdon. Samuel Stout, Hopewell. Joseph
Scudder, Monmouth. Jasper Smith, Flemington, 10 Copies. Samuel Stewart, do.
T.
Rensselaer Ten Brook, New-Brunswick. Peter Thompson, do. William Ten Brook,
do. Henry Traphagen do. Jacob Tallman, do. Andrew Ten Eyck, North-Branch.
Garret Terhune, Middlesex. Cyrenius Thompson, Millstone. Willet Tailor,
Raritan. John Ten Eyck, Sen. do.
V.
Rev. John M. Van Harlingen, Millstone. John Van Doren. do. Peter Van Doren,
do. Cornelius Van Liew, Somerset. Frederick Van Liew, do. Peter Voorhees do.
Andrew Van Middlesworth, do. Abraham G. ^an Neste, do. Lowrance Van Derveer,
do. John Ver Meule, do. Frederick Ver Meule, do. Abraham Van Pelt, do.
Cornelius Van Compe, do. Cornelius Ver Meule, Sen. do. James Voorhees,
New-Brunswick. Nicholas Van Brunt, do. Richard Van Arsdalen, do. David
Voorhees, do. Cornelius Vanderbilt, do. Denice Van Liew, Middlebush. Garret
Voorhees, do. Jaques Voorhees, do. Abraham L. Voorhees, do. Philip I. Van
Arsdalen, Bedminster. Abraham Van Neste, do. Aaron Van Doren, Bedminster. James
Van Derveer, do. John Van Middlesworth, Hillsborough. Isaac Voorhees, do. Peter
Vroom, do. Garret Voorhees, do. Peter Vounck, Middlesex. Albert Voorhees, do.
John Voorhees, Readington. Peter D. Vroom, Raritan. John Van Middlesworth, do.
Rynear Veghte, do. Joseph Van Doren, do. 4 Copies.
W.
Rev. John Woodhull, Monmouth, 2 Copies. George Spafford Woodhull, do. Willett
Warn, New-Brunswick. Christian De. Wint do. John H. Williams do. Daniel
Willis, Elizabeth-Town. John Williamson, Middlesex. Daniel Whitehead, do. John
Whitenaght, Millstone. Joseph Williams, do. Peter Wyckoff, do. Isaac
Williamson, do. Matthew Wallace, Princeton. Thomas Wiggins, do. John Wyckoff,
Middlebush. John Wortman, Bedminster. William Wallace, Raritan Mindert Wilson,
Hillsborough. Cornelius Williamson, do. Nicholas Williamson, do. Jacob Wyckoff,
Somerset.

