A SERMON, PREACHED AT STONEHAM, ON LORD's DAY, OCTOBER 26, 1794. OCCASIONED BY
THE DISMISSION OF THE MINISTER FROM HIS PEOPLE IN THAT TOWN.

BY JOHN CLEAVELAND, JUN. V. D. M. AND LATE PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN STONEHAM.

Published by Desire.

THOMAS C. CUSHING. Essex-Street, SALEM MDCCXCV.

HEBREWS XIII.17. FOR THEY WATCH FOR YOUR SOULS, AS THEY THAT MUST GIVE ACCOUNT.


THE Author of this epistle, in his conclusion, exhorts the Hebrews to several
christian duties; and in this verse, of which our text is a part, to obey them
that have the rule over them, and submit themselves. By those who had the rule
over them, the Apostle means those who were Pastors of the Church; being
appointed overseers by the Holy Ghost, to lead the people in their public
devotions; explain the word of God to them; to speak, exhort, and rebuke, with
all authority; and to administer to the Church the seals of the covenant.

Gospel Ministers are stewards of the mysteries of God; and when they
faithfully perform their work, obedience and submission are due to them from
those whom they are set over. People are bound to obey the truths preached by
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and submit to their instructions and leading, as
far as they are agreeable to the divine rule: for Ministers have their
commission and authority from the King of Heaven; hence disobedience to them is
disobedience to Christ. A reason why people should obey them who have the rule
over them is given in the words of our text, "For they watch for your souls, as
they that must give account." Your souls are near their hearts, and they have
critical and painful work to do for them; to watch for their salvation, and
carefully avoid every thing in their ministerial work which will hinder it. And
this they do as knowing they must hereafter give account to him, who put them
into the ministry, of all their conduct as Ministers of the Gospel, and what
attention they have paid to your souls. Seeing then they have such a solemn
charge over you, and account to give, it becomes you to obey them, and submit
yourselves, lest their account finally prove unprofitable for you, which will
be the case if they have to give up their account with grief for your
disobedience to the gospel which they preached to you.

From the words of our text we may note this doctrine, viz.

That Ministers of the Gospel must give account how they watch for souls.

The following remarks may illustrate the doctrine.

I. The trust committed to Ministers is very precious. It consists in the souls
of men; those rational capacities which render men subjects of moral
government; with which they may serve and enjoy God forever. But the souls of
men, which are by nature sinful and exposed to eternal punishment, may be saved
by the gospel which the Ministers of Christ preach to them: souls for whom
Christ came into this world and laid down his life that a way be opened for
their salvation; souls who, if obedient to the gospel, will forever enjoy and
praise God in heaven; but if finally disobedient, will forever sink under the
wrath of the Almighty, and more dreadfully than if they never heard of the
gospel of Christ. These souls were made after the image of God, and do still
retain his natural image -- They are to answer some very important end in the
divine plan, which will be attended with unspeakable joy or woe to these souls.

If Ministers have such precious things committed to their trust, it is evident
they must give account of the betrustment to him whose the property is. And all
souls are God's; hence he will call for an account of his own property, which
was delivered to the care of his servants; and especially such valuable
property as the souls of men, who are to be eternally happy or miserable.

II. The eternal interest of souls is nearly connected with the gospel which
the Ministers of Christ are to preach. The gospel contains that eternal life
which all the saved do partake in; and it is by the preaching of the gospel
that God saves sinners, and builds up saints in faith and holiness for the
heavenly world. If Ministers do not warn sinners, they will die in their sins:
and if they do not feed Christians, with gospel truths, they will not increase
in knowledge under their ministry. If Ministers corrupt the word by their
preaching, souls will be misled, and settle down in belief of such errors as
will prove their eternal ruin. If Ministers faithfully preach the gospel,
Christians will be edified and strengthened in the ways of God; sinners may see
the danger of all their false refuges; be sensible of the need of Christ for
their Savior; and be influenced to comply with the terms of the gospel, which
are set before them by the faithful preaching of it. If Ministers are faithful,
the finally impenitent, under their ministry, will have no excuse to make for
continuing in unbelief and impenitence. They were faithfully warned, and
earnestly invited to Christ for salvation, but would not obey. Their blood then
will be upon their own heads; and their eternal punishment will be more
dreadful than if they had never sat under the faithful ministry of the gospel!
If such great, and eternally important things are connected with the gospel
being preached to men, how strict will the account be which Ministers must give
to him who sent them to preach the gospel! If such are lost through the
negligence, or corrupt preaching of Ministers, they must give account for such
conduct in their ministry which ruined souls! why they neglected the souls
under their care! why they prefered corrupt doctrine to the pure word of God!
why they chose to declare smooth things to sinners, rather than proclaim the
terrors of the divine law, and precepts of the gospel, which are very
disagreeable to sinners, tending to alarm their consciences and make them feel
uneasy in hearing such truths. If Christians have been fed by the faithful
preaching of Gospel Ministers, and the finally impenitent prepared for a more
dreadful punishment by it, they must give account of such faithful preaching
which has occasioned such glorious and dreadful effects. But it will be a
joyful and happy account for such faithful Ministers.

III. The work is very great which Ministers have to do in watching for souls;
far greater than any other work men can engage in. They have to treat with
souls as they are related to the Great God and Eternity. Ministers have to set
the Divine Character before their people in its scriptural light. And how great
a work is this! No being is to be compared with God for greatness! Before him
all nations are less than nothing and vanity. How solemn will the account be
which Ministers will have to give, how they treated the character of God in
their preaching! Whether they strictly adhered to the Revelation God has given
of himself in his word concerning his natural and moral perfections, and
concerning his universal government over all creatures and events, and have
carefully avoided giving any feature of the Divine Character which is not
clearly warranted by the word of God? Or whether they have not, in some
measure, described the Divine Character in such a light as is pleasing to the
selfish feelings of sinners; and explained some of the scripture declarations
concerning God, so as to strip them of that majesty and terror which they wear
in plain scripture language; and this with a view that wicked men may feel more
easy in their minds concerning God, than the Bible will allow them to feel?

Ministers have also the Law of God to set before sinners. This is a very
necessary and important part of their work, for this is the rule of their duty
toward God and man. This shows the consequence of disobedience to its precepts,
and is as important to be known as the gospel: for without a right knowledge of
the law a person can have no consistent ideas of the Gospel. The gospel
establishes the divine law, and illustrates its purity and justice in the
clearest light. The law shows sin in its nature and consequences; and the need
sinners stand in of the gospel salvation is more clearly seen by rightly
understanding the law. No person can be a true friend to Christ and his
salvation, and at the same time wholly ignorant of, or an enemy to the law of
God. -- Here, then, is solemn work for Gospel Ministers. They must give account
how they watch for souls in setting the law of God before them; whether, to
please men, they said little or nothing about the law; or what they did say was
of such a nature as to bend the law down to the selfish feelings of the natural
heart, and strip it of all its terrors, with which scripture clothes it
relative to transgressors! or whether, in watching for souls, they have, like
Paul, knowing the terrors of the law, persuaded men, by unfolding the law in
its purity, justice, strictness, extensiveness and dreadfulness as it relates
to sinners; and showing them that no thought, word or deed of theirs can be
considered a conformity to the law of God, in the least degree, while wholly
destitute of holy love to God and men. And whether they have thus set the law
before sinners, from a sincere desire for the salvation of their souls; not
being influenced by the fear of offending them, on the one hand, nor from a
party spirit to irritate and stir up their passions, on the other hand. In this
great work which Ministers have to perform, is contained the news of salvation
by Jesus Christ. This is great, important and interesting. Here they have to
show that God had an eternal purpose of grace for men, appointing a certain
number of them to eternal life by Jesus Christ. The glorious character of the
Redeemer they have to describe to men, and set him before them as God-man,
mediator between God and men; his atonement as the only foundation of hope for
sinners; his doctrines, precepts, the religion which he requires of his
followers; its nature and influence on the life of a Christian. What his
salvation consists in; on what terms it can be enjoyed by sinners; and what the
consequences will be of finally neglecting to comply with these terms; the
nature of the christian Church; the character of its members; the rules for its
government; and its final prosperity and victory over all its enemies. A future
state of rewards and punishments; a general resurrection, and final judgment,
are subjects for Gospel Ministers to treat upon in their ministry. In
performing this great work, they must give an account how they treated the
various subjects of the gospel. Whether they strictly conformed to the
scripture representation of truths in their connection and importance; or have
glossed them with human inventions, to please men, and be popular in the view
of the world. When treating of the Savior of men, whether they have held him
up in his glorious and mysterious union of divine and human natures, or
represented him as a mere creature! Whether they have rightly treated of the
atonement of Christ, as being necessary for the salvation of men; or denied its
necessity and wholly set it aside. When speaking of the salvation by Christ,
whether they have described it in its glorious reality as deliverance from
moral evil, as well as natural; enjoying and serving God forever in heaven; or
considered it mostly as deliverance from future punishment. And whether they
have encouraged sinners to hope for this salvation on any thing they can do
short of Repentance and Faith. Whether they have insisted on the necessity of
regeneration, that sinners be holy and safe; and taught that it was effected by
the special influence of the Holy Spirit, or by the endeavors of the sinner.

Ministers must give account, whether they have taken pains to convince sinners
that they are wholly to blame for remaining in impenitence and unbelief; or
whether they have so represented their state as tends to make them feel that
they are excusable for living in rejection of Jesus Christ. Whether, in
treating of Christ's religion, they have carefully endeavored to distinguish
it from all counterfeits, and show wherein the difference consists.

Ministers must give account, whether they have carefully fed the people of
God, with wholesome truths, precepts and promises, explained in a gospel light.
Whether they have taken pains to guard Christians against error in doctrine,
and deviations from the christian rule in practice.

Ministers of the Gospel must give account why they entered into this great,
glorious and dreadful work of the gospel ministry. Whether it was from love to
souls; regard for the interest of Christ's kingdom in the world; and a desire
of glorifying God in this line of duty: or whether it was from selfish views;
for the sake of filthy lucre, popular applause, or any other sinister motive.
Whether they entered upon it with fear and trembling, from a view of the
greatness of the work, and their own insufficiency to perform it; with humble,
earnest prayer to God for wisdom, and grace rightly to engage in this work, and
faithfully go through with it; or whether they paid no heed to it in this
manner, and little thought of its importance and solemnity.

Ministers must give account, whether they have been much at the throne of
grace in fervent prayer for themselves, that they may be directed in the search
of divine truth; in giving the true sense of the scripture, when they attempt
to explain it to the people; be directed wisely to choose subjects for the
benefit and instruction of their hearers; that they may be faithful in all
their work with souls, both as to preaching and living. -- And whether they
have earnestly and honestly prayed for their people, that they may be saved;
that believers may increase in numbers, and grow in grace; or whether they have
been strangers to prayer in their studies, and families, for their people. They
must give account whether they have made their work their business; by devoting
their time to study, and other parts of the ministerial duty; or whether they
were oftener found in worldly employments than in their study, and attending to
their flocks. -- Whether they have watched all opportunities to do good to
souls, by private visits, as they had opportunity, as well as public
administrations, and make these visits serve religious purposes; and in some
way or other promote the interest of souls; or whether they have visited only
from worldly views. -- Whether they have taken all the pains in their power
with careless sinners, to awaken them; with convinced sinners, to lead them to
Christ; and with converts, to build them up in knowledge and holiness. --
Whether they have been diligent to warn their people against the errors in
doctrine which they saw them exposed to; and show them the danger of such
schemes of religion which please the natural hearts of men; and have
endeavored to prove from the word of God that such religion is false, and
dangerous; and though it may offend those who are inclined to error, yet from
love to their souls have persevered in beating down these strong holds of
Satan; or whether from fear of offending their hearers they have let them alone
in their errors. Also when they have known of any wicked conduct among their
people, they have borne testimony against such things; exhorting the guilty to
repent of all vile conduct, and reform from it; showing how ruinous to the soul
such things are, which the word of God condemns: or whether from fear of giving
offense, they have suffered their people to live in known transgressions
without warning them. -- How solemn the account will be! And the work being so
great, an account must be given how it was performed!

IV. The work of the gospel ministry is attended with great difficulty, arising
from various causes; which render it needful that Ministers have patience,
forbearance, fortitude, fidelity, skill, and a spirit of holy prayer, in a
right discharge of the work.

Though the precepts and rules of the gospel are plain, and intelligible; yet
there are some things hard to be understood, which require close and diligent
study, in comparing scripture with scripture* and searching for the connected
meaning of such passages, lest a wrong construction be given to scripture, and
the hearers thereby misled. Ministers then must give account how they have
attended to this part of their duty, for the benefit of their flocks.

The work of the gospel ministry is very unpopular in view of a careless world;
and will subject Ministers to many censures, reproaches, and bitter words, if
they are faithful to sinners, in setting before them the truths of Revelation,
which their natural hearts dislike. Here is a temptation for Ministers to
soften their preaching to the taste of sinners, in order to live in good terms
with them. Ministers then must give account whether they patiently endured
reproach, for their faithful discharge of the trust committed to them; choosing
rather to please God than men: or whether, to please men, they have daubed with
untempered mortar! -- No serious person wishes to be an object of contempt,
merely, to his fellow men; and when he is thus unjustly treated, it must be
trying to his feelings. This is the case with Ministers, when they are
despised, and rejected, for being faithful to souls. Therefore they must give
account, whether they prefered fidelity to popular applause, or otherwise.

Ministers, in general, are dependent on their people for temporal support.
Their work forbids them from engaging in worldly business, to procure support
and worldly riches for themselves and families. They must give their time to
their ministry; and look to them whom they serve for their necessary support.
This is a trying circumstance in their ministry. For they need bread and
clothing, as well as others; and the necessaries and conveniences of life are
desirable to them, in a reasonable measure, as well as to Christians in a more
private life: but to be dependent for these things on men, who dislike the
truths of the gospel, is, in some respects, undesirable; and affords a
temptation to Ministers to seek to please wicked men, by withholding plain
truth from them, that they may more cheerfully contribute to their worldly
support. Ministers must give account how they have watched for souls in this
respect. Whether they have been willing to submit to inconveniences arising
from this quarter, for the sake of being faithful to souls; or, for the sake of
worldly gain, have been willing their people should be ignorant of plain and
important truth!

Ministers are men of like passions with other men; they have infirmities of
body and mind; their health is often so impaired as to render it very difficult
to attend public administrations. Yet many people are unwilling to make excuses
for them on this account; when, perhaps, one half of the complaint in
themselves, which their Ministers labor under, would be sufficient to keep
them from places of public worship. This is hard treatment.

Ministers must often expose their health, in visiting the sick and others of
their flocks, or offend their people. This is another difficulty they have to
meet with. They must then give account, whether, in such cases, they have
consulted their own ease more than duty, in serving their people, or otherwise.

Ministers also have to contend with their own spiritual infirmities, which
remain in them, as well as in other Christians, and often cause them very
sorrowful reflections. They are liable, like other Christians, at times, to be
off their guard, in speech and behavior, and to be led aside by temptation.
They have the passions of anger, resentment, grief, etc. which may, in times of
temptation, break forth in an unchristian manner, for which they are humble and
penitent when they come to reflect thereon. Yet how ready are their people,
often, to catch at such infirmities in them, and raise irreconcilable
objections against them, on account thereof; and are wholly unwilling to make
such allowances for their Ministers, in such cases, as they would wish to be
made for themselves, even in far greater deviations from the line of duty! --
Ministers, then, must give account how they watched for souls, under such
difficulties; whether they conscienciously bore testimony against all sin, even
in such instances wherein they themselves have been overtaken. Whether they
could forgive those who treated them with unchristian severity; whether they
humbled themselves for their sinful missteps, and cautiously watched against
sinful passions and conduct in future; or whether it were otherwise with them.

V. Ministers have the eternal interest of their own souls involved in watching
for the souls of their people. If they are unfaithful to the souls of others,
they will be so to their own souls: but if faithful to others, they will be so
to their own. If they truly strive for the salvation of others souls, they will
for the salvation of their own souls. If sinners perish through the sinful
neglect of Ministers, their blood will be required at the watchman's hand. That
solemn and alarming passage in the 3d and 33d Chapters of Ezekiel is worthy the
serious and abiding attention of every Gospel Minister. So thou, O son of man,
I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shall hear
the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked man, O
wicked man, thou shall surely die; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked
from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand. -- Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to
turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but
thou have delivered thy soul. -- Here we see how nearly connected with his work
a Minister's own interest is. If sinners perish, through his unfaithfulness,
their blood is to be required of his hands. He must be accountable for their
death, as far as it was owing to his neglect to warn them faithfully. But if he
discharges his duty with fidelity, he is safe, though sinners perish whom he
warned. -- When the Apostle Paul took his leave of the Elders of the Church at
Ephesus, he said unto them, Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am
pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God. He felt himself clear from the guilt of any man's final
ruin to whom he had preached; from this consideration, that he had not shunned
to declare unto them all the counsel of God. Therefore it was not through his
fault, or neglect, that any of his hearers were finally lost. And it implies,
that if he had shunned to declare all the counsel of God to those whom God sent
him to preach the gospel to, and they had perished, he could not be pure from
their blood. So that his own salvation was involved in his faithfully watching
for souls.

The Apostle Paul exhorts Timothy to take heed to himself, as well as to the
doctrine, for in doing this, he would save himself and those who heard him.
Ministers have to watch over their own hearts, and lives, in watching for
souls; and see that they love and live the religion of Christ, which they
preach to others. Paul said he did thus, he kept his body under, and brought it
into subjection, lest when he had preached to others he himself should be a
castaway. Which implies, that Ministers who have no true religion themselves
will be lost. Nor can they faithfully watch for souls, if they take no care to
maintain a life of religion before their people. A true Minister of Jesus
Christ is a man of true religion; and he will strive to be faithful in his
preaching and personal religion. Therefore Ministers must give account how they
watched for souls with relation to their own salvation.

VI. Ministers of the Gospel have their commission and charge to preach the
gospel from Jesus Christ. He qualifies them with gifts and grace for the work.
He sends them forth, in his providence, to preach to souls. They are put into
office by the rule of Christ in his word. They are bound to preach the truth
which Christ has revealed to men. God has committed to them the word of
reconciliation; they are ambassadors for Christ, and in his stead to pray men
to be reconciled to God. They are Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God. Consequently they must give account to him, who made them
overseers of the flock of God, and stewards of his word, whether they have
strictly conformed to the rule, given them by their Great Lord and Master, in
preaching to saints and sinners; not daring to add any thing of human
invention; or leave out any part of the gospel, through design to please men.
Whether they have endeavored, all in their power, to understand the errand
which they are sent upon, and plead the cause of their Master. When they have
been treating with the enemies of Christ, whether they honestly stood up for
their Lord, his word and kingdom, or shamefully betrayed their trust, by siding
with his enemies; allowing their objections to be true, and just, which they
make against God, his government, and religion; and justified the enemies of
Christ, in their refusal immediately to submit to him; by setting them to do
many things previously to their repenting, and submitting themselves to their
Sovereign, whom they ought to obey and love constantly. The least deviation
from the rule of Christ, in watching for souls, is going aside from the
commission and authority which he has committed to their trust; and they must
give account of it to their Lord; and so of all their work, whether faithful or
unfaithful.

VII. The glory of God is the great end of the gospel ministry, as well as
other parts of God's plan; and Ministers of the Gospel must so watch for souls
as to honor God. In preaching divine truth, God is set on high, as before
observed. It is for his honor, for Ministers to preach to their people those
plain, close, uncorrupted truths which God has revealed in his word. It is for
the glory of God, that sinners are brought to embrace the gospel, and be saved:
that saints are, by the faithful preaching of the gospel, built up in christian
knowledge and holiness; and that the finally impenitent are rendered more
inexcusable, by attending to the faithful ministry of the gospel. Ministers
then must give account, whether they have regarded the honor of God, or not,
in this work. Whether, in their reading, praying, preaching and living, they
have had a sacred regard for the Divine Being; and desire that they may glorify
him, in all their ministerial work; and be instrumental in leading sinners to
honor and please God. Whether, for the honor of God, they have borne
testimony against all vile conduct among their people; or such as their people
have been exposed to elsewhere, and they may be knowing to. Whether, for the
honor of God, they have endeavored to stop the mouths of gainsayers, and
refute the errors and corrupt opinions of men concerning the word of God.
Whether they have, for the honor of God, pled for the rules and order of
Christ's house, and shown the importance of Christians walking agreeably
thereto. Whether, for the glory of God, they have persevered in pleading for
his cause, truth and religion, when they have been hated, reviled and abused;
and refused to yield to the unreasonable desires of men, relative to their
solemn covenant engagements; or whether they have had no regard for the honor
of God, in any part of their ministry!

IMPROVEMENT.
1. We infer from this subject, the importance that Ministers of the Gospel be
men of ability, knowledge, and real religion. Without these they cannot be
qualified for the gospel ministry. Men cannot perform this great work of
watching for souls, if they are destitute of knowledge and grace. Those who
have no talent for instruction, and exhortation, are not fit for the ministry.
Nor are those who are ignorant men, not acquainted with letters, in any
considerable degree. Nor those, who are ignorant of the doctrines of the bible,
and the nature of true religion. How can men teach souls the important truths
they ought to know, if they have no knowledge of truth themselves? And how can
men who have no true religion be faithful guides to souls? Such know not the
spiritual taste of real Christians, nor how to feed them suitably to their
characters. Unholy men are not engaged for the salvation of souls; nor the
honor of the Great Redeemer. They may preach truths, but they do not love
divine truth.

2. If Ministers of the gospel must give account how they watch for souls, we
may learn how cautiously they ought to enter upon such a great and solemn work.
With what seriousness, attention, examination and prayer, should they exercise
themselves before they dare venture forth in such an important and dangerous
field! They should be satisfied, from good evidence, that God has qualified
them with gifts, knowledge, and grace, for this solemn work; that they may not
mislead souls; ruin themselves; and dishonor God.

3. This subject may lead us to reflect on the great difference between the
accounts of the faithful and unfaithful Ministers of the word. Those who loved
the truth, lived the religion of Christ, and honestly preached his gospel, will
meet the approbation of their Lord, saying, Well done! good and faithful
servants, enter ye into the joy of your Lord! On the other hand, those who have
been deceitful workers, corrupters or neglecters of the truth, enemies to the
religion of Christ, unfaithful to souls and the cause of the Redeemer, must
meet with a dreadful frown from the Great Judge of the World, saying, Go ye
wicked and slothful servants into outer darkness, bound hand and foot! The
faithful Minister will be approved by his Judge, in the great day, and glorious
in heaven forever, though numbers to whom he preached are eternally lost! He is
free from their blood, having been faithful to them! And the unfaithful
Minister must sink down, most dreadfully, under the wrath of the Almighty, with
those whom he misled in his ministry, and was criminally instrumental in their
ruin! Who can trifle with so solemn a work as the gospel ministry! How can a
man feel easy in his mind, when he has evidence that he was always an enemy to
the gospel of Christ, which he pretends to declare to others! And how can he be
content to make self and wordly interest his principal end, in entering on this
work! Do such think how dreadful an account they are preparing for the day of
Judgment? How pale and trembling will unfaithful Ministers meet their people at
the bar of God! to see those, whose souls they undertook to watch for, lost
through their negligence and unfaithfulness! remembering what corrupt
sentiments they taught them; with what selfish arguments they persuaded them to
embrace a false religion; and reject the sound doctrines of the bible, and holy
religion of the Redeemer. All their corrupt, self-pleasing sermons will be
exhibited to view in that day! All the exhortations and directions they gave to
sinners, which encouraged them to rest short of Christ, in their impenitence,
hoping to be accepted at last, will then be rehearsed in their true meaning.
And the miserable souls, who were so foolish as to be deluded by such
unfaithful dealing, will appear before them, as evidences of their guilt in
ruining their souls! How dreadful is the thought concerning the account of
unfaithful Ministers! On the other hand, how joyful will be the appearance of
the faithful servants of Jesus Christ! The gospel truths they delivered in
their sermons; the close applications; the warm exhortations; and the earnest
entreaties with sinners, to repent and believe; will then be mentioned in their
favor. And they will see all their flocks, to whom they ministered in this
world: the children of God, whom they were instrumental in saving, comforted by
the truths they heard at such and such a time, and warned from their mistakes
and wrong steps, will appear before them as their crown of rejoicing! And those
of their people, who refused to obey the truth which they preached to them,
will be present, also, and remember the times their Ministers warned them to
repent and believe, which they refused to comply with. Now they find true what
their faithful guides told them; that except they repented in time they would
be lost forever! But the faithful Minister is clear; their blood will be upon
their own heads!

4. Learn from this subject, how solemn and weighty the connection is between a
Minister of the Gospel and his people. They have chosen him to the most
important service a mortal can do for them; and he has taken upon him the most
weighty charge he can take. The connection being so solemn, a Minister ought,
from a full conviction or his duty, to take the oversight of a flock, and never
wish for a dissolution of his connection with them, except fully satisfied that
duty requires it. Small, trifling matters should never influence him to quit
his solemn charge. So with the people, they ought to look well whom they choose
to be set over them as their spiritual guide; as to his natural, acquired, and
gracious qualifications. That he is sound in the faith; will feed them with
knowledge and understanding; and will be willing to spend and be spent for the
good of their souls. And if they have such a one given them by the great Head
of the Church, they ought very highly to prize him, for his works sake, and
hold him in reputation. No small affair should influence them to part with such
a messenger from the LORD of Hosts. A true and faithful Minister of Christ is
endeavoring to serve his people, in their best interests. How careful should
they be, that they do not hinder his usefulness among them! Much is required of
a people toward their Minister, that he may profit them. They must pray much
for him; provide for his comfort; be very friendly to him at all times; put the
best construction on all he says and does, privately and publicly, which cases
will admit of. Never grieve him by opposing the truths he delivers; nor by
censuring him for his faithfulness, in bearing testimony against their bad
conduct. Nor try to hurt his influence among his people, by prejudicing their
minds against him, relative to his doctrine or conduct. If a Minister is guilty
of error in any of his sermons; or unchristian steps in his conduct; he is
entitled to the privilege of the rules of Christ's house; to be tried thereby;
and his people ought never to reject him, till they have found him guilty upon
trial. How can a people know that their Minister will not give them christian
satisfaction, if they deal with him according to gospel rule? And possibly,
upon examination, it may appear that he has not transgressed, as they supposed
him to have done. And if they have accused and condemned him without trial, and
thus hindered his usefulness, how great must their guilt be! They have injured
their own souls, and the souls of others, by destroying the influence of one
whom God approves of as faithful; and also grieving a friend and servant of
Jesus Christ! Such people ought to remember the solemn words of the Lord Jesus,
"He that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me." Christ is here speaking of those whom he sent forth to preach
the gospel to men; and we see how dreadful it is to despise them! Their crime
does not stop against the Minister, whom they despise; but reaches to Christ,
and the Father. The Son of God and eternal Father are despised! How great must
their guilt be, who are seeking all the advantage they possibly can, to
prejudice the minds of others against their Minister! Some will prejudice their
children against their Minister, by often, in their presence, opposing the
doctrines he preaches, without giving any scripture proof of their being
unsound. And thus their children drink in an unjust prejudice against the
truths they hear from their Minister, and receive no benefit from his ministry;
all his instructions are in vain to such persons; and they may die in such
prejudice to the truth, and perish forever. Dreadful thought for parents! If a
people, by their unkind and unchristian treatment of a Minister of Jesus
Christ, should so far prevail as to destroy his influence among his people,
that a separation from them becomes necessary, how dreadful is the sin of such
a people! They do despise Christ, and in effect pray him to depart from them;
and they have awful reason to fear he will leave them without any spiritual
guide at all; or send them one who will pervert the truth, and lead them on to
endless ruin. The connection then between Ministers and people is most
important.

5. We may infer from the subject, that people who have rejected a faithful
watchman, will have a most dreadful account to give in the great day; that is,
if they die impenitent for such rejection. They and their Minister must meet
again; but it will be at the bar of God, where nothing but truth will be
admitted. No plea will avail there, which is not consistent with the commands
of God, and religion of Jesus Christ. It will not then do to plead, they did
not like the Minister's sentiments, provided they are sound, according to the
bible; nor to plead, they surmised him to be irregular in some of his conduct.
If they have treated him contrary to the rules of the gospel, and thus been
influential to destroy his usefulness, they must answer for it on that dreadful
day of account. How confounded will they be to hear the Judge approve of the
faithful ministry of his servants, whom their people rejected; and even of
those very things they rejected them for! How solemn their account concerning
their own souls! Why are they not saved? They had warning from the Ministers of
Christ. The particular sabbaths, lectures, and private interviews with their
Ministers, will all be brought into view. The particular sermons, the truths
which were delivered, the exhortations and entreaties to repent and believe,
will all be mentioned then; with the arguments which were used to urge a
compliance with the gospel. What then can be said in defense of rejecting
salvation by Christ? To say then, as often they do in this world, they supposed
the Minister was angry; had a party spirit; and the like; will not avail with
them. If he faithfully warned them, they ought to have received the warning,
and repented. -- But some never take pains to hear what the watchman has to say
for the good of their souls, at least, very seldom attend. Christ sent a
messenger to them, to instruct them in their duty; but they would not hear what
he had to say to them. They had opportunity to attend, but chose to neglect it.
They esteemed it a great calamity to have such a one among them; and wished to
be rid of him. Are such persons friendly to their own souls? Are they friendly
to Christ? It is impossible! For they sin against Christ, in refusing to hear
whom he sends to them; and he who sins against Christ wrongs his own soul.

6. Let us now apply this subject more particularly to this present solemn
occasion; an occasion the most solemn, in some respects, I was ever called to
attend to.

In compliance with the free invitation of this Church, and People, I was, nine
years ago, set a watchman over you, to watch for your souls; for which I must
shortly give account. My ministerial connection with you is now dissolved;
being requested by the town. I am no more your watchman as heretofore. I have
not that particular charge of your souls, which I once had. And though it is
possible some of you may hear me preach again, yet not as your Minister, as
once I was. But this is not the last meeting we are to have together. The most
solemn meeting we can have, is yet future. It will be at the bar of God; where
we shall see each other, and know that we once had an important connection
together as Minister and People! Then will be mentioned the means which led to
this connection; and those also which led to a dissolution of it; with all the
circumstances attending us, from my first preaching to you, to this closing
sermon. You must give account of your motives in inviting me to settle with
you; and of all your measures in bringing about such a connection. I must give
account of my motives in accepting your invitation; and all my public and
private conduct toward you since, as your Minister. You must give account of
the parts you have taken, in those measures adopted by the town, in dissolving
this union. And I must give account of every thing I have done in this solemn
affair, till a dissolution took place. As to my ministry here, I have a most
solemn account to give, whether I have prayerfully endeavored to be faithful
to your souls, in studying, preaching, warning, reproving, exhorting, visiting,
and living religion. Though I have many failings in the course of my ministry
to bewail before God; yet, I humbly trust, through infinitely sovereign grace,
I shall appear pure from the blood of all your souls, which have been committed
to my care. But for this I rely upon the mercy of God alone, through the great
Redeemer. From a consciousness of duty, I have relinquished my ministry here;
yet I may possibly be mistaken, and have gone aside from duty.

Let me, my Christian Friends, address a few words to you on this occasion,
particularly the CHURCH in this place. With you, as a body, I have walked in
fellowship for a number of years; but am no more your Pastor, to administer
common and special ordinances to you; and it is probable we shall never more
sit together at the table of the Lord in this world. But, my friends, we must
meet again in another world, and there remember all the solemn scenes we passed
through in this world. I must give account how I have treated you, as a part of
the visible spouse of Jesus Christ; of all the methods I have taken to lead you
as your Pastor, with my motives in taking the oversight of you. Whether I have
faithfully endeavored to feed you with the good and wholesome truths of
Revelation, free from human invention: Whether I have plainly laid before you
the marks of the real Christian; and faithfully exhorted you to examine whether
these marks could be found upon you. Or whether I have so described the
Christian, as was calculated to deceive you, and cause you to hope without
sufficient grounds. Whether I have honestly endeavored to watch over the
Church, and warn them of danger from errors in doctrine, and deviations from
the rule of duty in conduct. Whether I have set before you the order of
Christ's house, as revealed in the scripture, and shown you the importance of
strictly complying therewith. Whether I have been cautious and careful in the
examination of candidates for church communion; not daring to encourage any to
come, who did not give me some reason to believe they were subjects of saving
grace, though I may be deceived concerning them. Whether I have pitied you
under all your trials and temptations, which have come to my knowledge, and
endeavored to give you all that instruction and comfort in my power. Whether I
have rejoiced to see you appearing at any time to maintain the honor of
Christ's cause, by an holy life, and love to the doctrines of the gospel: and,
on the other hand, mourned to see a different appearance in any of you. And
whether I have daily borne you on my heart at the throne of grace, that you may
grow in christian knowledge and grace, and all finally be saved. -- O what a
solemn account have I to give to him who made me an overseer over this Church
of God! And, my friends, have not you also a very solemn account to give in
this connection? If your Pastor has been faithful, must you not give account
how you have improved under his ministry? But if he has been unfaithful, must
you not give account whether you have treated him as the gospel rule requires
of you? Yes, you must all give account of your thoughts, words, and conduct
toward your Pastor. Whether you have loved him, pitied him under trials,
prayed for him, and tried all in your power to strengthen his hands. Whether
you have carefully avoided saying or doing any thing which could weaken his
ministerial influence among this people; and refused to receive an accusation
against him but before two or three witnesses. -- And relative to this solemn
separation, which has now taken place, you must give account whether you were
aiding in it; or endeavored by all christian steps to prevent it. Whether you
have never shown opposition to any of the truths your Pastor has preached; and
thus strengthened the hands of the enemy. Whether any of you have had your ears
open to the tattle of the vain world, and been ready to believe idle reports
without examination. Whether you have had your minds cooled toward your Pastor
from mere hearsay, without ever knowing whether or not they were true. And
whether you have never given a misrepresentation of facts, by means of which,
others have been troubled in their minds. And, in a word, you must give account
whether you have endeavored at all times to treat your Pastor as an Ambassador
from Jesus Christ.

May God, of his free gace, through Jesus Christ, pardon all our sins we have
been guilty of toward each other, as Pastor and Church! And I pray God to
build you up in the faith and order of the gospel; and enable you to keep up a
strict watch over one another in the Lord; and may we finally meet in the
heavenly world, where christian friends will never more part!

I would now say a few words to the CONGREGATION, not particularly of the
Church. I am now about to take my leave of you, as your Minister; perhaps never
more to preach the gospel to you. But we must give account of the opportunities
we have had together in this connection: I of my preaching; you of your
hearing, or refusing to hear. I must soon give account of all my treatment of
you in my ministerial connection with you; and, if I have been faithful, the
account will be joyful for me; but dreadful for you, if you have not been
faithful to your own souls. From you, as a town, my dismission was occasioned.
You desired me to relinquish my ministry in this place. You have refused to
give reasons for this desire; and you have also refused to have this solemn
affair examined by an Ecclesiastical Council. But, a Council, called by the
Pastor and Church, have advised to a dismission, which has now taken place.
But, my friends, the affair is not to end thus: all these transactions are
registered in the Court of Heaven, to be brought out to public view before the
assembled universe! You and I shall then have a very solemn meeting! Then I
shall hear the reasons why you pressed for a dismission from my ministry, as
you have done. Christ is perfectly acquainted with them; and he will state them
plainly, that all the world may know them! Then you cannot keep them out of
hearing. And are you sure they are such as the impartial Judge will approve of?

Relative to this solemn affair, I must give account of every step I have taken
in it. Why I so much insisted upon order and regularity in such a serious
affair, which we have been attending to. Whether it was from selfish views, or
from a regard to the order of the Churches, and the solemn charge of your
souls. You must give account whether it were from covetousness, you refused a
Council; or from a full conviction that such a step would be contrary to the
laws of Jesus Christ. Should any individuals in this town think themselves free
from this solemn account, because they have not acted on either side, but
remained neuters through the whole; let such remember, they must give account
why they have not acted in this solemn and important affair. Although you have
not voted for, or against; or, in view of the world, taken sides in the late
struggles concerning your Minister; yet your minds have certainly been
decidedly on one side or the other; and you know what side you wished might
prevail. There is no such thing as the mind being neuter toward opposing
causes which it attends to. Christ says, "He that is not with me is against
me." Matt. ^ii.3^.
And you have, at heart, been either for or against your Minister. If you
believed his preaching and conduct to be such as rendered him worthy of
contempt and rejection from this people; you must give account why you have not
boldly, for the cause or religion, exerted yourselves to remove him from his
ministry here, agreeably to gospel rule. But if you believe that he has
endeavored to be honest and faithful in his ministerial charge; you must give
a dreadful account for withholding your help, when you saw him abused and
persecuted by his opposers! These things are nearly connected with the cause of
God. And is not his cause worthy your taking an active part in? The Angel of
the Lord pronounced a bitter curse against those, who came not to the help of
the Lord against the mighty. See Judges, v. 23.
And how can you feel easy in your minds, when you know you have not come forth
to the help of the Lord in this place? Another day will disclose your views and
motives in neglecting to be active in this solemn affair. Those who have
disliked my preaching, must give account whether they had good reason to
believe that I did not preach the gospel of Christ truly, and profitably for
honest minds: or whether the truths delivered, did not apply too closely to
them, condemn their conduct which they chose to indulge; and yet unable to say
that any thing was ever delivered contrary to the bible in its connection.

It is to be feared that some of you, who have sat under my ministry, are still
in your sins; never complied with the invitations of the gospel which have been
set before you; and it is likely I may never have any more opportunities to
warn you of your danger. Let me tell you, once more, O sinners, that if you go
on till death in your impenitence and unbelief, you will forever sink down
under the wrath of the Almighty; and all the instructions and warnings you have
had, will serve to aggravate your dreadful punishment! You will remember all
the calls and warnings you have had from those whom God sent to you in the name
of Christ. And now you are free from your Minister, and from any more public
warnings from him, as your Minister; what will be the event is known only to
him who governs all things. How sad will be your case, if you never have any
more warnings from God by his servants! You may be given up to choose corrupt
preaching, which pleases the natural heart; and that will ruin you. Or you may
be left to the choice of no worship at all; this also will destroy you.
Therefore repent now; choose Christ, and his religion, and you will be happy
forever. And if you as a people truly humble yourselves before God for all your
sins, he may yet build you up.

If here are any who have been under serious impressions from what they have
heard under my ministry, and are returning again to vanity; I have one word to
say to you. The time is coming when it will appear whether you were affected by
truth which you heard, or not; and why you can now feel cold toward such
things as once made you tremble. If you once believed that your Minister
preached truth, which was solemn and important, why do you now treat the same
kind of preaching with neglect? Are you now sure that what you once thought to
be true is false?

I have now done with you all, perhaps, forever! I may never preach to you
again; at least I am no more your Minister! Have I been faithful to you? Have
you been faithful to your own souls? Will there not be a dreadful separation
among us, another day? -- May God enable all of us to repent of all our sins;
believe in Jesus Christ, and live a holy life; then we shall have a happy
meeting together in a better world!

AMEN, AND AMEN!
Result of Council.
THE following is the Result of the Ecclesiastical Council, which sat in
Stoneham, the 30th of September, 1794; and advised Mr. CLEAVELAND to ask a
dismission from his pastoral relation to his people.

AT an Ecclesiastical Council, convened at Stoneham, agreeably to the request
of the Rev. Mr. John Cleaveland and the Church in Stoneham.

PRESENT,
The Rev. Messrs. Daniel Hopkins of Salem, Samuel Spring of Newburyport, Joseph
Mottey of Lynnfield, Elijah Parish of Byfield;
Delegates, Deacon Richard Lang, Thomas Mighill, Esquire. Deacon Nathaniel
Bancroft, Mr. Joseph Pike.

The Rev. Mr. Bradford, and Nicholas Pike, Esquire. being necessarily absent.

Having supplicated the divine presence and direction, the Council proceeded to
business. And from all the information respecting the unhappy situation of this
town, which they have been able to collect from the statement made by Mr.
Cleaveland; from the information given by a Committee of the Church, chosen for
the purpose; and from the votes of the Town, properly attested; it appears to
this Council,

1. That Mr. Cleaveland's influence among this people is lost, and
irrecoverably lost; and that it has become necessary that his ministerial
connection with them be dissolved: And it is the advice of this Council that he
ask a dismission from his pastoral relation to them.

2. It appears, from the fullest, and, they trust, the most impartial
examination of the subject, of which they are capable, that Mr. Cleaveland has
given no just cause for that aversion and opposition to him, which, in so
violent and very unprecedented a manner, they have displayed.

3. It appears to this Council, that Mr. Cleaveland's moral, christian and
ministerial characters stand fairly, and firmly supported; and they cordially
recommend him to the church and people of God, wherever, in divine providence,
he may be cast.

4. As Mr. Cleaveland has given to this people no just cause for that
opposition to him, which they discover, and which renders his removal from them
necessary; and as his removal must be attended by great inconvenience and
expense to him; it is the opinion of this Council, that he ought to receive a
compensation: And they recommend it to the parties concerned, to choose
mutually three judicious, impartial characters from some of the neighboring
Towns, to estimate the damage to which Mr. Cleaveland is subjected by his
removal.

5. That the Selectmen of the Town be seasonably furnished with an attested
copy of this Result.

Finally, the Council, deeply impressed with the singular sacrifice which Mr.
Cleaveland's friends make, in parting with their valuable and beloved Pastor,
beg leave to exhort them to acknowledge the hand of God in this affecting
providence, as becomes Christians; to maintain the order of Christ's house; and
with unremitting ardour promote the interest of his kingdom.

And now, brethren, we commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified.

D. HOPKINS, Moderator.
Voted unanimously. ELIJAH PARISH, Scribe.


