COUNT RODERIC's CASTLE: OR, GOTHIC TIMES, A TALE. IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

In winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire,
With good old Folks, and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betide.
SHACK. RICH. II. BALTIMORE: PRINTED BY SAMUEL SOWER. FOR KEATING's BOOK-STORE.
MDCCXCV.

COUNT RODERIC's CASTLE
CHAP. I
IN those days when Astolpho, surnamed the Proud, beheld his regal sway extend
over the rich and fertile plains of Lombardy, the name of Roderic the Hardy was
not unknown to fame. He had fought the battles of the empire; and an almost
uninterrupted series of success had crowned his arms. He had acquired immortal
honor to himself, and a vast accession of territory to his master; but wholly
trained in the field of war, and little skilled in the cabals of a court, he
found, after a life almost exhaustedin the painful pursuits of glory, the
smiles of the king's countenance withrawn.

He no sooner witnessed the dangerous gloom which began to thicken around him,
than he prepared to pursue those steps which were most likely to conduce to his
safety, and lead him to an asylum in which he might, in all probability, find a
shelter from the gathering storm. He retired, then, while it was yet safe to
retire from the capital, and sought a castle of his own near the frontiers of a
lately conquered province -- a retreat, in which the bolts of Astolpho's wrath
were but little likely to reach him. To this retirement he summoned an only
son, whom he had left behind him in the army, and who, though but a young
soldier, had already acquired a portion of fame little inferior to that of his
father.

This son, who was called Rhinaldo, had been, during the intervals which
occurred between each campaign, much resident at court and in the palace of
Astolpho first beheld the lady Isabel, the daughter of the late king, and loved
her. It would have been difficult indeed for a young man of the coldest heart
to behold her without emotion. In her dark eyes were mingled all the fire of
genius with all the softness of sensibility; on her animated countenance sat
blended majesty and mildness; on her brow was pictured commanding beauty; in
her smile the most winning sweetness; her shape was faultless, and her
demeanor artless and graceful; nor was Isabel blind to the merits of the young
soldier -- a person the very standard of manly beauty -- a countenance, where
every virtue of his heart was pourtrayed -- a cultivated mind -- a high and
unspotted reputation, did not escape the observation of the lady Isabel. They
had frequent opportunities of conversing, and of those opportunities a mutual
passion was the result.

The resentment of Astolpho became implacable, when he heard of Count Roderic's
retreat; and the very day after Rhinaldo had, in obedience to his father's
mandates, quitted the army to join him in his retirement, orders arrived at the
camp to supercede him in his command, and cause him to be conveyed close
prisoner to the capital.

These orders had, indeed, been preceded by a letter from the lady Isabel,
warning Rhinaldo of the danger which threatened him; -- a letter, rendered not
more dear to Rhinaldo by the noble proof it contained, than by the tender vows
it breathed, of inviolable fidelity.

In the retirement which his father had chosen, Rhinaldo passed many melancholy
hours in meditating on his beloved but absent Isabel. In vain did Count Roderic
endeavor to divert his thoughts from the ceaseless object of their attention,
by dissertations on that science in which this beloved son had, from the
earliest period of life, been his pupil, and in which they had both gained so
great a degree of renown. In vain did he encourage, among his men at arms, (for
he carried into retirement with him a retinue, which caused no little jealousy
at court) those martial exercises for their courage and dexterity in which the
men of that age were renowned. In vain did the court of the castle echo daily
with the sound of the trumpet. -- In vain were the banners seen waving above
the battlements. That heart which had so often leaped at the sound of martial
music, which owned no charms but those which blazed in the front of an
embattled host, now shrunk from what it deemed a tedious mockery, and sought to
indulge its feelings amid the luxury of the most gloomy, solitude.

A deep and devious forest, which flanked the castle to the south, afforded
this solitude, and thither did Rhinaldo daily repair to feast his imagination
on the thousand charms with which the image of his Isabel was replete. -- His
father, who discovered his dislike of society, and probably in some measure
guessed at the cause of it, forbore, at length, to restrain his inclination.
They seldom met but at table, (from the tasteless festivity of which Rhmaldo
retired as soon as decency would permit him) or at those hours when the public
duties of religion summoned them to the neighboring convent.

At these duties Rhinaldo was so constant, and his attention to them was so
rigid and undeviating, that his father could not forbear entertaining some
fears, that his melancholy would at length enroll him among the religious of
the place. Nor were those fears entertained upon light or frivolous grounds.
The society consisted of thirty persons, who had all borne arms with a
considerable degree of reputation. The superior was an old knight, who had led
Roderic himself in the field, and had been his guide in the path of glory,
though he was yet, from a youth, inured to toil, and an age fostered by
temperance, vigorous and hardy. But the person, the charms of whose society so
frequently led the steps of Rhinaldo toward the convent, was an hermit, who
had built his cell hard by, and whose disposition, truly charitable, had
rendered him highly respected, as well by the monks themselves, as by the
scattered inhabitants of the neighborhood.

The convent of St. Julian was situate close to Count Roderic's castle, on a
bold and commanding eminence. -- Consisting chiefly of rock, it seemed scarcely
capable of affording nourishment to the numerous shrubs, whose twisted roots
seemed incorporated with it, and was accessible only by a winding path of
considerable length. Steep, rugged and intricate, it was a task of considerable
labor to gain the summit, whose picturesque appearance, from the vale below,
never failed to incite in the mind an ardent wish to attain it.

The flinty walls of the convent seemed to have their foundation in air, and
its Gothic spires hung over the brow of the rock with an awful magnificence. It
overlooked the castle. This, as the latter was a place of strength, was a
circumstance of importance, and extreme care was taken, on any prospect of an
attack, to secure, this post, and to afford it ample supplies.

Beneath a projecting part of the cliff, close to the winding path already
mentioned, and at no great distance from the summit, had the hermit, of whose
society young Rhinaldo was so fond, fixed his abode. His daily care during the
period of his residence in that spot, when the duties of religion had been
fulfilled, was to enlarge, amend, and decorate his humble cell, till he had at
length formed an habitation, which, for simple beauty and comfort, the
thoughtless inhabitant of the gay world might envy him.

To this retreat, then, did Rhinaldo fly from the cumberous magnificence of
Count Roderic's establishment. Here could he meditate at leisure on the virtues
and accomplishments of his beloved Isabel. Here too, (and it was that
circumstance which rendered the spot so dear to him) could he confide, without
the dread of cold sarcasm, or harsh reproof, the tender secret of his heart.
Father Anthony (for that was the hermit's name) was austere indeed toward
himself, but, like the holy master, to whose service he had now devoted
himself, he wept over the failings of others.

CHAP II.
SOME months had now passed since Rhinaldo quitted his command to retire to the
Castle of his father, and (...) visits to the hermitage had grown daily more
and more frequent, when one morning at the approach of dawn, he ordered the
drawbridge to be let down, and, attended only by one faithful servant, took
the road which led to the capital. They passed the day in tracing the thick and
impervious forest which clothes for many miles the southern frontier of that
kingdom and the shades of evening overtook them as they gained it is verge. The
night set in with unwonted darkness, and the chill gust, which began to howl
from the north, foretold an approaching tempest. A few drops of thick rain fell
-- the darkness redoubled -- the distant thunder began to growl -- Rhinaldo
gave his horse the reins, and trusting to the sagacity of this long-tried
favorite for his safety, he proceeded at a slow pace, attended by his faithful
servant, catching every now and then a glimpse of the wild scence around, by
the gleam of the lightning, which began to dart with almost unabating rapidity.

Rugiero (so was Rhinaldo's servant called) stopped his horse suddenly, and
called to his master; "surely, my lord," said he, "by the flash of the
lightning, I just now descried the walls of a mansion."

Rhinaldo stopped. Rugiero bade him look to the right, and between some tall
trees he thought he perceived some rising turrets. They turned their horses,
and made slowly and cautiously for the spot. As they drew near, they found that
their surmises were true. -- They pursued their route, and at length with
considerable difficulty, arrived at the gate of an old mansion.

Like most of the seats of the nobility in the kingdom, it was surrounded by a
maot. Rugiero alighted from his horse, and slowly began to trace the moat
round, to discover, if possible, a bridge over which they might pass, and at
least gain some shelter from the inclemency of the night. He had not proceeded
far, before he perceived, on the opposite side, a drawbridge drawn up, which
made him conjecture, that, disolate as the building appeared, (for the walls
were in several parts overgrown with thick ivy, and bore every mark, as far as
the liget would permit them to be discovered, of great antiquity) it was
inhabited.

He began now to halloo as loud as he could, but with little probability, from
the howling of the storm, of making himself heard. He continued his progress
along the margin of the moat, and Rhinaldo, having alighted from his horse,
slowly followed him. -- They had not proceeded far, before the discovered that
this outwork bore as strong marks of decay as the rest of the building, and
that the raising the drawbridge at night must be more a work of custom than
utility.

Rugiero, by a very easy, but broken descent, gained the moat, and boldly
stepped into it. He found it very shallow, and ascending upon the ruins which
had fallen from a low and crumbling wall on the other side, he gained the
opposite bank. He then returned to give his master notice of this circumstance,
and to conduct him over. Rhinaldo did not hesitate; taking his horse in his
hand, he followed his servant. The beasts sprung lightly from the ruins upon
the crazy remains of this mouldring bulwark, and the travelers, passing slowly
round the walls of the house, arrived at a large and lofty porch, over-hung
with ivy, and midleg deep in the grass, which grew through the crevices of the
stones with which it had been paved. Having fastened their horses to a thorn
which grew close to one of the pillars, they retired to the extremity of the
porch for shelter. This shelter, however, they did not find -- the rain beat in
upon them with violence.

Rhinaldo resolved to try if the door was open. It was not improbable that it
should be so, even if the mansion were inhabited. In a place so desolate, there
is little fear of interlopers, and the moat and drawbridge would probably
render the domestics careless. -- He raised a weighty latch, and putting his
shoulder against the door, it opened heavily; and Rhinaldo and his servant
entered. Rhinaldo still held the door in his hand, and firmly persuaded, from
every thing he had hitherto witnessed, that the house was uninhabited, ordering
Rugiero to conduct the horses into the hall, where he determined to rest for
the night.

Rugiero strenuosly advised him to learn first, whether the mansion were
actually inhabited or no; and with this advice, upon consideration, he thought
it best to comply. He hallooed aloud, but the storm seemed to mock his efforts.
He walked slowly across the hall, but stopping suddenly, exclaimed, "Rugiero,
are these your footsteps which I hear?" "No, my Lord," answered Rugiero, "I
have not moved from this spot." "There is somebody," continued Rhinaldo,
"ascending a flight of stairs."

He now hallooed again; when a hoarse voice, in a low tone, exclaimed, "peace,
fool! are you fit to be trusted with a secret of such importance?" Still all
was dark; the sound of the footsteps on the staircase died gradually away, and
left Rhinaldo much perplexed. "Stay here," said he, after a pause, to Rugiero,
"till I return,"

Rugiero remonstrated, but his master was peremtory, and this attendant had
studied discipline in a camp. "I will be cautious," said Rhinaldo, mildly, in
order to soften the apprehensions of his faithful servant. "At all events, your
remaining here will secure us a retreat, should any thing sinister occur."

Rhinaldo now advanced, and tracing his way slowly and cautiously along the
hall, reached at length the staircase, from which the words, which so much
awakened his curiosity, had proceeded. He judged that this staircase, though
now somewhat crazy from age, had once been magnificent. It was very spacious.
He had scarcely got half way up it, when he heard footsteps above him, as if of
some person descending He stood motionless, in hopes that, whoever it might be,
from the size of the staircase they would pass without detecting him; for the
mystery of persons thus moving in the dark perplexed him even more than the
singular speech he had heard, and he was more than ever anxious to discover the
cause of it. The footsteps now seemed advancing toward him; he moved a pace to
the right, in order to avoid a meeting, and placed himself just in the way of
the person descending, who jostled him. A voice immediately exclaimed,
"Gaspard, why do you not speak? You must either bawl or be dumb -- the house is
locked in fleep -- you may now strike a light -- meet me, ten minutes hence, in
the refectory."

Rhinaldo was now divided what to do -- when a light, the only one he had yet
discovered, gleaming dimly from the door of a chamber into a long gallery
above, determined him to pursue his way up the staircase. He proceeded lightly
and cautiously. The light in a (...) time disappeared, but he (...) the place
whence it had (...). He could discover this place to (...) chamber, for though
a door (...) opened into a passage at the farther end of it, he again saw a
saint ray of light. He crossed the chamber, and entered the passage, at the
farther end of which he just distinguished the legs of a man ascending a narrow
staircase. He followed with extreme caution, and saw this person enter a small
room at the top of the staircase, which seemed to be a repository for very old
battered and unserviceable armor, and wornou^ horse furniture. The person he
had followed passed strait to the end of the room, and Rhinaldo gained such a
hight on the stair case, as to see him shove back a panel of the wainscot
which seemed artificially contrived for the purpose of concealment, and pulling
a bunch of keys from his pocket, open a strong massy door, plated with iron: he
then descended a few steps, shutting it after him and Rhinaldo lost sight of
him.

Perplexed at this circumstance, he advanced some paces toward the iron door.
He listened, and thought he could hear the sound of voices; but it was so
indistinct, tha^ he was left at last in doubt whether he had not been deceived;
and recollecting the conversation which passed on the staircase, he resolved to
return and rejoin Rugiero, with whom perhaps he might discover what was to be
perpetrated in the refectory. He groped his way down again, and at his post he
found his servant, who the moment he came near him, grasped his hand, and bade
him, in a low wisper, be silent and watch.

They had not stood many minutes before they perceived a faint light gleam from
an arch way on the opposite side of the hall, and two figures advancing slowly
along a passage, one of whom carried a kind of darklanthorn. They perceived
them to be men meanly dressed, and of the most unprepossessing appearance; one
particularly whose profusion of coarse, long, black hair, was unpleasingly
contrasted with the livid paleness of his countenance, excited Rhinaldo's
attention.

In a hoarse and dissonant voice, but which Rhinaldo discovered to be the same
which had addressed him on the staircase, he exclaimed, "Hark! I heard
something." "'It Was nothing but the wind," replied the other. -- "Hist!"
exclaimed the first, and paused; "where are the servants?" "Locked in sleep,"
said the other. -- They now placed their light on a table just within the arch
way, and the man who had spoke first, said to the other, "why did not you
answer me, when I met you on the staircase?" "when?" said the other. "Just now
-- within these ten minutes." "I never met you -- I have not been up stairs."
-- "Liar!" exclaimed the first. "May I fall dead this instant," returned the
second, "if I have left the refectory. Hey! what ails you? you tremble." "No
matter," exclaimed the first, in a faltering voice. "Give me the bottle." He
took a small wicker bottle from the other, and drank from it. It seemed to
revive him. "Give me the lanthorn," said he, "and the dagger." He received from
him the dark lanthorn, and a dagger of some length, which he stuck in his
girdle. "Shall you want me?'! asked the second man. "No," said the first; "go
-- wait for my lord -- we shall not want you, 'till the body is to be disposed
of." -- "Mercy on us!" cried the second, in an awful but tremulous tone. The
first turned short round upon him, muttered something between his teeth, and
walked slowly across the hall toward another passage, while the second man
moved toward the staircase, which he ascended.

Rhinaldo and Rugiero, with as little noise as possible, followed the first
man; yet they could not proceed so silently, but that they caused him to turn
round several times. The loudness of the storm, however, deceived him, and he
continued to move forward, through a winding passage, 'till he stopped suddenly
at a low arched door, which he opened with a key.

Rhinaldo drew his sword, and rushed forward to prevent his shutting it again.
This, however, he did not attempt, and Rhinaldo gained the door, just as he had
placed the lanthorn on the floor, in the middle of a small vaulted room, and
seemed occupied in thought. He stood with his arms folded, and his face turned
toward Rhinaldo. Never was a countenance so ghastly and horrid. It betrayed a
most diabolical agitation of mind. After standing thus for a few seconds, he
stooped down, and, feeling along the floor, laid hold of an iron ring, by
which, after a few efforts, he pulled up a trap door, and discovered, by the
gleam of the lanthorn, a broken flight of steps. He now took up the lanthorn in
one hand, and holding the door with the other, began to descend. Rhinaldo saw
that there was not a moment to be lost. If this ruffian should once get beneath
the trap-door, the murder he meant to perpetrate (and of his intention there
could not remain a doubt) might be committed in safety. Impressed with this
idea, he sprung forward. The man turned round at the noise, and on the instant
re^eived Rhinaldo's sword to the very hilt in his breast. He fell into the
vault, uttering a deep groan -- the lanthorn was clenched in his hand -- the
trap-door fell into its place as he descended, and Rhinaldo, with Rugiero, who
had just entered the room, remained involved in the most impenetrable darkness.

CHAP. III.
ASTONISHED at this circumstance, Rhinaldo paused for a few seconds; but
recollecting that it was possible the light might not be extinguished by the
fall, he felt for the iron ring, and lifted the trap-door. His conjectures
proved to be right -- the lanthorn lay on the floor, clasped in the hand of the
dead man -- and the flame within it was burning the horn. Rugiero picked it up,
and having adjusted the candle within it, began to survey the vault into which
they had descended.

It was narrow, long, and low; and at the end of it was a very small arched
door-way, and a door apparently very thick, and formidably secured with bolts
and bars. Rugiero pushed the door with his hand, and was suddenly alarmed by a
deep groan from the place, whatever it might be, to which it opened. He had not
time, however, to ruminate long on this circumstance; his master called to him
in a very low voice from the other end of the vault, and when he came near,
made him a sign to listen; he did so, and heard distinctly the footsteps of a
man walking in a hasty and agitated step over their heads. Every now and then
he paused, as if to listen to something; and after a few minutes, they heard
exclaiming in a low tone "Fabian!"

This was repeated several times; -- and Rhinaldo at length perceiving that it
was addressed toward the vault, answered in as hollow a voice as he could
assume, "Here!"

"Is it done?" exclaimed the unknown person from above. "It is," answered
Rhinaldo. "'It Is well," resumed the voice from above. "Convey the body into the
vaulted room -- lay it out on the table, and cover it with the mantle which I
shall send you." -- They then heard the steps of this person moving toward the
door, and the sound of them soon died away.

Rhinaldo, who now grew more anxious than ever to discover this mystery, took
his resolution on the spot, and, with the assistance of Rugiero, stripping the
doublet and cloak from the body of the man he had killed, he put them on,
pulling his hair over his face, and disguising himself as artfully as he could
with the blood which still flowed from the wound he had inflicted. He then put
on Rugieros's hat, which being much plainer than his own, was well calculated
to give additional concealment to his countenance; and, within the assistance
of this steady and faithful domestic, lifting the trap-door, conveyed the body
into the vaulted cham^er above, and stretched it on the table as directed.

This done, they prepared to secure the messenger who should be sent with the
mantle, and who they judged would prove the person they had before seen in
company with the man who was slain. In order to effect this, Rugiero, drawing
his sword, placed himself close to the door of the room, just within the
portal, while his master stood at the front of the table, on which the body was
placed, and so much in front of the lanthorn, which he had contrived should
throw but a dim gleam of light, that a person entering the room, could only
distinguish the figure of a man, but was not enabled to discover who, or what
he might be.

They had not waited on their post many minutes before, as they had
conjectured, the person they so lately saw entered the room, carrying the
mantle on his shoulders. He walked strait toward Rhinaldo, to whom he said, --
"Fabian! my Lord requires you to attend him at the head of the great staircase."

He had scarcely uttered these words, before Rugiero, advancing from the door,
seized him by the collar, and Rhinaldo doing the same, the fellow fell down
speechless with horror. They raised him immediately, and Rhinaldo warned him,
that to utter a single exclamation would prove fatal to him. -- He fell on his
knees, and in the most earnest manner entreated him to spare his life. Rhinaldo
told him that his safety wholly depended on his conduct. Disguise nothing from
us, said he, and you have nothing to fear. -- Sir, said the trembling wretch, I
will conceal nothing, but my Lord, by this time, waits for Fabian and myself,
at the head of the great staircase. After a moment's pause, Rhinaldo said, I
think I can trust thee so far. Thou shall attend me to thy Lord -- but mark
well my words -- the very moment in which, by a single word or action, thou
attemptest to betray me, I here swear, whatever may be the consequence of it,
shall be the last of thy life.

Rhinaldo then threw the mantle over the ^^dy of the ghastly Fabian, and
commanding (...) trembling wretch before him to conduct (...) to the great
staircase, he gave the lanthorn into his hands, ordering him to precede (...) a
few paces, but, at his peril, to keep (...) light turned from him.

In this manner they proceeded, leaving Rugiero in the vaulted room. -- They
had sarcely gained the foot of the staircase, (...) they perceived a man
walking at the top it, with a small taper in his hand. He was richly dressed, but
had a ferocity in his aspect (...) did not escape unmarked by Rhinaldo, (...)
kept as much behind his conductor as s^^ble.

The man at the head of the staircase no (...) perceived them, than he ordered
them, (...) impatient tone, to follow him, and ^^ng hastily, walked along the
gallery, (...) which the gleam of light had led the steps (...) Rhinaldo, when
he was last on the staircase. He passed through the same chamber ^^ich he had
before passed, entered the (...), ascended the narrow staircase, and shoved
(...) the panel in the little room above it. (...) then opened the door, and
discovered to Rhinaldo a scene, which excited his utmost ^^tention. A few steps
descended from the door he had opened into a lofty and spacious apartment, the
furniture of which, though one could perceive that it had been once
magnificent, appeared very old and decayed.

At a table, on which was placed a dim lamp and a crusifix, he could perceive a
lady richly dressed. Her elbow rested on the table, and her cheek on her hand.
She was reading. The man who preceded Rhinaldo turned to him, and his
companion, and ordered them to stay without. He then proceeded down the steps,
The lady cast her eyes toward him as he entered, threw them with a
supplicating look toward heaven, and again fixed them on her book.

He advanced slowly into the room, and beckening the lady, in a stern tone of
voice ordered her to follow him.

"What more am I to suffer?" said she. "What farther scene of savage cruelty am
I to witness?"

He beckened Rhinaldo and his companion into the room. The lady started wildly
when she saw them. "Nay," said she, "if I am to be murdered, perpetrate your
crime on this spot." -- Saying this, she seized the crucifix; clasped it to her
bosom, and fell on her knees before the book, which lay open on the table. The
person who had caused this alarm then took her under one arm, and making a sign
to Rhinaldo to do the same by the other, she suffered herself to be conducted,
without a murmur, whithersoever they should choose, still holding the crucifix
in her hand.

Rhinaldo, struck with compassion at the situation of this lady, was repeatedly
tempted to whisper comfort in her ear; but he thought a premature discovery of
his design might in all prabability baffle every attempt he might make to serve
her; he therefore proceeded, holding her still by the arm, 'till they gained
the vaulted chamber, when the person who had conducted her to it thus addressed
her: "Adulteress!" -- She raised herself from the arm of Rhinaldo. "Monster!"
said she, "at least, spare my fame -- thou know the falsehood of that
insinuation." -- "That mantle," -- said he, pointing to that which lay over the
body of Fabian, "was the work of your hands, and designed doubtless as a
present to me." "Never," -- answered the lady, -- "heaven knows. -- They to
whose power it was my lot to bow, knew too well that it was not designed for
thee."

"Perhaps," returned he, with an air of the most savage triumph, "it was
designed for him who now wears it." At this the lady started -- she looked wild
with apprehension and terror -- she advanced toward the table -- she clasped
her hands together, and eagerly looked on the mantle -- "It cannot be," said
she -- "you are not such a monster." The man advanced, and with a barbarous
readiness, seized the taper which his attendant carried, and held it before
her. "Lift up the mantle, said he, to Rhinaldo. Rhinaldo lifted it, fixing his
eyes full upon him, and discovered the body of Fabian.

"Good heavens!" cried the lady; "what can all this mean?" She staggered some
paces back, and was caught in the arms of Rugiero, who had advanced to be ready
to assist his master upon occasion. -- The man himself seemed petrified with
astonishment upon seeing the corpse -- in a few seconds he drew his sword.

"Consummate villain!" said he; and he flew at Rhinaldo. Rhinaldo, who watched
his eye, drew at the same time, beat down the thrust which was made, with
extreme rapidity, at his breast, and, returning it, buried his sword in his
adversary's body; but perceived, on recovering his guard, that he was himself
wounded in the thigh; he, however, advanced toward the lady, and seeing her
somewhat recovered, attempted to explain to her that the person for whose life
she seemed to labor under such apprehensions, was probably safe -- out he
poured this intelligence into a deaf ear. Harrassed to death by the cruelties
of her oppressor, and the scene she had witnessed, she seemed insensible to all
around her. -- Rhinaldo and Rugiero conducted her slowly to the apartment in
which they had found her, and placed her on the bed.

Rhinaldo then inquired whether there were any female servants in the house,
and hearing that there were two, he went, attended by the companion of the
deceased Fabian, to awaken them, and in a short time procured their attendance
on the lady.

After taking care that every possible assistance should be given to her,
Rhinaldo turned his thoughts once more toward the vaulted chamber, and leaving
the lady under the protection of his faithful Rugiero, he ordered Gaspard (for
so was Fabian's comrade called) to attend him; and again proceeded down the
stairs, determined to explore the vault, in which the miscreant, he had so
lately punished, had met the reward of his iniquities.

As they entered the room, the first object that struck them was the body of
the person who had just fallen by Rhinaldo's sword. Rhinaldo held the taper to
his face, and contemplating his features, though now fixed by the agonies of
death, -- "Is not this," said he, to Gaspard, "the Lord of St. Amand?" Gaspard
answered in the affirmative. Rhinaldo felt the body; but no signs of life
remained. He then ordered Gaspard to raise the trap-door, and followed him into
the vault. They proceeded along this dreary subterraneous passage, 'till they
came to the little door at the end. This, after some labor, they unbolted, for
the fastenings were numerous and strong, and descending by a narrow broken
staircase, entered as dismal a dungeon, as the most gloomy imagination could
pourtray.

In one corner they described the figure of a man, seated on a large stone, to
which he was chained. As they opened the door, he cast a languid eye toward
them, and exclaimed, "I shall at last then find an end to my miseries! Do not
fear to perform your commission -- but, if you have any compassion left, bear
the ring which you will find in my bosom to the wise of your lord."

Rhinaldo advanced toward him. -- Have you, resumed the prisoner, compassion
enough to promise me that favor? "Count Tancred!" said Rhinaldo, astonished at
the voice which addressed him. "My friend -- my -- "

The prisoner leaped in surprise from his seat, but, restrained by his chains,
he sunk down again. "Know ye not Rhinaldo?" said the young knight, and sprung
forward to embrace him. The prisoner folded his arms about his friend; but the
surprise proved too much for him, and he sunk speechless on Rhinaldo's bosom.
In a little time, however, he recovered himself.

"Gracious heaven!" exclaimed he, to meet Rhinaldo in the place of my
executioner. "Let us rid you," said Rhinaldo, "of these chains." The chains
which secured him were fastened by a strong bolt round each leg. Rhinaldo
thought that if his boots were cut off, the link would prove large enough to
slip over his foot. He asked Gaspard for a knife, who went in search of one,
but in ascending the stairs, found the dagger of Fabian, which had dropped from
his girdle as he fell; with this he returned. Count Tancred's boots were slit
down and taken off, but the link was smaller than they had supposed -- it was
necessary they should be unlocked or filed.

Gaspard then told Rhinaldo, that the key of the Count's fetters was probably
in Fabian's pocket, which was immediately searched, and Count Tancred, whose
impatience would only suffer them to unlock the link which fastened him to the
stone, wrapped his chains round his arm, and followed his friend out of the
dungeon. His mind was agitated by a most in satiable curiosity -- he asked a
thousand questions on a moment. "I will lead you," -- said Rhinaldo, "to one
who will assist me in (...) detail -- for, to say the truth, I am, at present,
rather weary."

Rhinaldo was at this time accompanying his friend up the steps of the vault.
"You look faint," said Count Tancred; -- "You bleed too, my friend!" They
reached the vaulted chamber, where the Count was finally freed from his fetters.

"Here," said Rhinaldo, "lie your foes." Tancred surveyed the bodies.

"Merciless barbarian!" said he, as he contemplated that of the Count; -- "Why
was not thy punishment reserved for me? But Rhinaldo," continued he, in a
faltering voice, "there is -- a -- beauteous and wretched victim -- "

Rhinaldo threw himself into a chair. "I feel," said he, "too much embarrassed,
by a slight wound I have received, to accompany you up stairs. -- This person
will conduct you where your question will be more efficaciously resolved; but
stay -- it will be proper, perhaps, to secure the fidelity of your guide -- so
saying, Rhinaldo pointed to the sword of the Count de St. Amand, which lay on
the floor. "But you, my friend," said Tancred, taking up the sword, -- "You
want assistance." -- "You will find my old servant, Rugiero, above," said
Rhinaldo, "send him to me."

Count Tancred now quitted Rhinaldo, and, under the direction of Gaspard,
sought the apartment of the lady. Rhinaldo had not been left many minutes in
the vaulted chamber, before Rugiero attended him. He examined the wound in his
thigh, and found it slight indeed; but by subsequent irritation much inflamed.
He dressed it as well as the little assistance he was enabled to procure on the
spot would permit him, when Rhinaldo, addressing him with an air which marked
the confidence he reposed in him, said, "It will be impossible for me to pursue
my journey in this state -- mark attentively the commands I am about to lay
upon you -- make with all speed toward the capital, and at the third house to
the right, in the narrow street which leads from the little square to the back
of the palace gardens, you will find my old sergeant, and your former comrade,
Bernard Tilly; he will take care of your horse -- remain in his house 'till
night, and when you hear the palace clock strike twelve, repair to the high
bridge -- there you will find a man walking muffled up in his cloak, with his
hat drawn over his eyes -- accost this man immediately, and say to him, "YES or
NO?" If he should answer "YES," repair to me with all speed. -- If "NO," follow
him without speaking, and whatsoever you may judge may be for my service,
execute it suddenly and boldly. Know, Rugiero, that the task I impose on you
requires presence of mind and intrepidity; but I have had sufficient experience
of your heart and mind, to bid me rely with confidence on you. You will perhaps
want money in the progress of the undertaking -- take this ring."

Rhinaldo here presented a ring to Rugiero. -- "Call on Ben Napthali, who lives
to the west of the great square, and he will supply you, on sight of it, with
whatever money you may want."

Rugiero, though he knew not what it was ^o disobey his master, and felt
himself honored by the confidence reposed in him, yet could not help suggesting
that he felt some uneasiness at leaving him in his present state -- wounded,
and in the house of his enemies. But Rhinaldo soothed his apprehendsions by
telling him that Count Tancred was with him, and that there were, as he had
learned, only three male domestics in the house.

Rugiero, after conducting his master up stairs, who found Count Tancred and
the lady in a more convenient apartment than that in which she had been
confined, to which the women, who had been called to attend her, had humanity
enough to remove her, went to seek for his horse, and having found both his own
and that of his master under the porch, from which they had not moved, he set
off by the light of the dawn, which just now began to appear, in search of some
place in which he might find provender for them: His eye soon directed him to a
building, resembling a stable, which was in many places unroofed, but which
still afforded a tolerable shelter. He led his horses gently in his hand, and
opening the door, discovered that he had not been deceived. In this stable he
found a man occupied in saddling a horse. This man started at seeing Rugiero,
and let fall the saddle, which he was lifting to throw over the horse's back.

Rugiero clapped his hand to his sword, and the man seizing the horse hastily
by the bridle, drew him, unsaddled as he was, out at an opposite door. Rugiero,
encumbered with two horses, knew not readily what to do. In an instant,
however, he quitted them both, and rushed on foot through the door at which
this person had sled. He found the man already mounted on the bare back of the
horse, who seemed to be possessed of much fire, for he sprung forward in a
moment with considerable agility. -- Rugiero sprung forward also, but in vain.
The man pressed his horse eagerly, and, circling the house, gained the corner
of the moat at which Rugiero and his master had passed, and driving his steed
resolutely at it, passed it without accident, and fled with speed into the
thickest of the forest.

Rugiero, at first, thought of pursuing the fugitive, and hastened back for his
horse; but, upon a little reflection, he gave up this design. His horse was
exhausted with fatigue, and the want of provender, while that of the fugitive
was probably fresh. It would, besides, be almost impossible to trace him in a
wild so trackless and deserted as the forest; he therefore contented himself
with searching the stables for provender, which, having obtained, he placed
before his master's horse and his own, and returned once more into the house to
acquaint Rhinaldo with the circumstance which had just occurred.

In passing the door, an impulse, which he could not resist, induced him first
to turn into the vaulted chamber, and he there imagined he discovered cause of
the singular circumstance which had just occurred. He found the body of the
Count de St. Amand removed from the middle of the room, where he had left it,
to a corner close under the window, which was opened to admit the light of the
dawn, probably from the purpose of contemplating the face of the deceased.

He had now little doubt but that one of the servants had, during the period in
which he conducted Rhinaldo up stairs, entered the vaulted chamber, and
discovered the death of the Count St. Amand.

This circumstance, as he judged, was of extreme importance to the safety of
his master, and he hastened to inform Rhinaldo of it, who gave him full credit
for the fidelity of his attachment toward him, but continued to urge him
strongly to hasten his departure.

Rugiero, therefore, returned to the stable, and his horse being somewhat
refreshed, he led him to the drawbridge, and letting it down, passed over it,
directing his course toward that part of the forest from which he judged that
his master and himself had deviated, when the storm had compelled them to seek
refuge in the mansion.

CHAP. IV.
THE Countess St. Amand, for such, by the reproaches of the Count, Rhinaldo
perceived her to be, was now much recovered from the recent indisposition which
the horrors of the night had caused. Though she could not but feel deeply and
awfully impressed by the singular events which had taken place, she did not
affect any extraordinary degree of concern for the death of a man, whose cruel
and ferocious disposition had rendered him the detestation of all who knew him;
her health indeed seemed to have been impaired by the inhuman conduct of this
barbarian toward her, and the roses had faded in her cheek. She was, however,
notwithstanding this, extremely beautiful; and the benevolence of her heart was
conspicuous in the gratitude which she did not cease to express toward her
deliverer. The concern she felt at hearing of his wound, could scarcely be
soothed by the tender attention of Tancred, nor by the repeated assurances of
Rhinaldo himself, that the wound was trifling, and that he had a thorough
confidence in the skill of his domestic, which he had in some similar instances
previously experienced.

The day now completely dawned, and the Countess proposed to Tancred and
Rhinaldo, that they should take some repose after the fatigues they had
undergone; but the intelligence which they had recently received from Rugiero,
of the escape of the servant, was of too serious a nature to permit them, for
the present, to enjoy a thought of repose; and anxious as they severally were
to have the wonderful events of the night explained to them, they were
compelled to delay the gratification of their curiosity, and consult together
on the measures to be pursued in a moment so pregnant with danger to themselves.

Rugiero, in the mean time, pursued his journey with as much speed as possible,
and arrived, without meeting any extraordinary adventure, at the capital. He
reached the house of Bernard Tilly, and, having put up his horse, waited, not
without anxiety, for the eventful hour of twelve. The clock from the
neighboring convent at length struck, and Rugiero snatching up his cloak and
his sword, hastened toward the high bridge. He found, as he passed, the
streets deserted. The inhabitants had all retired to bed -- he gained the high
bridge, and as he advanced toward the center of it, he discovered a man wrapped
in a cloak, walking with a slow and thoughtful pace toward him. This man
passed Rugiero, without seeming to notice him; when Rugiero, according to his
instructions, put to him the question -- "YES or NO?" The man answered
immediately, "NO;" and wrapping his cloak about him, quickened his pace, and
proceeded forward, without so much as looking at Rugiero.

Rugiero followed him through several winding streets, 'till he turned into a
passage so narrow that it involved them in complete darkness. Rugiero
continued, however, to follow the man, 'till the passage opened into a kind of
square, which appeared to be in a state of desolation. The ground was rough,
uneven, and full of hillocks. Their path was interrupted by fragments of stone,
bricks, and rubbish; and the stench which arose around them, betrayed it to be
the residence of the meanest and most wretched inhabitants of the metropolis.

They at last reached a stone building, seemingly of very ancient structure,
the entrance to which was a gothic door, so low that a moderate sized man must
stoop considerably at entering it, and very narrow.

At this door the man tapped gently, and a small grated wicket in the middle of
it was immediately unlocked. -- Some words in a low voice passed -- the door
opened, as far as a chain, which was placed across it on the inside, would
permit -- and two men, with drawn daggers, appeared as sentinels on the inside,
Rugiero and his conductor were admitted -- they passed under the chain, and the
door was immediately closed.

They passed through a long winding passage, and up a narrow flight of stone
stairs, at the top of which they tapped at a door, and were admitted into a
large, gloomy, and almost unfurnished room, illuminated by a single lamp, which
hung over a table.

Several men, whose persons could not, on account of the gloomy light which the
lamp diffused, be very accurately distinguished, were walking about the room,
conversing with each other. When Rugiero was admitted, his guide approached
them, and having said something to them in a low voice, passed out of a door at
the farther end of the room, and in a few minutes returned, accompanied by a
gentleman with a taper in his hand, who advanced hastily toward Rugiero; but
stopped short when he had approached near enough to distinguish him, and said,
with signs of disappointment, "how is this? Is not your lord here?"

Rugiero, who knew him to be a young nobleman bound by the strictest ties of
friendship to his lord, explained to him shortly the accident which had
prevented Rhinaldo's arrival; but added, modestly, that whatever service they
might think proper to employ him in, he hoped and trusted he should go through
it with firmness.

"I do not doubt it," said the nobleman: but your lord's counsel and conduct on
a day like this -- his absence affects us -- it is, as it were, a limb lobbed
from our enterprise.

He then turned toward the remainder of the company, and entered into a long
conversation with them.

Rugiero, by the light of the taper, which this gentleman had brought, added to
that of the lamp, had an opportunity of viewing more distinctly the figures of
these persons. They seemed all armed and accoutred for immediate service. The
nobleman who addressed him, though not completely armed, had on his cuirasse,
and other pieces, which were not sufficiently cumberous to prevent his acting
on foot.

After having conversed for some time with the rest, this nobleman turned to
Rugiero, and bade him follow him. They passed through the door at the end of
the room, and arrived at a small chamber, in which there was a common truckle
bed and two chairs.

"This," said the nobleman, smiling, "is my apartment. But come," added he,
"let us lose no time" He passed through this apartment, and descending by a
staircase on the other side of it, entered a room, in which were several armed
men, some walking, some sitting down, and others lying on benches. Several
pieces of armor hung round the walls, and swords and pikes seemed scattered
carelessly about.

"Come, my friends," said the nobleman, as he entered -- "our hour is arrived;"
twelve of them then took up their arms, and the nobleman, followed by Rugiero,
led them to the gate at which the latter had entered, which was opened at their
approach.

They passed over the ruins, and keeping the most profound silence, gained the
new bridge. They did not pass over it, but passing down on one side of the
river, discovered at no great distance a boat, in which sat two men.

These men arose at their approach, and the nobleman having said something to
them, addressed Rugiero as follows: --

"I must now leave you, as my presence is demanded elsewhere. These men will
conduct you to the garden at the back of the palace -- there, if fortune
befriends us, you will find the princess Isabel. This will prove an eventful
night. Your task will probably require fortitude and presence of mind. If you
have the good fortune to effect the escape of the princess, convey her with all
speed to the place whence we now came."

Saying this, the nobleman, with four of his comrades, departed, leaving
Rugiero with the rest, who immediately embarked in the boat prepared for them.
Rugiero now perceived that the two men in the boat were also armed.

CHAP. V.
THEY dropped silently down with the tide, rowing as gently as possible, lest
the dashing of their oars, amid the stillness of the night, should create some
alarm.

When they arrived at the back of the palace gardens, which opened by a
beautiful and lofty terrace toward the river. They were surprised by the sound
of many voices, and could faintly discover several persons moving on the
terrace. They now took in their oars entirely, and as the tide carried them
slowly opposite the terrace, preserved the most profound silence. -- They did
not, however, execute this so successfully, as not to be perceived. They were
challenged from the terrace, and ordered to bring to. In spite, however of this
order, they still continued to drop down with the tide, about the middle of the
channel, when they were alarmed by the report of an arquebusse, evidently
levelled at them; the shot, however, probably went over their heads, as they
did not perceive any effect from it. They now thought it necessary again to ply
their oars, which they did with some effect, but remitted their labor upon
hearing a bugle sound in the garden, at the call of which the soldiers, whom
they had seen upon the terrace, suddenly disappeared, and left the gardens
wrapped in total silence.

Rugiero, upon this, resolved to land there, and ordering the boat to pull in
gently toward the terrace, he threw a ladder of ropes, with which the boatmen
were purposely provided, over the parapet; but the breadth of the wall
prevented the grapplings, which were fixed to the end of the ladder, taking
hold. They then pushed the boat toward a large flight of stone stairs, which
descended from a magnificent portico about the center of the terrace, and
entangling their grapplings with some wrought iron which united the gateway
with the parapet, Rugiero ascended the ladder, and was followed by the whole of
his party, except the two persons he had found in the boat, who still remained
to take care of it. They paced silently along the terrace, and saught the most
retired part of the garden, intending to conceal themselves in the bowers with
which it abounded.

They had not proceeded for, before they discovered two women, who passed
swiftly between the trees. Terror seemed to lend them wings. Rugiero and his
party had scarcely time to observe them, before they saw their progress impeded
by a party of armed men, whose leader, advancing toward the women, laid hold
on the foremost of them by the arm, while his party surrounded them.

Rugiero, who immediately conjectered that this must be the lady Isabel,
ordered his men to stand to their arms, and advanced resolutely toward them.
The women shrieked, and Rugiero heard the leader of the opposite band exclaim,
"It is the lady Isabel -- secure her."

Upon hearing this, Rugiero rushed on him, and was resolutely seconded by his
men, one of whom gently led the women toward the terrace, while the rest,
placing their backs toward them, in a firm phalanx, covered the retreat. In
this manner they gained the terrace; but the exclamations of the opposite
party, who called loudly for assistance, and the clashing of their swords, had
by this time so far increased the number of their enemies, that though they had
gained the portico at which the ladder was suspended, the found themselves so
pressed, that they began to give up every hope of escape. They had found means,
however, with the assistance of the men below, to convey the two women safely
to the boat, and calling to those below to push off, had no thoughts but of
selling their lives as dearly as possible -- when the attention of the foe was
suddenly diverted by a violent attack on the gate of the portico, and in an
instant Rugiero found his little forlorn party succored by a strong
reinforcement, who mounted the terrace by the rope ladder, which still hung
suspended to the iron work of the portico.

The gate in a short time was opened by assistance from the inside, and a
considerable party, who had disembarked from boats which lay moored to the
stone staircase below, rushed at once into the garden. The enemy found it in
vain to contend longer, and made a precipitate retreat, in which they were
closely pressed by the party which had just arrived.

Rugiero, who had luckily (though very hardly pressed) escaped without a wound,
was now preparing to descend the ladder, in order to secure the retreat of the
Lady Isabel, when he was accosted by a person belonging to the party just
entered, who, calling him by his name, asked him, if the lady was safe?

Rugiero knew this person immediately to be the nobleman he had so lately
quitted, and his surprise at this unexpected meeting kept him for a moment
silent.

"We have been betrayed," added this nobleman. "Our troops have met with a warm
reception in the square, and I have embarked with this reserve to try whether
this part of the palace would not prove less impregnable than the front; but
where," continued he, "is the lady Isabel?"

Rugiero told him that she was in the boat below, and he descended immediately
by the ladder. In about five minutes he returned. "Rugiero," said he, "we have
been deceived. -- The lady in the boat is not the Lady Isabel; she is, however,
a lady, in whose welfare I interest myself much. The duty of the moment will
not permit me to stay -- the Lady Isabel is confined in her chamber in the
first story on the left front of the western tower. I will leave a trusty few
for the guard of the boat, and with thirty more, whom I will spare to reinforce
your detachement, you must attempt to rescue the lady" Having remained just
long enough to effect this arrangement, the nobleman hastened toward the
palace.

Rugiero now took the command of the men who were delivered to him by the
nobleman, and sought the western tower. He perceived the window on the left
front -- it was about the height of two pikes from the ground, and grated with
iron -- he perceived that the chamber within was lighted up; he had taken the
precaution to bring from the boat the ladder of ropes; he tied two pikes
together and hoisting the ladder, fixed the grapplings to the bars of the
windows and ascended. The light in the chamber grew every moment more and more
vived. What were the horrors which Rugiero felt when, upon gaining the window,
he perceived the furniture and hangings of the chamber enveloped in flames.

He had scarcely time to reflect on this dreadful spectacle, before he heard
the clashing of swords, and perceived that his men were attacked below. -- The
garden was again in tumult, and the party which had lately landed were
compelled to retreat to their boats, which they did in much confusion.

Rugiero's guard stood boldly on their defense, but were presently overpowered
by numbers, and compelled to seek their safety with the rest. In this confusion
Rugiero stood supported by the gratings of the window, 'till the flames began
to crack the panes of the casement, and his post was become too hot to be
longer tenable. He now began to descend, when, either from the melting of the
solder, through the increasing heat of the walls, or from the rottenness of the
ironwork itself, the grating gave way, and Rugiero fell to the ground.

He lay, for some time, stunned by his fall, and upon recovering himself, found
that the tumult in the garden had in a great measure subsided. He had luckily
received no material damage from this accident, and now thought of effecting
his escape; but reflecting for a moment on his situation, he judged it useless
to proceed toward the terrace, as the boats had probably by this time quitted
the shore.

As he walked slowly forwards, doubtful what he should do, he perceived before
him the body of a man, who had probably been slain in the late skirmish, and
who was dressed in the habit of the king's guard.

Rugiero hesitated not a moment, but stripping him of his hat, his buff coat,
and bandelier, and placing his arquebusse on his shoulder, he fell in with a
party who were in an irregular manner retiring toward the palace, and
insinuating himself among them, soon gained the great square in the front of
the building.

He there found most of the troops in the city drawn up, and under arms, while
a party were employed in extinguishing the fire which had filled his mind with
so much horror.

Musing on the dreadful fate which had probably attended the unfortunate lady,
for whose sake solely he seemed to have been commanded on his present service,
and shuddering at the bare idea of cummunicating to his lord intelligence so
pregnant with calamity, he quitted the square, unperceived by some sentries who
were posted at the differnet avenues, but who were employed in drinking, and
gained the high bridge. From the high bridge, he strove to retrace his former
steps toward the spot on which he had first seen the noble friend of his lord.
In this he succeeded; but, on his arrival, he had fresh cause for astonishment
and alarm. He saw the ruins almost covered with dead bodies -- a large party
of the king's troops were still there under arms -- the building, at the little
door of which he had been so cautiously admitted, was smoking in ruins, and,
opposite to it, were placed two small pieces of artillery. In short, there was
every appearance that this house had been defended to the last extremity.

Rugiero retired with a melancholy step from this scene of slaughter, and
regaining the house of Bernard Tilly, he mounted his horse, and prepared to
convey to his master the heavy and heartbreaking intelligence with which he
felt his mind oppressed. At the eastern gate, through which it was necessary
that he should attempt his escape, he judged that he should not be able to pass
without some difficulty -- He resolved, however, to depend on the coat he wore,
and the tale he should be able to fabricate, in all probability this would
scarcely have succeeded; but he was not put to the trial -- he found the post
deserted -- the guard had been recently attacked, and the gate forced -- he now
took the road toward the place where he had left Rhinaldo.

CHAP. VI.
RUGIERO rode on, wrapped in mournful meditation, 'till he came to the skirts of
a wood. As he entered the hollow way, which led through this wood, he heard a
noise of the galloping of horses at a distance behind him. He turned round, and
perceived a troop of horsemen* at the distance of about a quarter of a mile,
pressing with all their speed toward him.

As he did not think it prudent to encounter these men, he put his horse
forward, and perceiving a narrow path winding through the thicket on his right
hand, he turned his horse into it, and giving him the spur, and defended his
face as well as he could with his hand, he speedily lost sight of the road. He
pursued the path, which became gradually more open, 'till thinking himself well
concealed from the horsemen, whose approach had alarmed him, he paused. He had
the satisfaction to hear them pass along the read, without attempting to turn
out of it. He then thought of returning the way he came, but perceived the
thicket so deeply entangled, that he was compelled to pursue the path strait
forward.

It extended gradually, as he proceeded, 'till it opened into a green sward,
shaped like a little amphitheatre, and surrounded, on all sides, by the wood.
As he entered this place, he perceived the back of a man, who was gliding
through the trees at the other end of it. He stopped his horse when he
perceived this, and, as he was meditating on the path he should pursue, he was
surrounded by four men, who rushed out of the surrounding thickets so suddenly,
that they had seized upon his bridle and sword before he was aware of their
approach.

They told him he was their prisoner, and, bidding him dismount, tied his hands
behind him, and led him through the thickest of the underwood, -- his horse
being conducted by one of them slowly behind. After a toilsome walk of some
length, their path being interrupted by briars and matted weeds, and the hands
of his conductors employed in removing the branches by which they were
perpetually interrupted. They arrived at the foot of a rock, gradually sloping
from a prodigious height, crowned on the summit with lofty and majestic pines,
and clad to the very foot with brush wood, intermingled with small dwarf trees.

Beneath this rock were some cabbins, freshly constructed with the branches of
trees, and one indeed scarcely yet begun. Several persons were employed in the
labor of rearing them, whose arms lay by them.

Rugiero was conducted to the largest of the huts, which was built so as to
form a kind of vestibule to a cave, which seemed to have been scooped by nature
in the solid rock. From this hut a person advanced to meet him, who seemed, as
he could collect from the behavior of the rest, vested with some authority.

The men who had seized Rugiero informed this person, that being detached for
forage, they had fallen in with the prisoner as he was attempting to discover
their retreat, and, as was beyond all doubt confirmed by his appearance, in
order to betray it to the king.

The person whom they addressed, turning to Rugiero, asked him how he came into
that situation. "But," added he, 'his garb is evidence enough of his intention
-- we must teach him, that despair has rendered all attempts against us
dangerous -- let him be conveyed aside, and well guarded -- we will speedily
determine on his fate. Rugiero begged to be heard; but the person who had given
these orders turning his back upon him, the men who had him in custody were
about to convey him away, when he perceived an officer of a superior presence
approach.

This officer held by the hand a lady, plainly but handsomely dressed. What was
the satisfaction of Rugiero, when he discovered in him the very nobleman under
whose auspices he had conducted the business of the preceding evening.

The nobleman to whom his ca^e was referred, knew him immediately; ordered him
to be unbound, and taking him into the cave, asked him by what singular fortune
he had escaped from the calamities which attended the unfortunate events of the
night.

The apartment in the cave was lofty and spacious. It received a degree of
light, just sufficient to render it habitable, by an oblique perforation in the
roof, which joined to the surface of the rock at some considerable hight above
the entrance. In ^^is apartment, which had in former times been the residence
of a hermit, were three chairs and a table, carved rudely in wood, and
seemingly very old. At the end was a rude altar, formed in the solid rock,
having a crucifix carved with some ingenuity over it; and in the corner of the
cave lay a small bedstead of wood, which was covered with fearn, newly gathered.

Rugiero related to the young nobleman, with horror in his countenance, the
dreadful object which encountered him at lady Isabels' window; and the
circumstances which attended his escape.

"Heaven be praised!" said this nobleman, who was called Count Anselmo; -- "all
then is yet well. This lady," said he, turning toward the lady, whom he held
by the hand, "is indebted to you for her escape last night. You mistook her for
the Lady Isabel, to whom indeed she is nearly related, Upon the ill success of
our last attempt, I had the good fortune to reach the boat in which you left
this lady, and the equally good fortune to fall down the river under the very
walls of the fort which guards the entrance of the city, unperceived. We have
trembled for the fate of the Lady Isabel, wh^ upon the discovery of our plot,
was c^osely confined. But all, I trust, ^s yet well. Rugiero, "continued he"
you must undertake another journey to the city, for your master's service; but,
as the alarm is spread, it will be necessary for you to disguise yourself.
Where, "said he, speaking to one of his attendants, "is the woodman, whose
guests we are?"

A poor fellow was presently called to him, who was employed in finishing one
of the cabins, but who was closely watched, lest he should make his escape.

"You had better," said Anselmo to Rugiero, "change dresses with this fellow.
In his garb, and driving the sorry beast on which he loads his faggots, you may
easily gain admittance into the city."

To this proposal Rugiero immediately consented. He disguised himself like a
peasant, and, loading an ass belonging to the woodman with faggots, he waited
the commands of Anselmo.

"When you have gained the city," said the Count, "repair to -- "here he paused
-- "Has, your lord,' said he, "given you any order to receive money in the
city?"

Rugiero produced the ring he had received from Rhinaldo.

"All is right," continued the Count. "Ask of Pen Naphthali a thousand crowns
in gold; when you have got it, wait patiently 'till the clock strikes nine;
repair then to the colonade in the front of the townhouse, where, during the
day, the merchants assemble. You will there find the person whom you saw on the
high bridge; but be extremely cautious how you act. Your life, and the welfare
of your lord, will perhaps depend on your care. -- Do not, therefore,
whomsoever you may see there, address him; but place yourself with your back
against the fifth pillar of the colonade from the right. If the person, seeing
you in that situation, should ask you the question you formerly asked, " YES or
NO," he is your man. Deliver to him the thousand crowns and attend to the
orders he will give you -- do not, however loiter long in the streets after
this interview, as the city patrole will soon afterward mount guard."

Rugiero, armed with these instructions, soon departed; but fearing,
notwithstanding his disguise, an examination at the city gates, he adopted the
precaution of sewing the ring within the lining of his pack saddle. Nor did
this care prove needless -- at the gates he underwent a strict search; but
having taken great care that nothing about him should convey the slightest
suspicion of his being in any degree superior to the rank of the peasant he
appeared, they suffered him to pass.

As soon as he had conveyed his l^ad of faggots to a wretched inn' to which the
woodmen usually resorted, he prepared himself to execute the orders of Count
Ans^lmo. He procured the money of Ben Naphthali, and repaired, when the clock
struck nine, to the place appointed. He had scarcely placed himself against the
pillar, when the man he had formerly seen walked slowly by him, so close as to
brush him with his cloak. After a short time he returned, and perceiving nobody
near, addressed him in the words he had been taught to expect.

Upon this, Rugiero drew a canvass bag from his breast, in which were contained
the thousand crowns he had received from Naphthali, and gave them to the
stranger, who, putting them under his cloak, told him to be in the same spot
exactly in six hours -- but to take particular care, if possible, to avoid the
patrole.

Rugiero returned to his miserable inn, and throwing himself on a truckle bed,
waited with impations the expiration of the six hours. The clock at length
struck three -- he arose, and hastened toward the place of appointment. He had
not proceeded many paces before, at the corner of a street, he met the patrole.
He started aside, to avoid the sergeant, whose suspicions were so far aroused
by this circumstance, that he immediately sprung forward, and seized him by the
collar. He was soon surrounded, and after a few questions taken into custody,
and marched toward the guard-house.

He had not proceeded far beyond the townhouse, when the guard, in whose
custody he was, were encountered by another party. As soon as these parties
came close to each other, they halted, which they had scarcely done, when a man
springing forward from the midst of the party which had just arrived, seized
Rugiero by the collar, and said to the commander of the detachment he was with,
"This is the traitor -- this is the very man we are in search of -- I charge
you seize him."

The commander, upon these words, advanced toward Rugiero, gave him into the
custody of his own party, after a few words had passed between him and the
sergeant of the other detachment, when the parties separated, each returning
the way they came.

The astonishment of Rugiero kept him perfectly silent under this accusation;
nor was that astonishment lessened, by his perceiving that the person accusing
him was the very man to whom he had so lately delivered the thousand crowns,
and who had promised to meet him.

He was now convinced that he was betrayed, and that his own life, and the
dearest interests of his lord, must fall a sacrifice to his ill fortune. Yet
how it had occurred he could not divine. -- Wrapped in these melancholy
reflections, he walked on 'till they came to the remains of the old palace, a
building which had long been converted into a prison, for which use one would
have thought, from its appearance, it had been originally designed.

In an outward apartment belonging to this place, the guard which had conducted
Rugiero hither halted, and deposited their arms; and this faithful servant was
ordered to follow the commander of the party, who led him into a dark and
intricate passage, while the person who had preferred the accusation against
him kept warily behind him. They passed through many strong doors, of which the
commander possessed the keys. At length they descended by the winding staircase
of a turret, and passing a long and narrow arched vault, lighted by two dim
lamps, began to ascend in the same manner. After ascending for some time, the
guide halted, and, opening a door, introduced Rugiero to a small strong square
room, which seemed to admit the light in the day by one small casement, opened
in a wall of immense thickness. In short, it seemed a place of confinement for
prisoners of a better order, who were not destined to be very rigidly dealt
with.

In this room, at a table, on which burned two tapers, sat a young man, plainly
dressed, who seemed, as it appeared to Rugiero upon entering, in the act of
painting his face by a looking-glass which stood on the table; while another
person, of about his own stature, stood at his elbow, assisting him in the
employment.

Such an employment, in such a situation, could not fail to strike Rugiero. The
young man arose suddenly upon their entrance, and, taking his cloak and hat
from his attendant, seemed to await their orders.

Rugiero had now an opportunity of viewing him. He seemed very young, of an
elegant form, and brown complexion, his hair very much overshadowed his face,
and as well as his eyebrows, was remarkably dark.

Rugiero's guide accosted him respectfully, and, taking off his hat, told him
that the TIME WAS COME. The young man's servant upon this took up a small cloak
bag, which was delivered to Rugiero, and attended his master, who followed the
conductor to the guard room. The escort who had conducted Rugiero to this
place, resumed their arms, and proceeded toward the gate of the city, at which
Rugiero had entered, but halted within about forty paces of it, when the
commander, apologizing for the necessity he was under, ordered the young man
and his servant to be bound together. The same ceremony was performed on
Rugiero and his accuser, who were, to his surprise, bound arm to arm.

When they arrived at the gate, the commander asked for the sergeant of the
guard, and told him he was conducting some prisoners to a castle, which he
named, at no great distance. He then gave him the word of the night. The gate
was opened, the drawbridge let down, and the detachment soon saw themselves
clear of the city.

CHAP. VII.
THE leaders of this little party no sooner found themselves out of sight of
the gates, than they unbound the four prisoners, and striking out of the road,
pursued their march through a hollow way, which in a few hours led them to the
skirts of a forest.

During this march, Rugiero found himself treated with much respect by the
person who commanded the detachment, and the man to whom he had delivered the
thousand crowns. -- The latter apologized to-him for the man^^^ in which he had
been treated; but told him, that when he found him unfortunately in the custody
of the other escort, he perceived there was no other mode of extricating him,
than that of preferring the accusation, upon which he had been delivered up.
Upon the arrival of the detachment at the skirts of this forest, they were met
by a party o^ horse, at the head of which Rugiero saw the Count Anselmo. This
nobleman rode immediately up to the detachment, and dismounting from his horse,
addressed himself most respectfully to the young man who had accompanied them
from the prison, and insisted upon his riding during the rest of the journey.
This offer the young man, who seemed much exhausted with fatigue, accepted,
with many thanks, and was helped by the Count into the saddle. His servant was
likewise accommodated with the charger of one of the troopers, and the party
pursued their march 'till they arrived, by a very narrow path, which would just
admit a single horse, at the spot from which Rugiero had been detached on the
preceding day.

On their arrival, the Count conducted the young man and his attendant into the
cave, and ordered Rugiero to follow.

On his entrance to the cave, he was surprised to see the lady, whom he had
left with the Count, rise from her seat, and embrace the young man with ardour
-- but his surprise was quickly alleviated by the Count, (...) said to him,
"Rugiero, I may (...) congratulate you on your Lord's (...) ^aching happiness.
This" (...) the young man by the hand, (...) Isabel:"

Rugiero dropped on one knee, and the lady stretching out her hand to raise
him, he pressed it respectfully to his lips.

"Where," said she to Rugiero, "is your Lord? How came he absent at a time like
this? Is he safe? Is he well?"

"He is safe, Madam," said Rugiero; "and a few hours will conduct me to him."

"Why is he not here?" said she.

Anselmo, to whom Rugiero had disclosed the cause of Rhinaldo's absence, then
told her that an accident had prevented the Count's attendance, but that she
should see him on the next day.

"My dear Cousin Ellenor," said the Princess, turning to her, and embracing her
with much affection, "I did not think I should ever see you again. Blessed be
heaven for this interview!"

"To what propitious fortune," said the (...) ^^dy, returning her embrace with
equal ardour, (...) indebted for this happiness?"

"I (...), "know myself. (...) my dear Cousin, that, on the day preceding that
evening, when it was agreed that I should attempt my escape from the detested
addresses of the son of the Count St. Amand, I was closely confined to my
chamber. The cause of that confinement was the rumor of a plot to restore my
father to his throne. Of my escape I know little. I was alarmed by the cry of
fire. I heard a confused noise at my door, which was suddenly opened. I was
conveyed, with my faithful Barbara, to a room in the old palace, whither, late
last night, the disguises in which we now appear were conveyed to us. Ah! Count
Anselmo," continued the Princess, "Tell me, I entreat you, my father! is he
safe?"

"He is, Madam," said Anselmo; "it was not thought proper, 'till this effort
was made, to draw him from his retirement. The project of making ourselves
masters of the person of your uncle, and thus securing the capital, was
entrusted but to few. Rhinaldo was among them. You will, I know, pardon him,
that he did not confide to you the whole of our project. Such a confidence he
knew, from the delicacy of your situation, could alone be attended with pain,
anxiety, and eventually, perhaps, with danger to your person. As Rhinaldo could
not appear in the capital with safety, it was resolved that he should not join
us 'till our project was ripe for execution, and that then he should enter the
town privately, and meet one of our party at a place appointed. If any thing
had happened to disconcert our measures, at a word given by the person
appointed to meet him, Rhinaldo was to take horse and fly to bring up some
troops, who are collected on the frontiers; if nothing had happened, he was to
join us. Rugiero attended us in his place, and, receiving the word intended for
his lord, was conducted to us, for we did not then suspect, what we afterward
proved, that our plot had been discovered. As to your own escape, it was
effected by a sergeant of Astolpho's guard, who had formerly served your
father, and was attached to us. He had been informed of your confinement, and
projected, with an officer of our party, the plan for your escape, which was
speedily communicated to me. In the midst of the confusion, which occurred in
the palace, he contrived to set fire to the chamber adjoining to yours, and
prevailing on the guard, which was set over you, to open your doors, he entered
with his own men, and, under pretense of conveying you to your uncle, lodged
you in the old palace. But if you wish to learn the story from his own mouth,
here he is."

At that instant the commander of the party, which had esco^^ed Isabel to this
retirement, entered.

Isabel arose. "At least," said she, "I ought to express my obligations to
him." She now began to thank the sergeant for his conduct -- when he
interrupted her suddenly.

"Lady," said he, "this is no time for compliments. Heaven grant that you may
yet be in safety."

"My Lord," said he to the Count, "your scouts bring us but scurvy
intellig^^ce. Several soldiers have been discovered making through the thickest
of the wood in different parts, and there is reason to think we are discovered."

Alarmed at this intelligence, Anselmo arose, and walked hastily toward the
mouth of the cave. He had scarcely reached it, when a horseman, who had been
out to reconnoitre, brushed suddenly through the winding path in the wood, by
which Anselmo had conducted Isabel to the cave, and riding hastily up to the
Count, told him, that from an eminence he had discerned a large party,
consisting both of infantry and cavalry, marching toward the skirts of the
forest, and that a detachment of light troops were already upon the scout in
the wood.

There was not now much time for debate. It was suddenly resolved that (...),
with a chosen party, mounted on the best horses they had, and carrying with
them the little stock of provisions which they had already been enabled to
procure, consisting chiefly of the flesh of some wild goats, should immediately
retire through the forest, in order either to gain some station where their
friends were assembled, or to fall in with the troops, which they hoped were
already on their march (...) the frontiers; while Rugiero and the sergeant
should from a kind of rear guard with the foot to cover their retreat, and
check the enemy's horse, who could alone hope to overtake them.

This check they had no doubt they could effectually give, favored as they
were by the inaccessible nature of the ground, and their resolve was no sooner
formed than executed. Isabel, her Cousin, and servant, were mounted, and,
escorted by Count Ans^lmo and a chosen party of horse, filed through the narrow
path; Rugiero and the sergeant, with a party of foot, having first
reconnoitered it, and secured the outlet, which opened into a hollow way
leading to the deepest recesses of the forest.

Our fugitives had not long gained this road, when (...) perceived a small
detachment of horse advancing from the opposite part of the road which led
toward the city. Upon their approach, he threw his party into the woods on
each side of the road, who made such use of their ^ire (...) and arrows, that
the horse^^^ finding them effectually secured from their attacks by the
thickness o^ the wood, soon judged it prudent to retreat, and give up any
farther pursuit 'till their infantry should arrive. During this time, Rugiero
and his party gradually retreated after the Count, and had soon the
satisfaction to find themselves wholly unmolesten by their enemis.

They pushed forward with as much speed as they were able to make, 'till the
shades of night, which fell heavilly and deeply over the forest, in some
measure arrested their progress. They were then compelled to proceed at a
slower pace, for which they, however, felt somewhat consoled by the reflection
that their pursuers, if they were yet pursued, were equally impeded by the
cause which obstructed them. The night now grew darker, and, amidst the gloom
which was occasioned by the thick and lofty branches of the trees, they found
it extremely difficult to discern the path before them, in which they were
alone guided by the deep and rugged banks which arose on each side.

The wind now arose, and whistled hollow through the trees -- the gloom seemed
redoubled -- the rain began to rattle amidst the trees -- and the thunder to
roll at a distance -- while the howling of the wolves on every side of them
filled the (...) party with dismay.

They knew the ferocity of these animals, with multitudes of which this forest
abounded; and the darkness of the night rendered them liable to unforeseen
attacks from every side.

While they were in this situation, keeping as close together as possible,
through th^^ dread they entertained by these voracious animals, they perceived
a distant light glimering through a vista in the forest, and determined, after
a short deliberation, to make toward it, and procure, if possible, some
shelter 'till the storm should subside.

It is true, by such a step, they subjecte^ themselves to a discovery, or
rendered th^^ march liable to be traced, if the house from which the light
proceeded should prove the mansion of some person inimical to the cause, but
the fatigue and terrors of the (...) male companions of his flight, and inde^^
their seeming inability to proceed farth^ induced. Anselmo to run all hazards,
and turning toward the place whence the light they had discerned diffused its
beams, they found themselves in a short time close to the walls of a spacious
and stately castle.

It was here resolved that, as their numbers might create suspicion, Rugiero,
who was not so well known as the Count, and consequently was not so liable to
detection, should with the Lady Isabel, her Cousin, and attendants, demand
admittance, and shelter from the storm, while the remainder of the party waited
without, and sought protection from the boisterous inclemency of the night, in
some of the outhouses of the Castle.

This they might easily do without detection, for though this Castle was large
and stately, it was a place of no great strength. The situation did not admit
of its being moated, and its outward defense was a wall of no considerable
hight.

Rugiero then, with Isabel and her fair companions, while the rest of the party
stood aloof shrouded by the darkness of the night, applied for admittance. He
had slung round him a bugle horn, which Anselmo had given him, with orders, in
case he found himself in danger, to sound an alarm. The apparel of Isabel and
her companion was plain and neat, and Ellenor was covered with her veil. After
some time the gate was opened, and Rugiero begged for shelter 'till the storm
should pass over.

He said that his party had been attacked by the wolves, in passing the forest,
and that they had been compelled, in order to save their own lives, to leave
their horses a prey to those ravenous animals. After relating this story, they
were, upon a short deliberation, admitted through the court into a lofty and
spacious hall, hung round with armor.

The whole of the family seemed to have retired to rest, except a few servants,
who were standing round a fire, to which Rugiero and his party advanced, in
order to dry their clothes. After some little time, the servants were summoned
to attend their lord, who was preparing to retire for the night.

Rugiero and the Princess had waited but a few minutes, before they perceived
the door of a room open, and two of the servants, who had just left them,
descend by a few steps into the hall, bearing each a taper in his hand.

They were followed by a gentleman dressed in deep mourning, who advancing
toward Rugiero and his companions, surveyed them with scrutinizing eyes; but
what were the feelings of Isabel, when in this person she discovered the man
with whose abhored addresses she had been so much persecuted -- the Count
Rhodolpho, the son of the Count St. Amand.

Rhodolpho, after he had asked some questions of Rugiero, advanced toward her.
She was sinking with terror -- he looked at her, but, to all appearance, did
not recollect her, for he passed on to her Cousin Isabel, whom he desired to
lift her veil, What were the sensations of Isabel at this request! She knew
that Rhodolpho was perfectly acquainted with her Cousin. -- Ellenor, who
likewise knew him* hesitated and trembled. He intimated his desire with the
tone of a man who would be obeyed.

Isabel, instinctively, caught hold of the horn, which hung by Rugiero's side,
and raised it to her mouth; but before her lips could reach it, overcome by her
sensations, she fainted and fell senseless on the floor.

This circumstance called off the attention of Rhodolpho, who no longer
persisted in his demand, but leaving Isabel, whose accident he imputed to
fatigue, to the care of his servants, retired.

He had scarcely turned his back, when Ellenor, forgetting all precaution at
beholding her Cousin's situation, threw off ^her veil; and flew to the lady
Isabel's assistance.

Of the servants who had attended Rhodolpho into the hall, two had remained
behind. One of them was a shrewd fellow, whose subtilty and address had
recommended him much to the favor of his lord.

The appearance of Isabel and her companion had struck him, as bearing in it
something peculiar. The circumstance of her seizing the bugle, which hung at
Rugiero's side, and attempting to sound it, had not passed unnoticed; and the
beauty of Ellenor so ill according with the situation in which she appeared,
convinced him that some mystery attended the arrival of these people at the
Castle.

Impressed with this idea, while Rugiero, assisted by Ellenor, Barbara, and the
other servant, was occupied in the recovery of Isabel he stole away to his
lord, and communicated to him all he had observed.

Rhodolpho, aroused by this intelligence, quitted his apartment, and returned
to the hall, where he unluckily arrived, unseen by any one, before Ellenor had
replaced her veil.

"Lady Ellenor!" exclaimed Rhodolpho, starting back, He looked alternately at
her and Isabel, who was still sitting in the chair. The efforts used to recover
her had disordered her dress -- some false hair which she wore was displaced --
the water sprinkled in her face had removed some of the paint which she had
used to give a brown and manly hue to her complexion.

Rhodolpho looked steadfastly at her. He clasped his hands together, and raising
them in a transport, exclaimed, "by all that is sacred, this was above my hopes!
The Princess Isabel! At last, Madam, you are mine -- nor is it in the power of
heaven or earth to redeem you."

The arrival of all she had dreaded roused those spirits in the Princess which
her fears had dissipated. She arose, and waving her hand, said to Rhodolpho,
with an air of dignity, -- "My Lord, I will remain no longer here -- let me
pass."

"See that no one escapes," said Rhodolpho to his servants. "Ladies," continued
he, with a sneer, -- "you must be content with my inhospitable roof tonight."

"Not so, my Lord," said Rugiero, firmly. "Since this is the case, we must
trust again to the inclement elements;" and taking Isabel in one hand, and
Ellenor in the other, he conducted them toward the door.

"On your lives, let no one pass," said Rhodolpho to his servants, who advanced
toward the door.

Rugiero now quitting the hands of the ladies, drew his sword, and said, in a
determined tone, "The man who attempts to obstruct our passage, dies."

Isabel, Barbara, and Ellenor, now ran toward the door, while Rugiero, still
facing Rhodolpho and his servants, kept them at bay.

"Ring the alarm bell," cried Rhodolpho; and the servants flew different ways
to arouse the sleepy inhabitants of the Castle.

Rugiero, finding himself free from the unequal attacks of his foes, took
advantage of his breathing time, and, applying his bugle horn to his mouth,
sounded a charge, while the delicate and trembling hands of his companions were
applied, with unskilful haste, to the massy bolts and bars of the door.

The active alarms of the servants soon brought assistance to their lord.

Rugiero found his assailants increase. He had repeatedly sounded his horn,
when, to his extreme joy, he heard his friends on the outside of the door,
which Isabel and her companions had at length contrived to unbar.

Count Anselmo, and his party now rushed in, and giving a sudden check to the
assailants of Rugiero, bore away the Princess, her Cousin and companion. By
this time, however, the hall was full of men, for Rhodolpho had quartered his
company of men at arms (which his father's interest had obtained for him) at
his Castle that night, with intent to join the king on the next day. They
rushed out in pursuit of the fugitives, and as they exceeded Anselmo's little
band considerably in numbers the latter were compelled to seek refuge in the
darkness of the night, and the thickness and obscurity of the tangled forest.
Pressed by a formidable enemy, close at their heels, they knew not which course
to take, but dispersed in different bodies, and sought their safety in flight.

Anselmo, who would not quit his mistress and her lovely Cousin* found himself
in a few minutes unaccompained by any man of his party, except Rugiero. He
sought the place where he had left his horses, and, with the assistance of
Rugiero, having mounted his little female band as well as he could, they took
the first path which led from the Castle, and pressing forward with all the
speed they could make, soon found themselves free from the noise of their
pursuers.

CHAP. VIII.
ANSELMO and his fair companions had traveled for some time, Rugiero purposely
keeping behind, that, if any pursuit should be made after them, he might give
early intelligence of it, -- when the horse on which this brave and faithful
servant was mounted fell suddenly with him.

Rugiero readily extricated himself from him, but notwithstanding every effort
he could make, in vain attempted to raise this worn out animal, whose strength
was wholly exhausted. After endeavoring, without success, to make the Count,
who was at some distance before him, acquainted with this disaster, for the
roaring of the storm completely drowned his exclamations, he resolved to sit
under a tree, close to the spot, where his horse lay, and wait the approach of
day with patience.

In the mean time, Count Anselmo, with the lady Ellenor, the Princess Isabel,
and her companion, proceeded onward, unconscious of the fate of Rugiero. At
last, however, hearing no longer the sound of his horses feet, they stopped to
listen -- but they listened in vain. The howling of the wind was the only noise
which saluted their e^rs. They knew not what to conjecture. Every idea they
could form of the fate of Rugiero seemed pregnant with danger to themselves.
They were at length, after a long period passed in painful and fruitless
expectation, compelled to pursue their journey without him, which they did in a
cheerless and melancholy silence, each of them brooding over ideas which they
were almost afraid to communicate to the others.

They were journeying in this manner, when they came to a more open part of the
forest, a large and dark object before them, which they were soon convinced
was, as indeed it proved, a house. Somewhat revived at this prospect, they
pushed forward, and speedily arrived at an old and ruined mansion.

In this ancient and dismantled dwelling, they perceived no signs of
inhabitants. They judged it on that account a more proper shelter for the
night; and though the Princess and her female companions were not unimpressed
by terrors from the awfulness of the scene, they passed a crazy draw bridge,
and, crossing a courtyard, reached the door of the house, which Anselmo,
dismounting, presently opened.

When he had opened it, he listened, but could hear nothing. He was the more
convinced* by this circumstance, that the house was uninhabited, and prevailed,
after much entreaty, on his timid companions to leave their horses, (which he
fastened together) and enter the mansion with him.

The lightning, which had not as yet ceased to play around them, shooting
through a large gothic window, displayed to them an old unfurnished hall. They
found that the rain beat in near the spot where they stood, and the wind swept
through the various avenues of this uncomfortable asylum. As they were much
incommoded in this situation, Anselmo proposed that they should seek a better
shelter; and after some opposition, his friends clinging close around him,
proceeded across the hall, and descending by a few steps, found himself in a
warmer station. He now began to trace his new apartment by the walls, and soon
perceived, by the style of the furniture, and the extend of the fire place,
that he had reached the kitchen of this mansion.

In pursuing his discovery, he soon found out that this part of the mansion
could not have been long uninhabited, and began to entertain hopes, if he
could, by accident, procure any implement with which he might strike a light,
of rendering their asylum less comfortless for the remainder of the time which
they should be compelled to pass in it.

His search was not unsuccessful, an andit became apparent, to demonstration,
that the house could not have been long ^orsaken. He found the implements he
sought, and discovering some straw and faggots in a recess at no great distance
from the fireplace, kindled a fire, and easily prevailed on his shivering
friends to draw round it.

It was, in their situation, a luxury indeed. They wanted, it is true, to add
to their comfort, the provisions which they had brought from their retreat in
the forest, but in the late attack, which dispersed their party, they were
separated from the horses which had been laden with them. They huddled round
the fire, and dried their clothes. They discoursed with somewhat more
cheerfulness than their conversation had of late displayed, and congratulated
each other on their escape from the hands of Rhodolpho; 'till, exhausted with
fatigue, fleep overtook them, and they sat slumbering over the dying embers,
'till they were rouzed by a noise which harrowed up the hearts of the females
with terror, and appalled even the firm and manly breast of Anselmo.

A slow and solemn step, attended by the clashing of chains, seemed to gain
upon their ears from a long passage opposite to that by which the had entered
the kitchen.

Anselmo (for the lady Isabel and her companions, breathless and overcome with
terror shrunk behind their protector, and did not dare to cast their eyes
toward the place whence the noise which alarmed them proceeded) beheld a light
gleam at a distance on the walls of the passage, and soon after discerned the
form of a man advancing slowly along it.

A deadly paleness overspread the countenance -- the eyes were hollow, and sunk
-- the hair was clotted with blood -- with which his garments were also
stained, and the light which Anselmo had descried, proceeded from a taper which
he hold in his hand.

Anselmo's blood froze in his veins at this spectacle. In spite of all his
fortitude his knees trembled, and a cold sweat bedewed his brow; nor could he
arouse in his mind resolution enough to address the spectre before him, 'till
he was awakened from this trance of terror by a singular phenomenon.

The form which has been described continued to advance, 'till it approached so
near to Anselmo, that the light of the taper gleamed upon him; upon which he
started suddenly, and prepared hastily to retreat.

Anselmo, roused by this circumstance, advanced to follow it; but the Princess
Isabel and her Cousin shrieked aloud, and clung to him under the impulse of the
most agonizing terror.

At their shrieks the phantom again turned toward them.

"Whatever thou art," cried Anselmo, "I conjure thee stay and relieve me from
this horror."

"Anselmo!" exclaimed the spectre, in a hollow voice, but in a tone of
perplexity and wonder.

The voice, hollow as it was, sounded like that of Rhinaldo. It recalled the
wandering senses of Isabel. She looked in the face of the speaker, pale and
disfigured as it was -- it was the countenance of Rhinaldo too.

Isabel shrieked and fainted.

"Help, help my Cousin Isabel!" exclaimed Ellenor.

Rhinaldo, (for he was the spectre,) rushed forward to her assistance, while
Anselmo remained motionless with wonder.

It was long before the beauteous Isabel could recover her scattered senses,
and longer before she could be persuaded that her Rhinaldo stood before her,
impressed as she was with the idea that it was the spirit of her departed lover
which she had seen.

Her doubts, however, at length subsided, and pity, at the ghastly appearance
of Rhinaldo, took place. She asked him, with a mixture of affection,
compassion, and horror, the cause of his present appearance; and Rhinaldo,
postponing the gratification of his own curiosity, acquainted her with his
arrival at the forlorn mansion in which she saw him -- the death of the Count
de St. Amand -- and the discovery of Count Tancred; after which he proceeded as
follows:

Rugiero had not long left us when we discovered that the escape of that
servant whom he had, without success, attempted to detain, was as fatal a
circumstance as his affectionate fears forboded that it would be. -- This
fellow went immediately to a Castle of his lords, which is at no great distance
from this, and alarmed the family with the story of his death. Before we could
settle any plan of escape, for which my wound, though it was but slight, in
some degree still disqualified me, the house was assailed by the domestics of
the Count. We barricaded it as well as we could, and prevailed on the servants
who remained with us to assist us in our attempt to carry off the lady. We were
preparing to depart when a posten door was forced, and our enemies rushed in
upon us. Count Tancred and I drew our swords, in defense of the lady. I know no
more -- I was cut down -- nor did I recover my senses, 'till I found myself
loaded with the chains I now wear, and surrounded by a party of ruffians whom I
had never before beheld. I was conducted into the presence of Rhodolpho, who
stood in the midst of a circle of armed men. When he perceived who his prisoner
was, the hatred he had always borne toward me broke out in the bitterest
invectives, and he ordered me to be conveyed to the dungeon from which I had
rescued the Count Tancred. -- There my conductors left me. I heard the last
door of my prison close -- in vain did I wait to hear it open again -- hour
after hour passed away -- and the horrid silence of the dungeon continued
uninterrupted. My remorseless foes had doomed me to all the horrors of death by
famine. I soon enperienced many of its pangs. I awaked from my swoon to an
intolerable thirst. Chained as I was, they had not taken the precaution to fix
me to a particular spot, presuming, as I suppose, that I was well enough
secured. I roved round my dungeon, raging under the agony of the thirst which
consumed me, when I felt my foot touch something. Judge what was my transport,
when I perceived this to be part of an earthen pitcher of water, which had been
left there when Count Tancred was removed. But I will not dwell on
circumstances which must afflict you. My wounds, though they had bled much, did
not prove of much consequence. The horrors of my situation gave me strength and
courage. I surveyed my dungeon, and by a feeble ray of light which entered at a
narrow slip toward the roof, I descried a part of the wall bricked in the form
of an arch. It immediately occurred to me that this had formerly been a door
way, and that it might not be of the same substance as the rest of the wall. I
sought again round my cavern for something with which I might remove a brick,
and at least attempt to discover its thickness. -- In searching near the stone
to which my friend Tancred had been fastened, I most providentially discovered
a dagger which I had used in attempting to free him from his chains, and had
afterward thrown carelessly by. With this I went to work. -- The first brick I
found much difficulty in removing -- when that was done, my labor grew lighter
in proportion; but many weary hours passed, before I had made an aperture big
enough to admit my body. This, however, I at length accomplished, and found
myself in a dungeon more horrid than that which I had quitted. It was lower
than the other, and nothing more dismal, damp, and faetid, can be imagined. A
few worn steps, just under the breach I had made, convinced me that that part
of the wall had, as I had conjectured, been formerly a door-way -- but I was
soon too dreadfully convinced of it, by an object which, when I adverted to my
own situation, curdled my blood with horror. By the saint light which gleamed
through the aperture I had made, I discoverd a rusty iron collar, chained to
the wall -- a hoop of iron, large enough to enclose the waist of a man, hung
below it, close to the ground -- and beneath it, amid a few rusted chains, and
the tattered remnants of cloth which had escaped putrefaction, lay in a heap
the skeleton of the wretch who had thus shrunk from his fetters. The horrors
with which I was struck at this spectacle, did not, however, prevent my
exploring my new place of confinement. I could find no door. Alas! upon this
unhappy victim, the only door to the dungeon had, probably, been walled up, as
it was thought, for ever! In passing round this dungeon, I perceived the wind
blew upon me from one corner, and, feeling the place, found that the walls were
parted, either rifted by the bolt of heaven, or severed by the slow but sure
hand of time. At this spot, then, I renewed my labor. I will not trouble you
with a detail of it. After infinite toil, for, though more decayed, the wall at
this place was much thicker, than the former, I found my way, not many hours
ago, into a narrow winding passage, through which I ascended into the house. -- I
proceeded, you may immagine, with extreme caution; nor did I discover all the
horrors of my former situation, 'till I found that the whole of the premises
were deserted, and I was left to undergo the fate of the miserable victim,
whose remains I had so lately beheld. I just now discovered the remains of some
salted provisions, of which I have had the prudence to eat but sparingly, and
which perhaps, may not be unwelcome to you. What is become of my friend Count
Tancred and the lady, I cannot conjecture. She is, I suppose, carried off, and
when I reflect on my own situation, I can scarcely entertain a hope that he is
yet alive.

CHAP. IX.
WHEN Rhinaldo had finished his story, Anselmo related to him the distresses
which had driven them to take shelter in a place which seemed so little
calculated to produce so fortunate a meeting, Rhinaldo brought forth the little
store of provisions which he had discovered. The fire was refreshed. Rhinaldo
and Isabel blessed that providence which had thus, when least expected, permitted
them once more to behold each other, and to pour forth the delicate and chaste
effusions of the sublimest of all passions, unchecked by harsh control of
pride, or the baneful mandates of a rigourous and unfeeling state policy.

Anselmo and his Ellenor were too much occupied with each other to interrupt
them, nor would they, in spite of the remonstrances of Barbara, who had alone
the discretion to reflect that their present situation was not wholly free from
danger, have suffered a thought to intrude on the bliss of the moment, had not
the step of some persons in the hall roused them from this state of oblivious
happiness.

Anselmo, starting up, drew his sword, and Rhinaldo, whom his own exertions and
those of his friends, though they could wholly liberate, had freed from so much
of chains, that they were no longer an encumbrance, seized the first weapon he
could meet with, and they both moved toward the passage which led to the hall.

They perceived two men advancing toward them, one of whom bore a torch in his
hand.

"Let us search," said he, who bore the torch, "through every corner of this
seat of horrors. If he is alive I will find him."

Rhinaldo knew the voice of Tancred. "Count Tancred! and living!' cried
Rhinaldo; "through what miracle is it that I am again permitted to embrace my
friend?"

"Rhinaldo! exclaimed Tancred. "Then the object of my search is attained --
blessed be heaven for the safety of my deliverer!"

"But how could you escape," resumed Rhinaldo, "the danger in which we were
both involved?"

"Alas!" said Tancred, "I am indebted for my unhappy life to the loveliest --
the best of women! -- but no more of that -- the thought is too much -- Oh! let
me but live to return the boon she gave! -- to die for her! -- but I rave -- To
make short of my story -- "When I last saw you, we were occupied in the defense
of the Countess. While we were engaged with a party, too numerous for any but
desperate men to contend with, another band seized the Countess, and bore her
away. I left your side, my friend, and rushed to her assistance. I was struck
down by a partizan -- another arm was lifted for my destruction -- the Countess
caught hold of it -- she put her purse into the hand of the soldier, and begged
he would make his mistress his debtor, by saving my life. She promised the
highest rewards. Interest, or, as I have reason to believe from his late
conduct humanity, determined this brave fellow. On the instant he bestrode me,
fallen as I was, his comrades were quickly occupied in conveying away the
Countess; and when he found himself free from observation, he raised me from
the ground, and carried me to a private part of the Castle, whither, after the
departure of Rhodolpho, he returned with his father, a woodman, of this forest,
and conveyed me to his cottage. I had there so little recovered the effect of
the blow I had received, that I scarcely knew what they did; but was soon
re-established by the care that was taken of me. Behold my deliverer -- he has
resolved to share my fortune -- "

As Count Tancred was proceeding, Rhinaldo was alarmed by the trampling of
horses. They paused and listened -- the noise increased -- the voices of men
were distinctly heard.

"We are surrounded," cried Anselmo. "Rhodolpho's party have traced us."

"There is then but one step to take," said Rhinaldo. "Follow me."

Isabel and her companions seemed now inured to terror. They suffered
themselves to be led in silence. Rhinaldo conducted them up a back staircase,
toward the room in which the Countess had been confined. They arrived at the
little lumber room, which contained the battered armor. From this place
Rhinaldo took the precaution to arm himself. He took down some of the swords,
but they were wholly unserviceable. At last he chose a strong and heavy pole
axe, and shoving back the panel, discovered to his friends the iron door. This
door he opened, and bidding the forlorn party, which he conducted, enter the
apartment, he replaced the panel as carefully as possible, and joined his
friends below.

They were convinced that the noise they had heard proceeded from some persons
who had pursued them from the Castle of Rhodolpho, and who, probably,
suspecting that if they should by chance have taken that road, they would
retire to the old mansion for shelter, or, perhaps, attracted by the light of
the fire they had kindled, or of the taper which Rhinaldo had procured, were
induced to search for them there.

They formed many conjectures as to the number of their enemies; at the
supposed magnitude of which they were not so much alarmed, as at the idea that
Rhodolpho might be among them, who had, most probably, been acquainted by his
father with the secret of the panel -- a secret, as yet, perhaps, undivulged
to any other person.

Their fears, however, as to the presence of Rhodolpho, proved on this occasion
unfounded. He was on the succeeding day to join Astolpho with his company of
men at arms, and had only detached on this pursuit a pretty numerous train of
domestics, well armed and headed by two of his most trusty adherents.

While they stood wrapped in these conjectures, and in a mournful silence the
result of them, they were aroused by the sound of many steps ascending the
stairs, which led to the little lumber room. They listened in a state of
breathless expectation and terror. -- They had not yet closed to the iron door;
nor indeed could its strength avail them, as all the fastnings were on the
outer side.

They heard a person walk slowly round the lumber room. What were their
sensations when he exclaimed, "We can go no farther this way -- let us return."

This was assented to by a companion who was with him, and they heard, with a
rapture scarcely to be described, their returning footsteps on the staircase
which they had just ascended.

Rhinaldo and his companions continued in their place of concealment for half
an hour, before they judged it prudent to make any attempt toward discovering
whether their pursuers had retired; for, in their secluded situation, they
could hear nothing.

Rhinaldo then slowly began to open the panel, when an object presented
itself, which induced him to close it again with a haste which struck a sudden
terror to the hearts of his companions.

This object was the face of a man. This person, who bore a light in his hand,
was ascending the staircase when Rhinaldo perceived him, who encouraged a faint
hope, that, from the distance he was at, the taper he bore could not cast any
strong reflection on the walls of the room.

This hope, however, soon died away. They heard a clattering noise against the
panel itself, and immediately prepared themselves to receive this intruder in
such a manner as to prevent, if possible, any discovery through his means.

In a short (...) afterward the noise ceased, and they heard the footsteps of
this person descending the staircase, as they immediately conjectured, to
procure assistance. They now gave themselves up for lost, and an hour passed
before Rhinaldo dared again attempt to open the panel. He proceeded
cautiously; but his effort was accompanied by a noise he could not account for;
and a heavy object fell inwards against his legs. This he soon discovered to be
a cuirass, which indeed the person who had caused them so much alarm had placed
there.

This person had returned to this ancient armoury, to try if he could
accommodate himself with some pieces of more value than his own -- but probably
retired disappointed in his aim.

Rhinaldo now recovered from this new alarm, and proceeded cautiously toward
the head of the great staircase. When he arrived there, he heard the murmer of
voices at the door of the hall, and found that their pursuers, tired of their
vain search, were about to mount their horses and retire. He waited 'till he
heard them pass over the drawbridge, and then returning to his friends,
acquainted them with this event.

Upon intelligence so welcome, they quitted their place of concealment, and
after waiting 'till they judged that their pursuers had proceeded far enough ^o
insure them from the danger of a discovery, they sallied from these crazy
walls, and left this forlornmansion for ever!

They had no sooner gained the forest, than Isabel, throwing her arms round her
Cousin, and faithful attendant, mingled her tears with theirs; and Rhinaldo and
Anselmo, pressing Isabel and Ellenor gently to their breasts, joined with them
in pouring forth their thanks to heaven for their signal deliverance; while
Count Tancred contemplated, in deep and silent sorrow, the mysterious fate
which involved that adored object, for whom alone he thought the life he had so
lately retrieved worth preserving.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
COUNT RODERIC's CASTLE: OR, GOTHIC TIMES, A TALE. IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

In winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire,
With good old Folks, and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betide.
SHACK. RICH. II. BALTIMORE: PRINTED BY SAMUEL SOWER. FOR KEATINGE'S
BOOK-STORE. MDCCXCV.

COUNT RODERIC's CASTLE.
CHAP. X.
THOUGH Rhinaldo, the Lady Isabel, and their friends, were delivered from their
late peril, it was still a matter of serious deliberation in what manner they
should now proceed. To remain where they were 'till the day should dawn, would
render them liable to all the dangers that might result from a discovery. It
was resolved, therefore, dark as the night was, to proceed, and they traveled
onward, 'till the day broke upon them, in a small opening of the forest.

A stream, which broke from the summit of a lofty cliff* that bounded them on
one side, and ran murmuring along the foot of it, tempted them to halt here for
a short time, and take that repose, of which they were so much in need. After
drinking of this stream, and resting themselves, they pursued their journey.

Though the dread of being overtaken had supported them through more than common
exertions, yet nature began, at length, to be exhausted -- and Isabel,
dissolving into tears, declared that she must die where she was, for she could
proceed no farther; saying this, she sunk into Rhinaldo's arms, who laid her
gently on the turf, and, supporting her head on his breast, (...) over her in
all the agony of the most piercing despair.

Anselmo, Ellenor, and Barbara, (the two latter of whom felt a degree of
faintness and lassitude almost equal to that of the fainting Isabel,) knew not
what to do. At length Anselmo perceiving that the cliff, from which the stream
took its course, still appeared through the tops of the trees on his right
hand, proposed to Count Tancred, if possible, to climb it, that from its summit
they might explore the country around, under the precarious hope that some
relief might possibly be at hand. Impressed with this idea, they made their way
toward it, and had scarcely gained the margin of the rivulet, when, to their
infinite surprise and joy, they saw the eminence terminate at some distance
from them, by an easy descent, interspersed with clumps of trees, leaving the
rivulet to wind through a beautiful valley, which divided the forest as far as
the eye could reach.

At the bottom of this descent, and close on the banks of the rivulet, they
discovered a cottage* and hastened toward it, to endeavor to procure relief.

They had scarcely gained the wooden bridge, by which it communicated with the
valley, when a man advanced from the cottage door to meet them. What was the
surprise of Anselmo, when he perceived this man to be Rugiero.

After expressing his astonishment at a meeting so unexpected, he communicated
to Rugiero the situation in which he had left his companions, and they returned
to the spot where Isabel had sunk under her fatigue. They found her still
supported by Rhinaldo, and her Cousin and attendant sitting by her, in a dreary
silence. Intelligence of the unexpected relief which was at hand gave some
animation to their drooping spirits.

Isabel arose, with the assistance of Rhinaldo, and leaning on his arm, and
upheld by Count Tancred on the other side, she followed Anselmo, who supported
the feeble steps of his weary Ellenor, while Rugiero served them as a guide,
and Barbara leaning on the attendant of Count Tancred, followed her lady.

The owner of the dwelling received them with an honest though rustic
hospitality. He desired his wife, who was nothing backward in her civilities,
to attend to the lady, for as yet he discovered but one, while he prepared a
homely meal for the rest, whom he perceived to stand in great need of
refreshment.

Isabel and Ellenor were conducted by the old woman, after she had been
informed of the secret of their sex, to a comfortable bed, on which they threw
themselves without undressing; and Barbara, at their desire, placing herself by
their side, they soon fell into a ^ound and refreshing sleep.

During this period, Rugiero visited Rhinaldo's wounds. They had been
originally flight, and a good constitution had already so far contributed to
their cure, that this skilful domestic found his labors limited to the freeing
his master from the traces of the blood which had originally issued from them.
Having therefore dressed him as well as the bareness of his toilet would
permit, and persuaded him to take, in an easy chair, that repose of which he
stood so much in need, he related to Count Anselmo those circumstances, which
had happened to him since they had lost him in the forest. He told him of the
accident which had happened to his horse, which he had reason to believe never
rose from the spot where he fell.

"I waited," continued Rugiero, "under the tree, to which I had crept for
shelter, till the storm had in some measure abated, when I returned to try if I
could raise my horse. After several efforts I found it impracticable, and was
finally obliged to give over the attempt, on hearing the trampling of a body of
horsemen on the road. As it appeared to me probable that these were of Count
Rhodolpho's party, I turned immediately out of the path, and making across the
forest, which at that place is tolerably open, I had the good luck, before I
had proceeded far, to arrive at the banks of this rivulet, and, finding no
bridge across it, pursued my path along its margin, 'till I discovered this
cottage.

"The old pair, who inhabit it, are vassals to Count Rhodolpho, but having
hoarded some money in the service of the father of the late Count de St. Amand,
are in easy circumstances. -- This I learned from themselves on my arrival.
They appear to be honest people, yet I cannot conceal from your lordship my
apprehensions that we are by no means in safety her^. It cannot be far from the
road which I quitted, when I heard the trampling of horses, and by which you
found your way from one Castle to the other. If Count Rodolpho should disperse
his party through the forest in search of us, some of them will, in all
probability, find their way to this cottage."

After a few hours passed in sleep, the Lady Isabel arose, much refreshed, and
awakening her Cousin and attendant; they joined Rhinaldo and his friends.

A consultation again took place. -- Anselmo communicated to his friends the
fears of Rugiero, and it was agreed, after some deliberation, that they should
seek the Castle of Count Roderic, Rhinaldo's father, where they deemed
themselves sure of protection.

Though they were not acquainted with the direct road to it, they knew in what
part of the country it lay; and Rugiero hesitated not to declare, that he
thought he could undertake to conduct them toward it. Having then gratified
their kind hosts, and provided themselves with some refreshments for their
journey they departed, and crossing into a thicker part of the forest, to avoid
being discovered, they turned their steps toward that part of the country in
which Rugiero conjectured the Count Roderic's Castle lay.

After a march of some hours, they stopped to refresh themselves, and setting
forward again pursued their journey 'till the shades of evening began again to
overtake them.

Though they had traveled far, there was yet no appearance of the Castle; and
from the answers of Rugiero, to the incessant questions which the fears of Lady
Isabel suggested, it was perceived that he was at least more diffident of his
knowledge then he had been in the morning.

This discovery had an affect on the spirits of the whole party. The necessity
of subjecting their fair companions, for another night, to the inclemency of
the skies, gave a double portion of anguish to the breasts of Anselmo, and
Rhinaldo, and they moved onward in a mournful silence, which every one seemed
too much occupied by his own thoughts to interrupt.

As they were thus slowly traveling onward they arrived at a rising ground, on
which was erected a stone cross. -- This mark Rugiero no sooner perceived, than
he suddenly exclaimed that he knew the spot.

"To the right," said he, "is an hermitage belonging to the Convent of St.
Julian; and to the left, within the distance of half a mile, the road, which
leads to Count Roderic's Castle, which cannot be more than six miles from us."

Anselmo proposed that they should turn toward the hermitage, where the Lady
Isabel and her Cousin, who seemed worn out with fatigue, might rest 'till the
morning; but these ladies appeared to have collected fresh spirits from the
information of Rugiero, and anxious to arrive at a place of safety, declared
that they were very well enabled to reach the Castle, urging Rhinaldo to
proceed with so much eagerness, that the plan was, as it turned out, most
unluckily adopted.

They soon reached the road, but had not traveled far along it, when, as they
turned the corner of a wood, which projected toward the road, they were
overtaken by a troop of cavalry, who had no sooner discovered, than they
gallopped immediately toward them.

At the head of this troop they quickly discovered Rhodolpho, who immediately
ordered them to be surrounded and disarmed.

The horsemen, who consisted of Rhodolpho's company of men at arms, attended by
their valets, immediately pressed upon them.

Rhinaldo, prepared to defend the Princess and her Cousin to the last
extremity, drew up his little band, with their backs to the wood, and seeing
Rhodolpho press onwards with the rest, sprung forward, and aimed a blow at him
with his pole-axe, which, as he stooped to avoid it, alighted on his shoulder,
and brought him to the ground.

It pierced his corslet, and* had he not been completely armed, as were all
(...) ^roop, would though it had not proved (...) ^ave probably disabled him
for ever.

This accident occupied part of his troop, who surrounded him. As soon as he
recovered himself, he gave orders that the women, whose habits he discribed,
should be seized, while the men were engaged, and carried off.

This command was speedily executed by the valets, who, being unarmed, could
the more readily dismount. -- While Rhinaldo and his friends were pressed by
the horsemen, these fellows seized on the Princess and her companions, and in
spite of their efforts, their tears and supplications, bore them away.

This was not done without opposition from their little party, who, upon
hearing the shrieks of the women, made a daring effort to join them; but
pressed on all sides by the horsemen, another body of whom formed up to cover
the retreat of those who bore off the Princess, they were finally compelled to
retire, and seek shelter in the wood, which they did without difficulty, for
the horsemen, who were completely and heavily armed, having no room to charge
them, found themselves rather incumbered than assisted by their lances, and
they could not dismount to assail them in the wood; (...) therefore, when they
found their enemi^^ (...) from any farther attack, and the prize they had
contended for attained, retired after their companions.

It would be difficult to paint the despair which seized on Rhinaldo and
Anselmo at this fatal event. A thousand schemes, suggested by grief and
indignation, presented themselves to them. They purposed following the
ravishers, many and formidable as they were; but they could never hope to
overtake them.

It was at last resolved that they should pursue their way to the Castle, when
their attention was called toward Count Tancred, who was sitting at the foot
of a tree. He had received a wound, from the thrust of a lance, in his arm and
it bled so profusely, that there was little hope of his being able to walk so
far as to the Castle that evening; and Rugiero, who bound up his wound,
proposed that they should seek shelter for the night, at the hermitage he had
mentioned, which was not a great distance, and proceed in the morning toward
the Castle. This advice was in their present situation, too salutary to be
neglected, and they returned to the stone cross, which they had so lately left,
whence Rugiero conducted them to the hermitage.

CHAP. XI.
THE venerable inhabitant of the place had not yet lighted his lamp, but sat at
the door of his cavern, wrapped in meditation. He advanced to meet them with a
benevolent smile, and offered them the shelter of his lowly roof, in terms
which a long acquaintance with the more polished society among mankind could
alone communicate; and he no sooner perceived the situation of Count Tancred,
than he produced some medicinal stores, for which he was much famed among the
neighboring poor, and inspecting the wound, applied to it a dressing, from the
experienced virtues of which he promised himself a speedy success. He then
"spread his vegetable store" before his guests; nor was this all -- the
gratitude of his rustic neighbors had supplied him with more substantial food,
of which he sometimes, though sparingly, partook.

He could not but perceive the gloom and despodency which hung over some of his
guests and which all their efforts to gratify him by a cheerful acceptance of
his favors, could not dispel; but his skill in mankind had taught ^im, that
were grief admits of alleviation, by being participated, it will obtrude
itself; and that were it seeks concealment, it is generally too poignant to be
relieved by communication.

Rhinaldo, however, who knew not of any motive he had to conceal himself, so
near to his father's Castle, and who, had any such motive occurred, would have
disdained a concealment with any one who belonged to the convent of St. Julian,
made himself readily known to the hermit, and introduced his friends Anselmo
and Tancred.

The venerable hermit received this communication with politeness, but a
visible reserve hung over him during the rest of the repast, which Rugiero, the
most unconcerned of the guests, except Count Tancred's deliverer, was the first
to notice.

It perplexed this faithful servant, and he watched an opportunity to
communicate hi^ observation to his master. -- This, however, he waited in vain
to obtain.

The hermit, as soon as their frugal repast was finished, begged that Rhinaldo
would indulge him, by accompanying him round his little domains, which it had
been for many years hi^ daily task to beautify; and his other guests perceiving
that they were not included in thi^ invitation, suffered Rhinaldo, who readily
accepted of this offer, to accompany him alon^^

The moon had now arisen, and, after some general observations on the beauty of
the place, which, at such a season, would have had a thousand charms for any
bosom less torn with conflicting passions than that of Rhinaldo, the hermit
addressed him as follows:

"Count Rhinaldo, I am doomed to communicate to you intelligence, of which I
find by your conversation you are yet ignorant, and which must severely afflict
you."

"Proceed," said Rhinaldo, firmly -- "after what I have suffered today, all
other sorrows must be light."

"Count Roderic's Castle," continued the hermit, "is in the hands of the king."

"Has my father then," said Rhinaldo, in a tone of grief, "sided with the
usurper? Alas! why was not I permitted to communicate to him that secret, the
concealment of which has produced so much mischief; for had he known that his
lawful sovereign -- "

"Alas!" said the hermit, "your father is himself a prisoner, if -- if -- he
lives."

"If he lives*" said Rhinaldo, starting back, and a visible paleness overspread
his countenance.

The king," said the hermit, "surprised him -- no sooner had the plot, in which
you embarked, failed* than Astolpho set out hastily for the frontiers. He
arrived here before any intelligence could be received, and desired admission
to the Castle, as your father's guest, for a few days. Your father, unconscious
that he could have any fresh cause of displeasure, and indeed unable, on so
sudden an occasion, to prevent his admission, was compelled to receive him; and
he was very speedily followed by a force which would have proved formidable,
had his intention been divulged. Thus has he contrived to sit down before his
enemies, occupying a very formidable post. Our friends, however, yet possess
the mount of St. Julian, where they are very strong."

"And has no intelligence of the fate of my father yet reached you?"

"None, but the melancholy and uncertain rumor which I have already disclosed
to you."

Rhinaldo seemed wrapped, for a moment, in gloomy reflections. He started, after
a pause, from his reverie. -- "And father Anthony?" said Rhinaldo, in a
hesitating voice.

"My son, I commend thy caution," said the hermit; "but father Anthony is now
acknowledged for that which he is. Yes," continued the venerable anchorite, his
eyes gleaming with the fire of youth as he spoke, "our lawful lord and
sovereign, Emanuel, commands the forces on Mount St. Julian, and may success
attend his arms! His situation indeed, at present, is not without danger; but
if the diversion on the western frontiers, which is already formidable, should
draw off any strong detachment of Astolpho's forces, what may we not expect?"

"Thou speak with a sire that would ^^ame the tardiness of younger men,
father," said Rhinaldo.

"Would I could join my brethren of the Mount in arms!" replied the hermit.
"But even here I may not prove wholly useless."

Rhinaldo now returned to join his friends, and the hermit spread before them
some mats, the work of his own hands, composed of grass and rushes; but the
softest down could not have allured Rhinaldo to slumber. He revolved in his
mind the situation of his father; and the loss of Isabel, which had so deeply
afflicted him, seemed to lose some of the bitterness with which it had
overwhelmed him.

He judged that his own conduct, which he now censured as hasty and rash, had
involved that honored parent in disgrace and ruin -- perhaps had given him up
a prey to the knife of the secret assassin. He could not for a moment endure
the pang of a thought so pregnant with horror. He resolved at all events to
proceed to the Castle, and learn the fate of his father, that, if he still
lived, he might learn his destiny, and participate his misfortunes; and, if
dead, might revenge his death, or devote himself a sacrifice to the fatal
consequences of his rash and mysterious enterprise.

Anselmo, whose loss would not permit him to enjoy a large portion of repose
than fell to the lot of Rhinaldo, left his couch with the first dawn of day,
and perceived his friend already risen, and tracing, with pensive step, the
beautiful, yet gloomy recesses, with which the neighborhood of the hermitage
abounded.

Here Rhinaldo related to him the intelligence which he had received from the
hermit, and concluded with his fixed determination to disguise himself, and at
all events, if possible, gain access to the Castle.

The venerable father now joined them, and having in vain endeavored to point
out to Rhinaldo the rashness of his undertaking, was compelled to acquiesce in
his determination, and offered to assist in preparing him for the perpetration
of his design.

Anselmo, when he heard that the rallying point of the party which had been so
unsuccessful in the enterprise, of which he had been the leader, was so near
the spot where he now was, resolved to join the faithful adherents of Emanuel
at the convent of St. Julian; and received intelligence from the hermit of a
pass by which he might gain the out-posts, avoiding at the same time the troops
of Astolpho, and a secret word, which would procure him ready admission to
their leaders.

Rhinaldo, in pursuance of his design, cut his hair close to his head; and
having otherwise, by the assistance and advice of his friends, so disguised his
person, that there was little dread of his being discovered, changed his dress
for that of the man who had attended Count Tancred, and, having taken a
friendly leave of that nobleman, whose wound became so much inflamed, as to
threaten him with some confinement in the hermitage, he departed, accompanied
by Count Anselmo and his faithful Rugiero.

When they had proceeded about three miles on their journey, Count Anselmo,
accompanied by Rugiero, whom his lord, in spite of all his entreaties, refused
to admit to a share in the adventure he was about to undertake, lest his
presence should lead to a discovery, quitted Rhinaldo to pursue the road which
the hermit had pointed out to him.

Deep in meditation on his intended scheme, and revolving in his mind plan
after plan, now adopting and now rejecting them, as they offered themselves for
his consideration, Rhinaldo came within sight of his father's Castle, before
any settled system of operation had suggested itself to him.

While he was thus musing, his eyes fixed with a mournful gaze on the
well-known turrets, which recalled to his memory many of the cheerful and
innocent hours of childhood, he came suddenly upon a guard of Astolpho's
soldiers, who were posted on one of the avenues to the Castle.

The sentinel who was on duty asked him who he was? and where he was going? As
he was hesitating what answer he should give, he perceived the corporal, who
was commanding officer of this party, miserably thrumming upon a harp.

He answered, "that he was a poor harper, who had been robbed in the forest of
that which was the only means of his subsistence -- his harp."

This was a lure, from which he hoped to derive some advantage, for he was well
skilled in this instrumen^, which had formed great part of his amusement during
his youthful days. Nor was he deceived in his expectations. The corporal arose
upon hearing this, and, giving him the instrument, desired him to play. He had
no sooner touched it, than the whole guard forgot their duty. They received him
as if he had been an old acquaintance, and the corporal placing him on the seat
which he had just occupied, they sat in a circle round him, listening to the
strains which flowed from his instrument in silent rapture.

To this officer he particular attached himself, and so won upon him, by
imparting to him a few instructions concerning the instrument he so much
admired, that when he was relieved, he swore he would not part with so valuable
a friend, but conducted him to the guardhouse of the Castle.

He was soon familiarized among the soldiers, and frequently urged to enlist
among them, but telling his friend, the corporal, frankly, that he did not like
the situation, and wished to be placed in service, that officer soon introduced
him to one of the servants of the house, who was like himself fond of music;
and by the good offices of this patron, Rhinaldo became soon enrolled among the
liveried attendants on Astolpho.

CHAP. XII.
THUS introduced to his paternal mansion, he mingled unnoticed with the servile
herd, among whom he was enrolled, and traced, in this obscure situation, those
stately apartments, which had rung with gratulatory acclamations at his birth,
and where his youth had been fostered with the most anxious care.

The splendid armor which adorned the hall, had proved the hardy deeds of a
long line of warlike ancestors; and the banners which waved over them, were
badges of their illustrious descent.

On the morning succeeding the day of his admission to the Castle, as he was
employed, with others, in preparing a repast, Astolpho, attended by the chief
officers who had accompanied him on this expedition, entered the hall. He was
leaning on one of his train in close and familiar converse. How was the
indignation of Rhinaldo aroused, when he found his favorite to be his cruel
enemy Rhodolpho!

A thousand ideas obtruded themselves at once on his mind* Conflicting passions
assailed his bosom, over which rage and revenge predominated, and he was on the
point of rushing, unarmed and helpless as he was, upon his rancarous enemy, and
attempting to sacrifice him, ^ven at the side of Astolpho, a victim to his own
wrongs, and the tears of his adored Isabel. But the idea of this lovely maiden
presented itself to his imagination, at a fortunate period, to check the wild
frenzy which had seized him.

Rhodolpho was in the Castle. Was it not probable that Isabel was there too?
The hope, faint as it at first appeared, that she might, even now, be under the
same roof with him -- that, unknown as he was, some favorable opportunity of
serving her might occur to him, soothed his transports, and he retired, as soon
as the duties of his office would permit him, to meditate, in solitude, on a
subject, which so amply engrossed his contemplation. But he had soon, alas! a
deeper subject for meditation; for Meditation, even to madness.


It was no longer a subject of doubt or concealment in the Castle, that Roderic
the Hardy, the lord of the domain, the father of Rhinaldo! had been murdered,
within half a league of the Castle, and the finger of suspicion pointed at
Astolpho.

Indeed, when the circumstances attending this transaction were considered,
little doubt could be entertained on the subject.

Roderic had not been seen since he had welcomed the king to the Castle.

A very short time had sufficed to acquaint him with Astolpho's design, and at
daybreak on the ensuing morning, (for it was evening when Astolpho arrived,)
he had departed, completely armed, with a few trusty attendants. It was thought
that Astolpho was aware of this departure, and winked at it, though Count
Roderic could have but one design in it, which was to join his friends in the
west, for, within half a league of the Castle, he was set upon by a party, and
killed with the shot of an arquebuss, pointed directly at his breast, so close
that his corslet was unable to resist the balls.

Not one of his attendants escaped; but the transaction was witnessed by some
who knew his armor. They sought afterward for the body, but that, as well as
those of his attendants, was carried off, and probably for reasons known to
Astolpho, if he were really the author of this murder, buried in some sacred
place.

The reflections of Rhinaldo upon this horrid catastrophe, were the most bitter
that unbounded grief and unavailing remorse could furnish. He looked upon
himself as the murderer of his father. A settled gloom overspread his mind, and
nothing but the hope of revenge could have instigated him to perform the task
he had undertaken, or have procrastinated, for a moment, a discovery which must
have proved fatal to him.

From these more than melancholy reflections, he was aroused by intelligence
which diverted his affections into a different channel. He learned that the
Princess was actually, as he suspected, in the Castle; but nobody whom he could
converse with had yet seen her. It was also reported that Rhodolpho was soon to
be married to her.

Rhinaldo, acquainted as he was with the Castle from the days of his earliest
youth, knew that, if she was actually there, she could not be long concealed
from him, and resolved to watch the motions of Rhodolpho with a scrutinizing
eye.

In the mean time hostilities were vigorously carried on between the two
parties.

Astolpho had a very strong force with him at the Castle, with which he
continued to make vigorous assaults against the Priory; but, besides that, that
post was almost impregnable -- it was defended by the most brave and
experienced knights -- for such had been the fathers of St. Julian, before they
devoted their days to the duties of religion.

The wound which had detained Count Tancred at the hermitage, proved more
obstinate than he had expected; nor did the state of his mind in any way
contribute to the forwarding its cure; but he found, in the conversation of the
venerable hermit, much alleviation to his sorrows.

This holy father, who had long trod, in a distinguished character, the busy
stage of the world, had not viewed mankind without observation. His mind was,
therefore, amply stored with true wisdom, that which is born of sound
reflection upon long experience, and the sublime truths of religion had
softened his heart to the frailties and infirmities of his fellow creatures,
while they spread over his breast that delicious calm which they alone are
capable of bestowing.

Count Tancred, who, in communicating his griefs to such a man, found the only
alleviation to his sorrows of which they were capable, soon entrusted to him
the secret of tha^ melancholy, to which it was too apparent hi^ heart was a
prey.

CHAP. XIII.
YOU will not, my venerable father, said the Count, long wonder at the weight
which oppresses my soul, and which, in spite of all efforts to throw it off,
still baffles my endeavors, when I relate to you my unhappy story.

You are not ignorant, that our monarch Astolpho, surnamed the Proud, had a
sister many years younger than himself, whom, when upon the death of the great
and good Emanuel, he mounted the throne of Lombardy, he drew from the
retirement in which she had been 'till that period immured.

The Princess Aspasia was at this time of such tender years, that it was not
judged proper to detain her long at court. The Castle of Montalban, than which
none can be more delightfully situated, was fitted up in a most princely manner
for her residence; and her household was established under the government and
direction of a lady, her relation.

Of this establishment I had, what I then esteemed, the good fortune to make
one. In an age, little advanced beyond that of infancy, I was appointed one of
the pages to the Princess.

Let me pass over, my venerable father, those hours, in which the seeds of a
passion, which I shall carry with me to the grave, began to unfold themselves.

Those delicious moments, which were incessantly marked by sensations as sweet
as undesi^ed, are awakened to the memory, only to imbitter, by obtruding
themselves into a comparison with others which have been as strongly tinctured
with complicated misery.

What was at first duty, soon grew to be something more -- and, surely, no
hours can be more sweetly passed than those in which his duties of station are
stimulated by affection, and have the reward of not passing unnoticed by their
object.

The Princess soon distinguished me -- I adored her -- we grew up together, and
our passion strengthened with our years.

Let me hasten to the conclusion of a tale, which too much oppresses me.

In the time of the late wars, Astolpho scarcely during three years resided for
three months in the capital. The Princess, though of an age to grace the most
distinguished circles, by her understanding as well as her beauty, seemed to be
forgotten, and remained, without a murmer on her part, at the Castle of
Montalban.

Happy period! Period! made up of the most delicious moments! To see her daily
-- to attend her as the sweetest, the most grateful of duties urged me, was all
my full satisfied heart had learned to wish! Alas! it was too soon to end. I
became of an age, when it was deemed improper that I should remain idle at home.

I was appointed to a command; and, with as much alacrity as a man can possess,
who leaves behind him all to which his heart has learned to cleave, I joined
the army. I was then stationed with the same brigade as Rhinaldo, and it was
our fortune to see some severe service together. I returned about the time when
Astolpho ordered the Princess to court. She there became the theme of ceaseless
admiration.

Astolpho himself seemed to adore her, when suddenly, contrary to all
expectations in spite of her detestation toward the object -- of her prayers
and supplications -- of the groans she uttered -- and the tears she shed at his
feet -- he sacrificed her to his stern and brutal favorite, the Count St.
Amand.

Proud, vindictive, and remorseless, this man seemed little softened by the
beauties which inflamed him; but bore his wrech-victim to a dreary Castle on
the north of this forest, where, in solitude, she was left to shed unavailing
tears over the miserable fate to which the unaccountable partiality of a
brother, who, she had reason to believe, loved her, had consigned her a
helpless prey.

What, alas! was my situation during this dreadful period! My despair was not
to be concealed. It became so marked, that the cause of it began to be
whispered at court. My frantic love at length, no longer to be restrained,
burst forth in an act, which involved the object of it, as well as myself, in
the most wretched calamity.

I determined to obtain an interview, a last one, with the Princess, and then
to seek in a foreign war that death, which the peaceful state of my own country
then denied to my wishes.

Unhappy resolution! I bribed her servants, and gained admittance to her
presence. She was in her chamber, which she seldom quitted. I found her
employed in adding some ornaments to a mantle of state which she had formerly
embroidered and destined for me, upon Astolpho's promising, at her
intercession, to appoint me, young as I was, to the office of Knight Marshal,
which is, as you well know, a post of great honor, and to which my birth
alone, though it is not inconsiderable, could scarcely, at so early a period,
have entitled me.

She was weeping -- weeping, as she confessed, in an agony of sorrow, as soon
as her resentment at the rash action of which I had been guilty had subsided,
over the unfortunate Tancred.

Let me hurry over this delicious though fatal interview. I told her my resolve
-- we were both in tears -- I was kneeling at her feet, bidding her adieu, and
had my lips pressed to her lovely hand, which was wet with my tears, and on
which I imprinted a last kiss, and was rising to tear myself away for ever --
when the Count, whether apprised by the servants I had corrupted, or incited by
the rumors which prevailed at Court, and the settled sorrow and disgust which
the Princess could not conceal at the sacrifice she had been compelled to make,
burst into the room, attended by a numerous train of servants.

I was about to draw my sword, when I was seized and disarmed.

The brutality of the Count's nature now raged uncontrouled. He drew a
poignard, as if about to murder his wife in my presence; but a thought of a
deeper revenge seemed to check this purpose. He smiled grimly on her, and,
sheathing the dagger, ordered me to be carried to a place of security.

We were both of us, the next morning, before the day broke, conveyed secretly
to a ruinous mansion, which he passesses, situate on the verge of the forest,
attended by himself and two servants, in whom he chiefly confided.

The miseries which the unhappy Aspasia endured, from the savage and unbridled
cruelty of this monster, during a month's confinement in that desolate mansion,
she alone can ^ell.

I was the tenant of a loathsome dungeon, from which the hand of Providence,
and the courage and conduct of my friend Rhinaldo, relieved me. In what manner
you have heard from himself. You have also heard how the Princess was again
torn from us. But let me perish ignobly, if I do not discover the miscreant
Rhodolpho, the base son of this inhuman father, if the earth does not conceal
him. I will tear him from the side of his master, in whose favor he has
supplanted his father, rather than forego the revenge for which my soul thirsts.

CHAP. XIV.
THE hermit strove to calm the violent agitation, which he perceived the
relation of Count Tancred had raised in his bosom, and, having soothed him to
some degree of tranquillity, addressed him as follows:

Alas! my son, let not your rage induce you to attempt impossibilities; but
await 'till circumstances shall bereave your enemies of that power, of which
they are now, too fatally, possessed.

Rhodolpho is as firmly fixed as his father was in the favor of Astolpho; and
were another sister to be sacrificed, dear to that monarch as was Albina, she
would instantaneously become the sacrifice of this connection.

Of the cause of this I have learned from Rhinaldo that you are ignorant -- but
I do not fear to trust yo^ with it. Listen then to the story I shall relate: --

It is now about fifteen years since Lombardy sustained a loss, which it has
never yet recovered, in our great and good Emanuel, when this half-brother
Astolpho ascended the throne. It was generally thought that Emanuel had
perished in a hunting party, in which he was saperated from his attendants, and
in spite of all those inquiries which the anxiety of a whole people promoted,
he was never, for the space of above fourteen years, heard of.

This supposition was rendered the more probable, as the part of the forest in
which he was missed abounded with wolves of the largest and most ravenous kind.

His dauntless courage -- the wisdom which was displayed in every act of his
government -- the mildness and urbanity of his address and manners, rendered
the loss of such a king universally regretted. Nor was it without symptoms of
gloom and dissatisfaction that Astolpho's title to the crown was confessed; and
the daughter of Emanuel, though then in the age of absolute infancy, did not
want partisans, who suggested in very loud terms her right to the throne.

The party of Astolpho, however, who was indisputably brave and skilful in the
field, and who possessed some of those virtues which allure popularity, soon
silenced these murmurers, and he was proclaimed king.

Fourteen years had elapsed since the event took place, when a stranger, poorly
glad, but of a dignified and majestic mien, arrived toward the fall of night
at the priory of St. Julian, and demanded of the superior admission into the
brotherhood, pledging himself to make good his claim on the succeeding day.

The necessary qualification for a brother of our order is, that the candidate
be a knight, who has for fifteen years served his country bravely, faithfully,
and without reproach.

The stranger was presented with some refreshment after his journey, and
conveyed to a cell, where he was left to repose himself 'till the morning, when
he was desired to attend the superior of the order.

When the stranger was admitted into the presence of the superior, he asked him
"if he knew him?"

The old man, who had lived for above thirty years in that retirement, had lost
all traces of his countenance.

"My father!" exclaimed the stranger, "if your pupil Emanuel, who followed your
steps so inadequately at the battle of the Bucklers So called from a corpse of
infantry called Buckler Men, who fought with sword and target, and whose
gallant stand under the shelter of their bucklers, which were exceedingly
large, saved the right wing of the army, commanded by the father of Emanuel in
person, and turned the fortune of the day,
should be still living, might he hope protection from the brothers of St.
Julian?"

The good old man arose from his seat at these words, and approached the
stranger, for his eyes had begun already to grow dim with age. He surveyed him
for a short time, and then falling at his feet, and embracing his knees, -- "I
have lived long enough!" exclaimed the venerable soldier; "am I permitted once
more to behold my sovereign! -- one who has so long been the pride of my heart!
-- one whose death my age has so long lamented."

Emanuel (for he was the stranger) raising the old man, folded him in his arms,
and asked him whether he might confide a secred, on which his life depended, to
the rest of the fathers!

Of this indeed he little doubted. He knew them all -- for they had all been
the companions of his youth, as renowned for their courage as their conduct,
and he easily gave credit to the venerable prior, when he took upon himself to
answer for their fidelity.

The were immediately summoned, and Emanuel discovered himself to them, and
related the circumstances of the mysterious fate which enveloped him, nearly as
follows: --

CHAP. XV.
ON the day which first beheld me torn from my kingdom, and doomed for fourteen
years to a state of dreary melancholy confinement, I was pursuing the chase
with my wanted eagerness, and found myself, through the swiftness of my horse,
separated from all my companions and attendants, except my brother Astolpho,
and his friend the Count St. Amand, who had changed their horses, and were thus
enabled to keep up with me.

After riding for some considerable time, and finding ourselves involved in the
most intricate part of the forest, notwithstanding the skill of the Count de
St. Amand, who undertook to guide us, it was proposed by that nobleman that we
should seek refreshment at a mansion of his, which he said he was sure could be
at no great distance from the part of the forest in which we then were.

It proved, as he had conjectured, that we were near to this spot, and a short
time conducted us to it. It was an old building, spacious, and formerly, no
doubt, magnificent.

The Count apologized for the reception we were about to meet with, in a house
where he maintained but few servants, and where he seldom resided. It did not,
therefore, appear singular to me to be welcomed only by a single domestic, who
received orders to attend to our horses, and procure us some refreshment; while
we were conducted by the Count himself to a specious apartment. There a
collation was soon spread, and we ate like men who had rode hard all the
morning.

After dinner the Count proposed to show us the house, in the construction of
which, old as it was, he said there were some things, deserving attention.

After viewing many apartments, we were conducted up a staircase into a small
room, in which were deposited various pieces of armor; from this room,
slipping aside a panel of the wainscot which concealed a door strongly
fortifyed with iron, the Count led us into an apartment tolerably spacious, but
very cloomy, furnished with a bed, and other conveniences of a stately
structure, but of very antique fashion.

In this apartment I was much surprised to find a man of a stern ferocious
countenance and a robust make, whom, though I had not much noticed him before,
I soon perceived to be the servant who had attended at our entrance. He was
armed with a cuirass, had a sword by his side, a dagger in his girdle, and hold
a partizan in his hand. "I observed, with some surprise, that he did not move
his hat, which he had on, at our approach; and a little alarmed at this
circumstance, as well as his general appearance, from my own defenseless state,
(for I had set out in the morning armed only with a cutlass for the chase,
which I had unbuckled and thrown aside, during our repast, after the example of
my brother and the Count,) I turned round to look for Astolpho, and perceived
that he had not entered the room with us.

I had no time to waste in conjectures on this circumstance. The Count shut the
door behind him, and, advancing toward the man, seized the partizan which he
held in his hand, and pointing it to my breast, swore vehemently that if I
ventered to stir, I should die.

He then desired the fellow to do his duty, who, reaching down a pair of
manacles, which were hung to the wall, came forward to bind them on my wrists.

Unarmed as I was, I disdained to suffer this treatment tamely. I seized the
partizan which the Count held to my breast, and should soon have wrested it
from him, had not his associate come to his assistance, and; drawing his sword*
sworn he would plunge it to my heart it I did not desist.

I found farther resistance ensured my immediate death, and was, at lenth,
obliged to submit. My hands were manacled, and, after being assured that if I
proved tractable, my life would be safe, and I should want for nothing, I was
left to meditate on this singular transaction, the iron door being secured, as
I could but too well hear, by many locks and bolts.

During fourteen years confinement, I never saw this fellow afterward, and
have great reason to believe, from what I have been since able to learn, that
my brother and the Count made him attend them to the thickest of the forest
upon my horse, and there dispatched him and my favorite beast together, as my
horses furniture, my cloak, (which in the heat of the chase I had given to the
Count to carry,) and my cutlass, were found at no considerable distance from
each other, in the part of the forest which the wolvesmost infest, who had
probably made a meal of this fellow and his horse.

It was some time before I could sufficiently recollect my scattered senses to
survey the apartment in which I was confined. This, however, I at lengh did. I
found it supplied with every convenience which could contribute to render
confinement tolerable.

Among other things there was a good collection of books, which in such a
situation proved a treasure.

The first idea with which I began the survey of this apartment, was that of
escaping. I surveyed it round; but the more I beheld it, the more was I
mortifyed with a conviction of the impossibility of succeeding in any attempt
of that kind.

The windows were very high, and so small that it would have been impossible to
force a man's body through them; though the opened gradually toward the inside
of the wall, which was very thick. The chimney was extremely narrow, as was
indeed every outlet which was necessary to this chamber of con^inement; and it
was defended, as I found in an attempt I made to thrust myself up it, by a
strong iron gate -- perhaps by more than one -- nay, if I had made my way to
the roof, through the chimney, or had been able to squeeze my body through one
of the windows, I should scarcely have found myself in a better situation than
in my apartment, which was at an immence distance from the ground.

I found that they had left for me some provisions, a few bottles of wine, and
some of water; and, as soon as the meloncholy ideas, with which my situations
could not fail to impress me, would permit to think of gratifying the calls of
nature, I took a slight repast, and throwing myself on the bed, I delivered
myself to an agitated and broken slumber.

On the next morning I examined the iron cased door. To this door you ascended,
by some stone steps, from the apartment.

In returning from this examination, which still contributed to damp my hopes
to escape, I found, at the bottom of these steps, another door. It was very
strong, made of wood, and furnished with a massy lock and bolts, and in the
center of it was a machine, somewhat similar to those used in convents, which
are turned upon a pivot, for the purpose of conveying things from the outside
to the persons within.

While I was musing upon these circumstances, I heard the bolts of the iron
door unfastened, and the Count St. Amand entered armed with more precaution
than on the preceding day.

I upraided him with his treachery and disloyalty, and approaching, with an
intent to seize him, he drew his sword, and swore that my life should answer
for any attempt on his person.

Sir," said he, "if you will submit with patience to your destiny, your
confinement shall be rendered as little irksome as possible. You shall want for
nothing -- but, 'till the period of that confinement, you must not expect to
see any person whatever. You shall be allowed pen and ink -- and by conveying a
note into the box of this inner door, you will make known your wants, which
will be supplied.

So saying, he threw me a key, that I might unlock my fetters, from which I was
permitted for the future to be free, and from that moment I saw him no more.

I was, however, regularly supplied through the medium of this inner door, which
he locked and bolted after him, with whatever I wanted, furnished always, as I
had reason to believe, by himself in person, though I sometimes suspected, from
the difference of the step which I heard, a step with which my ear was not
unacquainted, that my brother Astolpho supplied his place.

I will not detain you with endless projects, and some futile attempts to
escape, which always proved abortive, during a period of fourteen years
confinement: -- Let it suffice to say, that it was at last accomplished in the
following singular manner: --

I was awakened one night by a terrible storm -- the wind shook the building to
its foundation -- the thunder broke in deaf^ing peals over my head -- the
lightning flashed almost without intermission, so that my prison was perfectly
enlightened by its r^ys.

I arose from my bed, and paced my chamber, deeply meditating on the awful
horrors of the night, when a flash of lightning darted full on the building,
attended by a clap of thunder so terrible* that I thought the tottering fabric
would have fallen at one blow in ruins to the earth.

I was struck down, and lay for a short time senseless, and upon recovering
myself, was preparing again to lie down on the bed, when, casting my eyes to
the other end of the room, I was struck by an object which called all my
attention.

The storm ^eemed somewhat to have abated, but, as I looked toward the corner
of the room, I could perceive the lightning flashing, as I imagined, through
the solid wall. I approached the spot -- but how can I describe my
astonishment, when I perceived the wall to be rent open, by the displ^^ing of
several of the stones of which it was composed?

I removed the rubbish with an eagerness which almost frustrated its own
intent, and squeezing my body through the crevice, perceived with a rapture,
which I cannot describe, that my escape from my prison was become almost
certain, if I would hazard the attempt.

I fell on my knees on the spot were I stood, and amid the awful horrors of the
storm, returned thanks to that Providence whom it had pleased thus almost
miraculously to relieve me from so long and melancholy an imprisonment.

The lightning (the near approach of which I had so sensibly felt) had fallen
on one of the turrets of this old mansion, connected with the apartment in
which I was confined, and having torn off the roof, the battlements, and great
part of the wall, had left most of the stone staircase within it entire. --
When I got through the breach which the storm had made, I found myself on one
of the steps of this staircase which now stood, undefended by any wall or
ballustrate, winding down of the outside of the building.

The sight of it was indeed tremendous. The lightning discovered to me the
buildings, and the moat beneath, at an immense distance.

Nothing, perhaps, less than that ardent thirst for liberty, which then
possessed (...) could have urged me to attempt the (...) ignorant of what steps
the storm might have loosened, and what displaced.

I did not, however, hesitate, but began, boldly, the descent of this awful
precipice, for such (narrow, tottering, and undefended, except by part of the
wall, which still seemed to cling to the steps here and there) it certainly was.

After some risque from the looseness of my footing, and the power of the wind,
I arrived at last safely at the bottom, and found myself within the mansion.

Whether, during my confinement, any servants had been kept at this place, or
whether the house had been deserted. I do not know. I explored my way through
the dark recesses into which the staircase had led me, and after much
difficulty, undiscovered by any one, probably because, if there were servants
in the house, the storm prevented their hearing me, I found my way out at the
door of the hall, and gained the forest, where I passed a night of rapture,
unabated by the howling of the storm around me:

In the morning I made my way to the cottage, whose inmates, little imagining
they were protecting their monarch, afforded me shelter and food. They shall
not, however, repent their hospitality, if I should be fortunate enough to
regain possession of my throne. From this cottage I am come to seek farther
shelter with you.

Such was the story which Emanuel related to the prior and community of St.
Julian's -- in the course of which it will occur to every one as a singular
circumstance, that, instead of subjecting themselves to the hazard of the
king's escape from his place of confinement, the conspirators did not
immediately take away his life.

This was entirely owing to the superstition of Astolpho -- a quality which is
not unfrequently attendant on the most daring courage, though seemingly extremely
opposite to it in its nature.

Astolpho had been informed, early in life by an old man who pretended to be
deeply versed in judicial astrology, and who was, on that account, much
respected by him, that he should not long survive his brother; and this idea,
with the truth of which, as with that of all such predictions, he was fully
impressed, probably saved Emanuel's life.

He was willing to risque any thing but his own life, which he thought depended
on Emanuel's, to obtain the crown.

He might also, perhaps, feel, in the midst of all his ambition, some degree of
tenderness toward a relation, who had himself shown so much affection toward
him; and this conjecture is rendered the more probable, when we reflect on his
conduct toward the princess Isabel, whom he has educated with a care and
tenderness which, though the attachment of the people toward her might perhaps
have in^ured her from any attempt on her life, does not seem to have been
necessary from any motives of policy.

During a reign of fourteen years, Astolpho had so ^ell secured himself on the
throne of his (...) brother, that it was improbable that any sudden ^r^uption
in favor of Emanuel should be attended with success.

It became, therefore, necessary that he should be secreted with care, 'till
the strength of his frien^s could be tried; and it was agreed that he should
change the garment in which he escaped -- which was a plain dress, provided for
him by the Count de St. Amand, for the habit of the order, and enroll himself
among the fathers of St. Julian. With these brave and faithful companions,
then, has he resided for upwards of twelve months, during which time his
health, which, notwithstanding his unwearied practice of taking as much
exercise everyday asthe size o^ his prison would allow, was somewhat impaired,
has been reestablished, and measures have been most cautiously and
indefatigably pursued to restore him to the throne, which his unworthy relation
has usurped.

In the course of this pursuit, the young Count Rhinaldo, whose father, Count
Roderic, surnamed the Hardy, is lord of the Castle at the foot of the mountain,
and of the domain around it, was deemed worthy to be entrusted with this secret
and important event.

Virtuous, enterprising, and active, he was called by his father at the
conclusion of the last campaign from the bustle of the field, to partake of
that retirement to which the displeasure of Astolpho had condemned this
formidable le^der.

Retirement at such a period of life, and with such a disposition, but ill
suited the temper of Rhinaldo. He grew, on a sudden, melancholy, reserved, and
gloomy, and his only consolation, amid the despondency which seemed to surround
him at the Castle of his father, was the conversation of the fathers of St.
Julian.

Knights, like himself, they still delighted in the tales of former times, but
their rashness was tempered by experience, and their ferocity by age.

It was in this society that father Anthony, (for so was Emanuel called,)
became acquainted with him, and though he had been at variance with Count
Roderic, who had, at a very early period of life, imbibed some discontent from
a conduct which he had thought partial in the king, and had so behaved himself
upon the discovery, as totally to alienate the affections of Emanuel, yet that
Prince discovered so much virtuous energy and early wisdom in the conduct and
conversation of the son, that he became speedily attached to him, and at length
ventured to discover to him his secret -- but under a solemn engagement, that
he would never reveal it to his father, whom he could not prevail upon himself
to confide in.

How was the loyalty of Rhinaldo confirmed, when he beheld in Emanuel, the
father of his adored Lady Isabel! He pledged his faith to this revered but
unfortunate sovereign, and became one, among a very few, entrusted with a plot
lately formed in the capital, which has unfortunately proved unsuccessful, to
seize upon the palace and the person of Astolpho.

What will be the event of this attempt to re-establish on the throne this
brave but injured monarch, it is impossible at present to decide.

His friends are busy in the southern and western parts of the kingdom, and
have already raised forces, which appear formidable to Astolpho. At present
that usurper has a superiority at the Castle, and has made some vigorous
attacks on the mount, which is most resolutely defended by Emanuel and my
brethren there, who have again resumed their arms. Old as I am, I had
determined to join them; but it was judged that the little service I was able
to perform in favor of a cause to which I feel so strong an attachment, might
be, with better success, attempted here. I have a frequent but guarded
communication with them, which my situation has hitherto concealed from the
eyes of the enemy. If, however, it should at length be discovered, I shall
remember that I am a knight, and gladly yield up the few hours which yet might
have been spared to me in the cause of true loyalty.

The hermit thus concluded his story, which agitated the breast of Count
Tancred with mingled indignation, pity, and surprise.

It for a while suspended his sorrows for the Princess Albina, and he felt that
he had one more cause to lament the unhappy tardiness of his cure.

CHAP. XVI.
RHINALDO, under the disguise of a servant, became again familiarized to the
apartments of his paternal mansion.

He was every day a witness to the increasing favor of Rhodolpho with the
usurper, a circumstance which excited less surprise in his breast than grief
and indignation. He daily heard Emanuel treated in the Court of Astolpho as an
impostor -- a slander, to which, indeed, a claim revived after a silence of
fourteen years, afforded some foundation; and he was aware that Rhodolpho was
probably the only man who could lay open the foulness and falsehood of such an
assertion.

He was not, however, aware of one circumstance which had thrown Astolpho, more
completely than he had conjectured, into the hands of his favorite.

The Count St. Amand had, with that paternal fondness which the worst men
sometimes feel, entrusted his son, after binding him by many oaths to a strict
concealment, with this important secret, as a means by which he might ensure
the continuance of Astolpho's favor, in case that Prince should survive the
Count -- but fortune had done more for him. On the night of Emanuel's escape,
he had left behind him, among other things, a book, in which he had minuted
every occurrence which he thought worthy of notice during his long confinement.

As every day was much like the preceding one, this work was not very
volumnious, but it contained a short account of his arrival at the mansion, and
was continued at intervals nearly up to the day of his escape.

Upon visiting the rooms after the escape of the king, the Count St. Amand
found this journal, and, even amidst the confusion which seized upon him when
he discovered the escape of his prisoner, he did not forget to posses himself
of it.

This book, with annotations in many pages of it in his father's handwriting,
all combining to bear testimony to the truth of its contents, fell into the
hands of Rhodolpho upon the Count's death; as did a ring which was known to be
Emanuel's, and which, as it was found among the rubbish by the workmen, who
repaired the ruins which the storm had made, was probably lost by the king as
he forced his way through the aperture in the wall in order to make his escape.

With such proofs in his power, (of the existence of which Astolpho was not
ignorant,) it was of the utmost importance to that prince that he should secure
to himself the good will of Rhodolpho; and the servile adolation of that young
nobleman rendered this by no means a difficult or unpleasant task.

Rhinaldo, however, beheld the influence he was possessed of with the utmost
dread, aware as he was that it threw his beloved Isabel completely into the
power of this unworthy rival. Nor was it long before he was convinced that his
fears were but too well founded.

Incessantly employed in endeavors to discover in what part of the Castle the
Princess was confined, he in a short time perceived that two of Rhodolpho's
servants, who were more constantly than the rest about their master's person at
the hours of meals, always attended him with six covers for his table, though
he himself always dined and supped with Astolpho; these servants Rhinaldo
resolved to watch; and, on the day succeeding that on which he had formed this
resolution, he followed them, at the usual hour, toward their lord's
apartments -- he saw them enter with the covers which had been prepared, and
shortly after return, preceded by Rhodolpho, who led them up the great
staircase, and unlocking a door, remained at it while they entered a suit of
apartments, which Rhinaldo knew to terminate in a spacious chamber, formerly
allotted to himself, which extended to the other side of the building.
Satisfied with this discovery he returned, and was crossing the court of the
castle, to gain the opposite wing, when he was called to his duty, which was on
that day to attend at the carrying up Astolpho's dinner.

Mad as he was at the delay which this degrading duty occasioned, he was
obliged to submit, and some hours passed before he was at leisure to pursue his
intended design, for he could not omit any portion of the servile task allotted
to him, without incurring suspicion, which might ruin his design, or without
the danger of a dismission, which would effectually frustrate his
long-cherished hopes.

Evening had for some time set in* when he found himself at liberty, and a
second time crossing the court, gained the side of the house which had been so
long the object of his anxious solicitude. -- He ascended a staircase, every
step of which was familiar to him; though it seemed little frequented by the
present inhabitants of the Castle; and had not indeed been much used by his
father, as it led to the most ancient part of this extensive pile, a part which
had been for many years much neglected, for the more modern portion of the
building, on which great cost had been bestowed. The steps of Rhinaldo,
however, had frequently traced this ven^rable and neglected fabric. -- He loved
to muse in a long gallery, hung with the pictures of his ancestors, and
rendered a fit object for the indulgence of that enthusiasm which is often the
companion of youthful imagination, by the gloom which the narrow, colored
panes, and massy frames of its gothic windows threw ground.

To this gallery* which extended from wing to wing on one side of the building,
a space of very considerable length, Rhinaldo now ascended, and tracing his way
along it by the light of the moon, arrived at the opposite door to that by
which he had entered. -- He was much mortified when he found that this door,
which was not far distant from the apartment, in which he conjectured that the
Lady Isabel was confined, was locked. -- He tried in vain to open or force it,
and was considering what step he should pursue, when he recollected, that over
the gallery there was another room of the same size, which had never been used
but as a loft, through which he might pass and gain the apartments; on that
side of the castle; he therefore returned along the gallery to the staircase he
had just quitted, and ascending still by a more narrow part of it, which, as it
had been very seldom frequented, was somewhat incumbered by rubbish, he passed
through one or two small rooms, and arrived at the door of the loft; this he
laid hold on, and pushing it against some rubbish, which for a moment prevented
its opening, he entered the loft.

As he entered he heard a noise at the farther end, and, by the light of the
moon, imagined he perceived the figure of a man, which starting from a seat, or
disappearing hastily by the opposite door. He could not, indeed, distinctly
ascertain the figure of this object, in delineating which he was, perhaps,
deluded by his imagination; but upon the coolest reflection he was convinced he
had seen something move in that end of the loft, and that whatever it might be
that was in motion, it was an object so polished as to reflect the moon's
(...), and by which alone he had been enabled to discover it.

He puzzled himself in vain for some time, with reflections on this singular
circumstance, till at last, recollecting the primary object of his pursuit, he
passed the loft, and entering at the opposite door, which he sound open,
descended by another staircase, and soon arrived at those apartments from which
the door of the gallery below had excluded him. -- He proceeded through two
small rooms and gained a third, which joined to the apartment in which he
supposed the princess to be confined. -- This apartment, the last of those
which were inhabited on that side of the house, had formerly communicated by a
small door with the room in which Rhinaldo now stood; but this door had long
been nailed up, and the doorway had been plaistered over on the inside, to
render it level with the wall, at a time when, by Count Roderic's order, the
apartment had been hung with an elegant tapestry. -- ^t this door Rhinaldo
listened, but could hear nothing. -- He examined the fastenings, they were old
and worn with rust; he found that if he could procure instruments, it would not
be difficult to draw the nails, and thus open the door. -- This he determined
to attempt at an hour when the family were asleep, when he had little doubt
that he might work undiscovered in so retired a part of the mansion.

Having formed this resolution, he returned through the loft, and mingling with
the other servants, occupied himself in the duties of his office till the hour
of rest approached.

A stillness now began by degrees to invade the roar and tumult to which the
hours of wassel gave birth. -- Astolpho and his companions had retired to rest,
and the menial servants only waited till some of his inferior officers, who
were indulging themselves in a sober silent debauch, should choose to retire.

Rhinaldo, who had taken care to provide himself with tools fit for his
purpose, waited with anxiety for the conclusion of their supper -- the clock
from the turret tolled out twelve, and this party, as if awakened from their
lethargy by the sound, arose, to the secret joy of Rhinaldo, who saw them take
their route to their several apartments. He retired to a small room allotted to
him, and waited till the castle was buried in profound silence; then taking his
tools in his hand, he set out in pursuit of his purpose.

As he passed the door of the long gallery, in his way to the loft above it, he
heard a noise, and imagining that some part of the family were yet up, he
determined to enter the gallery, and wait there. -- He had no sooner set his
foot within the door-way than he felt himself for a moment rivetted by surprise
to the spot where he stood. -- The moon shone in full splendour through the
windows of the gallery, and clad with an awful and solemn beauty, the gothic
ornaments of the place: when, by the light it diffused, Rhinaldo beheld, seated
on a chair, beneath the picture of his father, the same ^igure which he had
before distinguished in the loft above, and which he could now plainly perceive
to be that of a man, in complete armor.

As he entered the room the figure started up, and disappeared by the opposite
door, which Rhinaldo had found shut on his previous visit to that place. As
soon as he could recover himself from the sudden astonishment and confusion
with which he was overwhelmed; he followed hastily along the gallery, but
found, when he arrived at the further end of it, the door, by which the figure
had disappeared, still locked. This circumstance impressed him with new
astonishment, not unmixed, in spite of all the firmness of his mind, with
terror; he returned, however, through the gallery, and ascended the other
flight of stairs, in order to pass through the loft to the apartment in which
he was to proceed to work.

As he entered the loft he again saw the same figure which he had seen twice
before, standing in the opposite door-way, and upon the noise he made on
entrance it again disappeared. -- Rhinaldo now, agitated by a thousand
different sensations, rushed hastily forward, and passing swiftly through the
loft, gained the staircase at the other end of it, which led to the apartments
which he had designed to visit. -- He descended the stairs swiftly, and
examined minutely every apartment. -- all was silence -- he could perceive no
object -- he could hear no sound. -- After musing some time he begun to be
convinced that his imagination had deceived him, and searching for the little
door which was to be the object of his labors, he proceeded to work. As he was
fearful, if the adjoining apartment should really prove to be that of the Lady
Isabel, the noise he might make would alarm her, he proceeded on his work with
extreme caution, and nearly, an hour had elapsed before he had completely
conquered all the difficulties which opposed themselves to him, and had opened
the door, which he did very gently, lest the croaking of its rusty hinges
should be heard.

He now found himself close to the apartment which he meant to explore; the
only separation between the two rooms being a thin partition of plaster, which
cased the door-way on the inside. -- He listened -- all was silent; this was to
be expected at such an hour. He thrust one of the implements he had with him
through the wall, to discover whether there was any light in the room; but the
tapestry which covered the walls prevented this discovery.

He paused again -- After a short time he distinctly heard the stop of a man in
the chamber, and concluding, from this circumstance, that his conjecture, as to
this apartment, had been ill-founded, was preparing to retire, when he heard
the voice of a man, who, addressing himself to another, in a low but hasty
tone, said, My lord, the King requires your presence immediately.

"Cursed ill-fortune," replied the other, in a voice which he knew to be
Rhodolpho's, "What can he want with me at this hour?"

Something has dreadfully disordered him; he has risen from his bed; his looks
are full of perplexity and horror; and he has desired your immediate presence.

They now walked slowly from the place, and Rhinaldo, satisfied that he had
taken his trouble for nothing, retired.

CHAP. XVII.
AFTER passing through the two adjacent apartments, Rhinaldo arrived at the
door of the gallery which was locked, and was about to ascend the staircase
which led to the loft above it, in order to return in his usual way, when he
again beheld the same figure on the stairs, leaning with one hand against the
wall. -- The moon, through a small window, which gave light to this part of the
staircase, disclosed, completely, the head of this figure; in the countenance
of it, Rhinaldo, from the momentary view he gained, (for at his approach the
figure turned hastily from him and disappeared) was convinced, that he saw that
of his murdered father. -- The helmet was his -- the plumage, the very plumage
he wore when he had last attended him in the field.

Struck with horror at this sight, he felt himself for some moments rooted to
the spot where he stood; but recovering himself, at length he ran hastily up
the staircase, and entered the lobby. -- He could see nothing -- he listened --
all was still. -- In a short time he heard a murmer ascending from below, and
the treading of several footsteps, as if the inhabitants of the castle were
already stirring.

He crossed the loft, and descending into the hall, found several of Astolpho's
attendants, and some of the servants, who were collected in different groupes,
and huddled close together, as if listening to some dreadful tale. -- He joined
one of these parties, and learned, that the cause of the confusion he witnessed
was the disordered state of the king, who had been awakened from his sleep in
such a paroxysm of horror, as to have spread, by his conduct, a general alarm.

The cause of this was not certainly known, because, as soon as he became again
master of himself, he imputed his alarm to a dream, and ordered his attendants
again to their repose; but the first report had been, that the figure of Count
Roderic, who was generally suspected to have been slain by his order, had
appeared to him completely armed; that it had opened his curtains, and
presented a dagger to his breast; but had, after a short pause, with a look of
mingled contempt and pity, withdrawn it and disappeared. This figure had been
seen by none of the attendants in the antichamber, who were buried in a
profound sleep, except one indeed, who declared that he saw something brush by
him, and pass out at the door; but as this person had been in company with the
rest, drinking freely in the course of the evening, this was generally imputed
to the fumes of the liquor with which he had been indulging himself.

In the hurry of the first alarm Count Rhodolpho had been sent for, but that
order had been now countermanded: the king had sent to him, as he had done to
others of his attendants, to tell him that he was not wanted, and had shut
himself up in his chamber with the captain of his guard, an approved and
valiant knight.

Agitated by this fresh intelligence, which concerned him so nearly, and bore
so palpable a relation to the appearance which had three times encountered his
sight in the course of the same evening, Rhinaldo was loft in meditation -- his
companions, dropping off one by one, left him alone in the hall; he sat musing
for some time; at length, no longer able to bear the accumulated pangs of the
various feelings which assailed him, he resolved again to explore that part of
the building where he had already beheld this singular spectre; to address it.
-- if it fled, to follow it. -- In short, at all events, if possible, to put an
end to the horrid suspense which now oppressed him.

He accordingly ascended, for the third time, to the gallery. -- All there was
still and silent. -- He again visited the loft. -- He thought he perceived
something -- he advanced -- it was only a singular appearance at an angle of
the wall, caused by a particular direction of the moon-beam. -- He passed along
the loft, and began to descend by the opposite staircase.

He had reached the door of those apartments, in one of which he had so lately
been at work, when he heard a noise behind him, as if on the top of the
staircase, near the door of the loft. He re-ascended five or six steps of the
staircase, and thought he perceived at the top of it something moving. -- He
was rushing forward to ascertain it, when he was stopped by loud and repeated
shrieks from below; they were in a female voice. -- The Lady Isabel was ever
present to his imagination. He thought the voice was here is -- he listened for a
moment. -- His suspicions grew stronger. He leaped down the stairs; the shrieks
were repeated. -- He listened -- they let him into the little suite of
apartments -- he rushed through them in an instant; in the third was the door
which he had recently opened. -- He now heard the voice of his Isabel
distinctly; it proceeded from the apartment which he had at first supposed to
be here is, and from which he was only separated by a slight partition of
plaster. -- The shrieks for a moment ceased. -- He heard the voice of Isabel,
in a tone of terror and supplication, imploring the mercy of some person:

"Alas!" said she, for pity's sake spare me. -- If I must at last become your
wife, cruel as is my destiny, I must submit; but for heaven's sake -- for your
own sake, do not attempt a deed which will call down accumulated vengeance on
your own head.

"I thank you," said Rhodolpho, (for it was to him that this prayer was
addressed) in a tone of cruel and bitter raillery, for your consent to marry
me, thus unsolicited; while you were your uncle's presumptive heir, it was
something; but your father's rash attempt has hurled you from his favor.

"At least," said Isabel, in a more determined voice; "dread the vengeance of
that father! of my uncle!"

"As to your uncle," said Rhodolpho, in a familiar tone; my dear creature, he
will never quarrel with a man for lowering your pride, in the present moment;
and as to your father, I never fear dangers at a distance. -- Come, continued
he, do not force me to harsh measures.

The shrieks of the Lady Isabel were now repeated. Rhinaldo, in a transport of
rage and indignation, setting his back against the slender fence which
separated the two apartments, easily broke through it, and lifting the tapestry
which covered it, discovered his beloved Isabel, in a night-dress, struggling
with Rhodolpho. -- He sprung upon him like a lion, and seizing him with both
hands by the collar, soon separated him from the princess.

"Vile dishonorable coward," said he, who bravest distant dangers! shudder at
one which has come thus unexpectedly upon thee, in the midst of thy villainies.

Base born hind! do thou know me? said Rhodolpho. -- Unhand me instantly.

Rhinaldo still held him: but perceiving that he felt about his girdle with his
righthand, he seized it just as it had grasped a dagger, and wrenching the
weapon from him, bade him prepare to die. A shriek from the Lady Isabel now
awakened his attention; and, throwing the dagger from him, he flew toward her,
and conducted her, almost fainting, to a chair.

The apartment they were now in had been assigned to the Lady Isabel, and was
used by her as her dressing room. On one side of it was a small apartment, in
which stood her bed, connected with it, by an arched door-way, over which hung
a curtain of silk, which was seldom let down, as it interrupted the free
passage of the air.

Rhodolpho, to whose custody her uncle had consigned her, kept the keys of her
prison, the outer apartments of which he kept safely locked; and Isabel,
relying upon their being secured, neglected to take any precaution with the
inner ones, as much, because she thought it useless, as because, by leaving
them unfastened she preserved a communication with the chambers of her cousin
Ellenor, and her servant Barbara, who were placed in other apartments, nearly
adjacent to here is.

Ellenor, who had been awakened by the shrieks of her cousin, flew, with
Barbara, to the door of her chamber; and, finding it locked, knocked loud for
admittance. Rhinaldo ordered Rhodolpho to admit them, which the other did not
choose to refuse, but opening the door, suffered them to enter, and quitted the
apartment.

Ellenor flew to embrace her cousin, and anxiously inquired into the cause of
her alarm. -- Isabel satisfied her, and expressed the highest sense of the
obligation, under which the sudden and mysterious presence and interposition of
the stranger had laid her.

"Do you not, then, know me?" said Rhinaldo, falling at her feet, and pressing
one of her hands to his lips.

The voice of Rhinaldo, now, for the first time, struck her ears; and the lamp,
which burnt in her chamber, gave sufficient light to enable her to distinguish
his countenance.

"Rhinaldo," said she, in a voice scarcely audible; she sunk into his arms; and
the moments flew, while these lovers gave themselves up to those chaste and
pure raptures, which true passion alone can yield, and which the presence of
Ellenor, far from restraining, emboldened the lovely Isabel to acknowledge with
less reserve.

Raptures like these were not destined to endure long. -- Barbara first alarmed
them with the intelligence, that she heard the sound of footsteps approaching
the chamber; and Rhinaldo instinctively flew to the door, and secured it.

"Oh Rhinaldo!" exclaimed Isabel, I know not how you came hither; but, for
heaven's sake, if there is any mode of escape, fly from a fate, which, if you
should be taken, must doubly embitter the remaining moments of a life, already
sufficiently miserable. Here she burst into tears.

Rhinaldo, in a tone of fixed resolution, declared that he would remain where
he was, to protect Isabel and her cousin; but this resolution was combated with
tears and entreaties by Ellenor, as well as Isabel, who represented to him,
that after the alarm which had been given, it was impossible that any immediate
danger could accrue to Isabel; and, that as to any future evil, it was only by
keeping himself free from discovery, that he could entertain a hope of averting
it.

"Fly then," said Isabel, the tears streaming from her lovely eyes; "at least
for my "sake."

This argument was, with Rhinaldo, unanswerable. -- They now distinctly heard
many footsteps in the adjacent chamber. -- He embraced Isabel and her cousin,
and hastily quitted the apartment by the cavity through which he had entered it.

CHAP. XVIII.
RHINALDO, who did not doubt but that in a few minutes his mode of retreat
would be discovered, fastened the little door after him, by the bolts which
still remained unimpaired, and hesitated for a moment what step to take. He
conjectured that Rhodolpho might not have discovered him, and thought that no
place offered more security than his own chamber, if he could gain it
unperceived.

He heard the voices of several men in Isabel's apartment, and had no longer
time to hesitate. He moved quickly up the stairs, and crossing hastily through
the loft, began to descend on the other side. He had already passed the gallery
door, when he heard voices at the foot of the stairs, and was enabled to
distinguish, among others, these words: Here is the staircase which leads to
that side of the house.

He returned in a moment, and ascended again to the loft. The gallery door was
open, and he judged that his pursuers would take that way, which would compel
them to return, and that he should thus gain time. They indeed entered the
gallery; but instead of returning, upon finding the door shut, they forced it
open; and when Rhinaldo, who had in the mean time crossed the loft, prepared to
descend, he heard their voices at the bottom of the staircase. In the utmost
perplexity, he looked anxiously and eagerly around him, for an outlet; the door
of the loft, on this side, opened into a small square room, which formed a kind
of landing-place, whence the stairs descended. In one corner of this
landing-place was a small door which opened, as Rhinaldo discovered, on a
narrow winding staircase, leading, as it seemed, to the roof of the castle. As
he had no time for choice, he began to ascend; but was suddenly surprised by a
noise above him, on the staircase, he listened, and thought he heard the steps
of a man. Astonished as he was, he continued to ascend, feeling his way along
the wall with his hand, which at last encountered a small door; he pushed
against it -- it opened; but was immediately closed by some person from the
inside, and fastened.

Thus excluded, he was obliged to pursue his way up the staircase; it ended in
a narrow room, in the ceiling of which was a trap-door; but there was no ladder
to enable him to reach it. -- He heard a trampling in the room below. He looked
round, and discovered a small window, the casement of which was almost entirely
gone. -- It looked out upon the battlements, he perceived that it was just wide
enough to admit the passage of his body through it. -- He caught hold of a bar,
which divided it is two, and springing up, thrust himself, with some little
difficulty, through it, and found himself on the battlements of the loftiest
part of the castle. -- He pursued his way along them, though he found it
somewhat impeded by the ruins which had fallen from the tower above him, out of
which he had escaped, which was the most ancient part of the whole edifice,
and, as has been before observed, the most neglected.

He arrived at length at a door, leading into one of the turrets, with which
these battlements were flanked; this turret was nearly in as ruinous a state as
the tower above. And Rhinaldo, when he pushed open the door, found himself
impeded by the rubbish which had fallen on the inside of it. -- He entered,
however, with some little difficulty, and found himself at the top of the
winding staircase of the turret, by which he resolved to descend; it was very
old and broken; the walls emitted unusual dampness; and it bore every mark of
having been deserted for ages. -- After pursuing this descent for a
considerable time, he found himself at a kind of resting place; this was a long
narrow vaulted passage, branching off to the left of the staircase, which,
however, still continued to descend.

Rhinaldo felt his way along this passage, which, from the length of time he
had already been descending, and from his arched form, he judged to be situated
among the vaults under the castle, and having pursued it for some time, found,
at the end of it, a low door, seemingly very strong, studded with large nails,
and almost choked up with rubbish. -- He now returned toward the staircase of
the turret -- he listened, but could hear nothing of his pursuers, who, it was
probable, had given up their search. -- He hesitated whether he should return
or no; but curiosity prompting him, he resolved to explore to what profounder
depth the staircase extended, having already conducted him, as he was
convinced, many feet under ground.

He began again to descend -- the staircase continued, winding downwards, till
it ended in a low arched passage, extending in a contrary direction to that
above. -- The mouth of this passage was closed by an iron grate, which hung
sloping toward the ground, supported only by one of the hinges, (the other
having given way) and the bolt on the opposite side. This grate Rhinaldo easily
throw to the ground, and entered the passage.

After having walked for a considerable time, and immured in total darkness,
and gradually descending as he went; he thought of returning; but perceiving,
suddenly, that he began to ascend, he resolved again to proceed, and finding
himself impelled by a curiosity, which every moment interested him more and
more; he continued to move forward, feeling his way with his hands, and
gradually ascending, till his foot struck against something, which, upon
examination, he found to be a stone step; he felt with his hands, and
discovered that he was at the bottom of a staircase, which he began to ascend.

This staircase was of considerable length, and Rhinaldo, who felt himself
incommoded by the damp air of the subterraneous vault* was compelled, after
some time, to stop and rest himself.

After a pause, he again proceeded, and found himself at length at the summit
of the staircase, his farther progress being opposed by a trap-door of great
weight. Rhinaldo placed his back against this door, and after some vigourous
attempts, he succeeded in raising it. As it rose he felt himself almost covered
with rubbish, and found, by a noise above, something had been displaced by his
efforts. -- He entered a place, damp, close, and confined; he could not
conjecture what it might be. -- As he walked curiously round it, he felt his
progress impeded; he stooped to discover the cause of this impediment, and his
hand alighted on a coffin, covered with velvet, and studded thick with nails.

Wrapped in the reflections which this singular object gave rise to, he proceeded
slowly, till he came to a flight of steps, which he ascended, and found, at the
top of them, a pair of folding doors. -- These he attempted to open, but, for a
long time, in vain; at length, old, rotten, and crazy, they yielded to the
vigorous and repeated efforts, which the horror he conceived at being buried
alive urged him to make, and he found himself within the iron railing which
surrounded a magnificent tomb, in a small chapel, within that belonging to the
monastery of St. Julian. This place he knew (for the moon still shed her mellow
light through the painted windows of the chapel) to be the tomb of his
ancestors; a privileged place of burial for the lords of the castle, and domain
around.

His rapture on this discovery is scarcely to be conceived. -- He saw the
usurper, Astolpho, delivered into the hands of his gracious and rightful
sovereign, the great and good Emanuel. He saw his father revenged, and his
princess delivered!

After having opened a gate in the iron railing surrounding the tomb, which he
effected by putting his hand between the bars, and pushing back a bolt; he
passed through a wicket of the same materials, which separated the little
chapel from that of the convent and entered the latter; but despairing of
making himself heard before the chapel should be opened at mattins, he placed
himself on a bench in the choir, and musing on the singular adventures ventures
of the evening, was at length overtaken by sleep.

He had slept but a short space of time, when he was awakened by the step of
some person walking slowly down the aisle, in which he sat. -- What were his
emotions, when he beheld, advancing toward him, the same armed figure which he
had thrice before discovered in the course of the same evening!

He was a second time convinced that it was the armor of his father; the vizor
of the helmet was up; he could no longer doubt it; the eye of his father was
bent full upon him. -- Rhinaldo fell on his knee, and with a mixture of
enthusiastic affection and reverential awe exclaimed:

O sacred shade! which bear the form of the most honored, the most revered
of fathers, disclose, I conjure thee, the cause of this most solemn visitation.

"Can it be Rhinaldo!" exclaimed the seeming spectre, in the voice of Count
Roderic; "arise, my son, and tell how it happens "that I thus encounter thee."

These words almost bereft Rhinaldo of his senses. -- The surprise of the
moment was scarcely to be borne.. -- That the father he supposed murdered
should thus unaccountably stand before him! He seemed growing to the pavement,
where he kneeled. -- His father saw the conflict, and, advancing, raised him
from the ground, and embraced him tenderly. Rhinaldo now recovered himself. --
He fell again at the feet of his father, and seizing his mailed hand, pressed
the cold rivets to his lips, and bedewed it with the tears of filial affection.

A third person now joined them, who proved to be a faithful domestic of Count
Roderic, named Hugo; and some time was spent, between the father and the son,
in expressing their mutual surprise at so unexpected a meeting.

Rhinaldo having seated himself by his father, gave him an account of all the
circumstances which had, on his side, conduced to so extraordinary an event;
and when he had finished his story, his father gratified his curiosity, by a
short relation of the circumstances which had, on his part, contributed to this
singular encounter.

He told him, that upon perceiving Astolpho's intentions, which though he had
suspected them, he did not find himself enabled to resist, confirmed by his
conduct when he entered the castle; he had, himself, firmly determined not to
quit it, but to lie concealed till some opportunity should offer itself of
regaining his lawful possession, or at least of execpting vengeance on his
enemies. That in order to effect this, he had recourse to the advice and
assistance of his noble and valued friend, Leopold, who had agreed to leave the
castle, and join the forces of Emanuel (though he had not yet declared himself
on his side) on the western frontiers, clad in a suit of Count Roderic's
armor, and accompanied by a chosen party of brave friends, who were
themselves, that the deception might be more certain, to be persuaded that it
was Roderic that accompanied them.

This scheme succeeded but too well for Leopold, who, being taken for his
friend, was pursued by the malignant hatred of Astolpho, and perished. -- Count
Roderic in the mean time remained secreted in the old part of the castle,
confining himself in the day time to a small room, which opened on the
staircase, leading to the tower, from the battlements below which Rhinaldo had
escaped.

He was here supplied with necessaries by the means of his faithful domestic,
Hugo, who mixed, unsuspected, with the servants of the castle. -- From him he
learned the death of his friend, and, in a transport of grief and indignation,
formed a firm resolution to revenge it. He resolved, however, to delay the
execution of his vengeance till the time when other circumstances should
determine him to leave the castle. Since the period in which the conduct of
Astolpho had become, toward him, that of an implacable enemy, Roderic, whom,
after many years of faithful service, not even the juster claims of Emanuel
would have induced to appear in arms against the usurper, suffered overtures to
be conveyed, through the means of Hugo, to his oppressed and virtuous prince;
through the same channel he received information, that a company of men at arms
would quarter, on the very evening when this eventful meeting took place, at
about five miles from the castle. -- Count Roderic resolved to join them; but
before he executed that resolve, he determined to exact the vengeance he
meditated for the murder of his friend. Hugo had bribed the sentinel on the
bridge, that they might be suffered to pass at a more early hour than usual.
Two of the Count's horses were ready in the stable; and it was probable, that
an officer of the Count's appearance, though he would scarcely have been
permitted to enter them, might be suffered to quit the lines unsuspected.

This would probably have been the case, had he pursued only his design of
escaping; but his mind was agitated by the hopes of approaching vengeance. He
was armed by the assistance of Hugo, and waited with impatience for the hour
when the sentinel on the bridge should be relieved, that the man whom Hugo had
bribed might take his turn; it was during this period of suspense, that he was
thrice seen by Rhinaldo.

At length the hour approached; he descended to the chamber where he knew
Astolpho slept. -- He passed the antichamber with caution; the officers were
buried in a profound sleep; he approached the bed of Astolpho, and putting
aside the curtains, drew his dagger. -- Astolpho awaked, and fixed his opening
eyes on him till they exhibited a degree of horror, which, in some measure,
recalled Count Roderic to himself. The usurper lay speechless, under the
impression of the most agonizing terrors.

Roderic was unfit for the office of an assassin. -- He was a knight of
hitherto unstained reputation; the victim before him he had long obeyed as his
sovereign. -- He sheathed his dagger, and slowly quitted the room, leaving
Astolpho, who was extremely superstitious, under a firm conviction, that the
object he had beheld was the spirit of the murdered Roderic, who had appeared
to reproach him with his guilt.

The Count retired, as he had entered, unmolested; and his next object was to
effect his retreat from the castle. He returned to the chamber in the
staircase, in search of Hugo. -- The castle was now alarmed, and it became
necessary to wait till all should again be quiet.

In the course of a short period the search after Rhinaldo commenced, and led
his pursuers to the very part of the castle in which the Count was concealed.
When he heard their footsteps he did not, for a moment, doubt that he was the
object of their search. -- He heard them at the bottom of the staircase, the
room in which Count Roderic was concealed, which was in the tower, communicated
by a flight of narrow stairs with the platform. -- There was no time for
hesitation. -- The Count, accompanied by Hugo, ascended, and they found
themselves on the loftiest part of the roof of the castle; but even here, if
pursued, they must be taken.

There seemed no mode of escape, unless they could gain the battlements below.
-- They perceived, on examination, that part of the parapet had in one place
fallen in, toward the battlements, and rendered the descent not very
difficult; they resolved to attempt it, and succeeded.

They pursued the path which Rhinaldo had trod before them; it was, indeed the
only one they could take; they came to the turret. -- it promised to them an
asylum, as he had done to him before; they entered it; the courage of Count
Roderic was as little to be daunted by the prospect of the subterraneous
passage as that of his son, and the necessity of attempting his escape was,
perhaps, more urgent.

He entered it, accompanied by Hugo, unconscious whether it might lead him; for
it had been long before his time disused, and the very knowledge of it, though
palpably formed to add strength to the castle, by affording a communication
with the mount, buried in oblivion. -- They arrived in the chapel at the period
when Rhinaldo's fatigues had buried him in that sleep from which the sound of
his father's footsteps awakened him.

CHAP. XIX.
DAY had scarcely begun to encroach upon the pale light which the moon had
diffused over the venerable walls of the chapel, when the sacristan unbarred
the door, and was surprised by the sight of Count Roderic and his son. He
conducted them, at their desire, to the officer of the guard, in whom Rhinaldo
immediately discovered his friend Anselmo. After mutual embraces Rhinaldo
informed him of the singular adventures which had led his father and himself to
that spot; and Anselmo introduced them to the presence of Emanuel, who had
already arisen, and was in arms, -- This gracious prince received Rhinaldo with
a cordial embrace; for he had witnessed the virtues of this young knight,
during their intimacy, while he concealed his rank, under the garb and name of
Father Anthony. -- To Count Roderic his demeanor was cordial, frank and open.

He had, not long before he was dispossessed of his throne, by the perfidy of
Astolpho, conceived some displeasure at the conduct of Roderic, whose fiery
unbending spirit had compelled the king at length to banish him his presence,
and the intelligence he received, upon his enlargement, that this nobleman had,
for many years, possessed, in a very high degree, the favor and confidence of
Astolpho, led him to suspect that he was privy to the perfidy which had
deprived him of his liberty and his crown. This suspicion, unfounded, as in
truth it was; for Roderic owed his rise in the court of Astolpho, to his recent
disgrace with Emanuel; and his continuance in the confidence of that usurper,
to his power in the state, and his conduct in the field, so firmly possessed
the mind of Emanuel, that though he had learned his late disgrace at the court
of Astolpho, he did not think it safe to trust him with the secret, on which,
not only his hopes of again ascending the throne of Lombardy, but even his very
life depended. The suspicions were now wiped away; his displeasure had long
subsided, and the daring spirit, and undisguised open temper and demeanor,
which had procured this nobleman the appellation of Roderic the Hardy, again
obtained their former credit in the mind of Emanuel.

The discovery of the subterraneous passage was made known to the king, and
after a council of the knights had been called, it was agreed, that the castle
should be surprised by the means of this inlet, while every preparation was
made for an active and vigorous cooperation from without.

The rising sun had not long shed its golden light on the turrets of Count
Roderic's Castle, before a knight, completely armed, arrived at the gate and
demanded admission to the presence of Astolpho. As soon as that prince had
arisen, and a council had been summoned, he was admitted. This knight, who was
of a figure in which strength, grace, and agility were combined, was
magnificently armed, and a large sable plume waved on his helmet. -- He
advanced toward the chair in which Astolpho was seated, and bending one knee
to the ground, demanded justice against a knight of his train, whom he pledged
himself to prove a recreant, false to his God, and to his king; an oppressor,
and base wrong-doer, toward that sex which he was bound by his oath, and the
order he profaned, to succor and protect.

Astolpho promised him the battle, and demanded if the knight were in presence,
urging him, at the same time, to speak boldly, and of good heart. -- The knight
with the sable plume then rising* lifted the vizor of his helmet, and
discovered the face of Count Tancred. He fixed his eyes on Rhodolpho, who stood
near the chair of the king and addressed him thus:

Count Rhodolpho, as thou art a knight, attend. -- Thou h^ldest in a rigorous
and cruel captivity, if thy savage rage has not yet destroyed her, the
Princess Aspasia, the sister of this injured monarch, whose favor thou
abusest. -- The truth of this I pledge myself to make good upon thy head, when,
and at what weapons, (provided they be such as may become a knight) thou will.

At these words Count Tancred threw down his gauntlet, which Rhodolpho took up,
denying, with many asseverations, but with manifest confusion, the truth of the
charge.

Astolpho, in whose countenance, amidst the strongest marks of astonishment, a
thousand passions seemed struggling for mastery, arose, and ordering the lists
to be prepared, and the battle to take place on the succeeding morning, at day
break, left the chamber, and the council broke up. -- In the mean time, Count
Tancred, who was known to many of the knights in Astolpho's train, was welcomed
to the castle, and care was taken that he should be honorably treated till the
next morning should arrive.

Astolpho, in the mean time, remained involved in the deepest perplexity. Among
his many faults, want of affection toward this sister had no place. He was
fond of her, and it was much against his inclination that he had felt himself
compelled to sacrifice her to the arms of the Count St. Amand. -- His
indignation, therefore, against Rhodolpho was raised to the highest pitch, by
the very idea, that the accusation of Count Tancred might be true; but the
important secret, of which this favorite was master, compelled him to stifle
his resentment, and to hide in smiles the rage which rankled in his heart; for
he well knew, that many persons of the first consequence, who at present
supported his cause, did it from a conviction, which had been artfully
instilled into them, that his opponent was an impostor, and that Emanuel had
actually perished, as had been reported.

While he was musing in his chamber, agitated by these reflections, he was
surprised by the presence of Rhodolpho, who had the privilege of entering this
apartment. -- He could not readily account for this visit, at such a season,
and was not a little surprised to find, that the cause of it was the anxious
desire which Rhodolpho felt to make a solemn denial of the foul charge,
preferred against him in the presence of his sovereign, a charge which he
solemnly averred to be founded in the most attrocious falsehood, and the most
inveterate malignity, which, he added, he did not doubt he should fully prove
on the succeeding morning; protesting at the same time, with the strongest
asseverations, that he had not seen the Countess since the death of his father.

This declaration was graciously received by Astolpho, and was, indeed, highly
grateful to him. -- He was willing to believe it true; but in spite of his
inclination, he felt some doubts which he could not holy suppress. He had long
suspected the courage of Rhodolpho, and could scarcely account for his meeting
this charge with such determined resolution. This resolution, however, if it
was not a proof that he was innocent, was, at least, a strong one that he was
willing to appear so; a circumstance which was calculated to spare to Astolpho
much mortifying self-humiliation; nor could he help looking with some secret
anxiety toward the event of the battle, which, by the death of Rhodolpho,
might free him from a subject already become too powerful not to cause him much
uneasiness.

CHAP. XX.
RHODOLPHO, in the mean time, who had never made this declaration till he had
taken a resolution effectually to prevent the discovery of its falsehood,
thought of nothing less than of meeting Count Tancred in the field. -- His
brain, fertile in every project of villainy, had engendered the plan of
preventing the combat, before he had pledged himself to Astolpho, that he would
so ardently embrace that method of proving his innocence, and he retired from
that prince's chamber to give more maturity to his design. -- He knew no method
of preventing the combat, which was to take place in the morning, so effectual
as that of assassinating his adversary over night; nor did his heart, at once
treacherous, cowardly and cruel, revolt at a crime, not sanctioned indeed, but
unhappily rendered too frequent by the barbarous manners of the age.

He thought, that by the means of some worthless instruments, about his person,
he might be enabled to do this undiscovered; but at all events, should
suspicions arise, he was sure of protection from Astolpho. His only subject of
debate now was how to accomplish his infamous design; and after some time spent
in deliberation, he formed the following plan:

In consequence of his brutal and unmannerly attack on the defenseless Isabel,
during the preceding night that lady had sent a most earnest entreaty to
Astolpho, that if she was in future to be confined, her place of confinement
might be near to his apartments; nor did Rhodolpho, whom the sudden appearance,
and mysterious escape of Rhinaldo had filled with strange suspicions and fears,
oppose this request; in consequence of which the princess, together with her
cousin and attendant, was removed to an apartment nearly adjoining to that of
Astolpho.

Rhodolpho, who had the superintendance of the household, though he could not,
in this case, act officially, easily procured it to be intimated to the
steward, who supplied his place, that the apartment lately quitted by the
princess, would afford the most proper accommodation for the strange knight;
and that apartment was, upon this intimation, prepared for him.

Rhodolpho now saw his enemy in his hands; he had, in the pursuit of Rhinaldo,
discovered the door by which he had escaped; an inlet to the apartment which
would be effectually concealed from the unsuspecting inhabitant by the
tapestry. Through this door he determined to give entrance, at midnight, to the
ruffian, who had been privy to his infamous design on the Lady Isabel, and to
two others of his train, whom this man pointed out as proper instruments for
the business. -- These miscreants were to dispatch the unfortunate Count and
his attendant with their daggers, while Rhodolpho, himself, waited without to
assist them in disposing of their bodies.

The plan being thus projected, and the horrid instruments of his infamous
design well instructed; he saw his unsuspecting adversary retire from a slight
meal, of which he partook with some friends, toward his apartment, for the
night. -- Astolpho also retired to rest. The tumult of the hall began, by
degrees, to subside; and all grew silent.

Rhodolpho alone, with a mind agitated by all the accumulated horrors which
fasten on a design so diabolical; yet urged by desperate cowardice to the
perpetration of his guilt, paced, with trembling step, the still gloomy
recesses of the castle. -- The darkness and silence of the scene sh^d a double
portion of terror, over his mind.

The clock tolled two -- this was the hour at which his accomplices had agreed
to meet him -- all was still silent, not a step to be heard; he thought they
had mistaken the place of appointment, and were, perhaps, already arrived at
the spot, which was to be the scene of their infamous action. -- He went up
stairs, passed through the gallery, and arrived at the little door; he found no
person there; the door was still fastened. -- He had just opened it, when he
heard the footsteps of some persons descending the stairs, on that side of the
gallery; they entered the apartment with cautious silent steps. -- Rhodolpho
advanced toward them:

Come, said he, in a low tremulous voice; you are late; the door is opened; be
careful, but be resolute. When the deed is done bring the bodies into this
room, with every thing that can lead to a discovery, and we will dispose of
them.

He had scarcely uttered these words, when he received the sword of the person
he addressed through his body, and the voice of Rhinaldo exclaimed, Die, most
infamous assassin.

Rhinaldo, with his father, and friend Anselmo, had been deputed to conduct a
select body of Emanuel's troops through the subterraneous passage, and they had
gained the tower, undiscovered, at the hour when it was judged that the
inhabitants of the castle were lulled in profound repose.

Rhinaldo, to whom the safety and protection of the Lady Isabel had been
particularly entrusted by her father, hastened, accompanied by a few friends,
toward that door, which he knew communicated with her apartment when he was
thus met, and thus accosted by Rhodolpho.

Rhodolpho, when he received the wound, groaned and fell.

Rhinaldo, impressed by the words of Rhodolpho, with the utmost horror, drew
his sword from the body, and rushing toward the door, which he found open,
entered the apartment, accompanied by his attendants. -- On lifting the
tapestry* he was surprised to discover, by a light which burned in the room, a
person busily employed in arranging and adjusting several pieces of armor; nor
was this person, who was Count Trancred's former deliverer, less surprised to
see a figure, with a sword imbrued with blood, advance from behind the
tapestry. -- He dropped the helmet which he held in his hand, and his sudden
exclamations awakened his master. Count Tancred, who, slipping on a loose robe,
and snatching up a sword which lay by him, entered from his chamber.

The mutual surprise of Rhinaldo and the Count, at this meeting, kept them, for
some moments, silent. -- Rhinaldo at length informed his friend, in a few
words, of the operations of the night, and left him in the care of two of his
attendants, while he himself proceeded in search of Isabel.

He passed hastily through the hall, where he had already perceived that the
business was begun. -- A party, near the steps of the range of apartments,
which were occupied by Astolpho, boldly, but unsuccessfully opposed another, at
the head of which Rhinaldo discovered the plume of his father; he rushed
forward to join him; the opposite party retreated up the steps toward the
chambers of Astolpho. When they arrived at his chamber, they found it empty;
nor were they long in discovering the fate of this guilty and unfortunate
Prince.

The vision, as he thought it, of the preceding night, had so much occupied his
mind, that the idea of it had, since its appearance, almost incessantly haunted
his imagination.

He was observed to be thoughtful and gloomy during the course of the day, and
when, after supper, he again retired to bed, he endeavored in vain to compose
himself to rest. After some hours spent in anxiety and terror, he arose, and,
dressing himself, walked about his chamber, waiting impatiently for the dawn.

Tired, at length, with his own thoughts, he walked into his antichamber*
where he found the officers of his guard and other attendants more alert than
usual from the alarm of the preceding evening. He conversed with them at
intervals for some time. During a pause in the conversation, he thought he
heard the sound of footsteps without. The state of his mind made him awake to
every suspicion -- he listened again -- it was no longer to be doubted. In a
fit of desperation he rushed out at the head of his few attendants, and met his
fate at the very first onset. He was found soon afterward in the hall covered
with wounds, and deprived of every symptoms of animation.

After having assisted to beat back the party who opposed his father, Rhinaldo,
whose thoughts were continually bent upon his Isabel, again detached himself
with a small party in pursuit of her. From the door of a chamber near to
Astolpho's, he saw three females rush forth in all the wildness of sudden and
extreme terror. -- He met them, and repeating the name of Isabel, stopped their
progress. -- The first of these females pronouncing the name of Rhinaldo,
rushed, as if for protection, into his arms.

It was the Lady Isabel. He conducted her, with her Cousin and attendant, to
the apartment of Count Tancred, under whose protection he left them, that he
might again join his father; but he found his presence useless. Emanuel had on
the preceding day contrived to send intelligence to the party of cavalry which
Count Roderic had prepared himself to join, of the plan in agitation, with
orders to march in the night, and surprise, if possible, that part of
Astolpho's lines, which was opposite to their quarters; at the same time he
quitted the priory, and at the head of his chosen troops made an attack on
those posts which were the nearest to him. Assaulted at once on opposite sides,
and this in the middle of the night, Astolpho's troops made but a feeble
resistance, and after a short stand they began to give way on all sides.

Count Roderic, in the mean time, having filled the Castle with his followers,
and secured the soldiers within, who, lulled in a fatal security, were most of
them surprised without arms, had by this measure effectually disconcerted the
troops, who fled before Emanuel; for when they retreated for refuge to the
Castle, they found the drawbridge in possession of their enemies.

They threw down their arms -- the gates were soon opened to Emanuel, and the
dawn of day saw his standard displayed on the walls.

CHAP. XXI.
RHINALDO had no sooner saluted his beloved and revered sovereign, and joined
in the general congratulations on this singular success, than he flew to the
apartment of Count Tancred, that he might introduce his Isabel to a parent whom
she had not seen since the age of childhood, and whom she had so long lamented
as dead.

He found the chamber empty -- but, listening, was attracted by the sound of
voices to the little room behind the tapestry, where he discovered the Count,
the Lady Isabel, Ellenor, and their attendants.

They were surrounding a wretched man, who seemed mortally wounded. He was
sitting on the ground with his back against the wall, and was supported on one
side by one of the attendants.

It was Count Rhodolpho, whose groans had led them from the inner chamber to
the spot where he lay. -- When Rhinaldo entered, he was imploring the pardon of
the surrounding audience, but particular of Tancred, for the offenses he had
committed, and for the farther ones which he had meditated against them.

He told Count Tancred that the Princess Aspasia was confined in his Castle,
and, drawing a ring from his finger, informed him, that upon producing that
token to his steward, who had then the command of the Castle, she would be
immediately delivered to him.

He confessed, with much contrition, that a passion he had conceived for that
lady, stronger than that which bound him toward the Lady Isabel, had caused
him thus to secret her.

As he was much exhausted, Rhinaldo ordered him to be conveyed to the bed in
the adjoining chamber. -- This was with some difficulty done. -- His wound was
there dressed, but he died in the course of the succeeding day.

Emanuel, thus restored to his throne, bestowed every day fresh marks of his
favor on Rhinaldo and his father, who had been the instruments of this happy
revolution.

For Rhinaldo he had long felt and long professed the affection of a father; he
no sooner received his long-lost daughter from his hands, than he returned her
to this affectionate lover, as the brightest boon he could bestow. -- That she
was indeed so, every hour which this enviable father spent in her company
convinced him; and, perhaps, if he had not so suddenly given her to Rhinaldo,
the difficulty he felt in parting with her might have inclined him to hesitate.

Anselmo now interceded with Rhinaldo to mention his pretensions to the Lady
Ellenor; nor were they for a moment disregarded. Emanuel expressed himself
happy to be enabled thus to reward the attachment of this deserving young
nobleman.

The last words of the miserable Rhodolpho filled the bosom of Count Tancred
with a tumult of hopes and fears. He had no sooner been introduced by his
friend Rhinaldo to Emanuel, than he prepared to depart for Rhodolpho's Castle,
having obtained, in addition to the token he had received, a mandate from the
king. It will be needless to describe the rapture which attended the meeting of
these lovers.

By the intercession of Rhinaldo the Princess obtained the restoration of the
estates of the Count St. Amand, which had been forfeited; and after some time
passed in widowhood, from respect to the memory of an husband, who had so
little deserved it, she rewarded the faithful attachment of Count Tancred with
her hand.

The steady and zealous services of Rugiero were not forgotten by Rhinaldo, who
obtained for him an honorable and lucrative situation. Nor did the Lady Isabel
overlook in Barbara, the companion of her toils and her dangers; and they
found, when, after a reign of many prosperous years, the death of Emanuel
exalted them to the throne of Lombardy, in these steady and zealous adherents,
true and loyal subjects, and firm and faithful friends.

The hours of adversity which Emanuel had known, had strengthened his mind,
which his tedious solitude had much inured to habits of reflection; nor could
he fail to observe, as often as he contemplated the combination of
circumstances which had brought about a revolution so singular, how seldom, if
we would wait patiently for events, we should have reason to inveigh against
the success, even in this life, attending criminal actions; and with how little
constancy and foresight we are to continue to lament those circumstances as
evil, which eventually, though inexplicably, produce our greatest good.

FINIS.

