A LITTLE PLAIN ENGLISH.

COPY RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

A LITTLE PLAIN ENGLISH, ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES, ON THE
TREATY, NEGOCIATED WITH HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY, AND ON THE CONDUCT OF THE
PRESIDENT RELATIVE THERETO; IN ANSWER TO "THE LETTERS OF FRANKLIN." WITH A
SUPPLEMENT CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE TURBULENT AND FACTIOUS PROCEEDINGS OF
THE OPPOSERS OF THE TREATY.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

"An habitation giddy and unsure
"Has he who builds on the vulgar heart.
"Oh thou fond Many! with what loud applause
"Did thou beat heaven with blessing Bolinbroke,
"Before he was what thou would have him be?
"And now, being trimmed up in thine own desires,
"Thou beastly feeder, art so full of him,
"That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up."
SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY THOMAS BRADFORD, PRINTER, BOOKSELLER,
AND STATIONER, NO 8, SOUTH FRONT STREET. 1795.

PREFACE.
I Dare say, the reader has already concluded, that the author of Plain English
can be no other than an Englishman; and, I can assure him, the further he
advances, the more will he be confirmed in his opinion. It would then, be
useless to deny the fact.

The Democrats have loaded me with every name which they imagine to be
opprobrious, (but of which I am very proud) such, for example, as Aristocrat,
King'sman, Loyalist, Royalist, Clergyman, Englishman, etc. it is, therefore, no
more than fair play for me to choose from amongst them that which suits me
best. Englishman is the one I have preferred on the present occasion; because,
as an Englishman, I have not been obliged to declaim with enthusiasm on the
inexhaustible riches, the generosity and humanity of the French Republicans; as
an Englishman, I have not thought it necessary to my advancement, to varnish
over the follies and errors of a certain part of society, in these States; as
an Englishman, I shall be excused for not thinking myself upon a level with
every patriot, every negro, and every democrat, that pleases to call me his
fellow citizen; as an Englishman, as a calf of John Bull, I shall hope to be
permitted, in short, I will be permitted, to bellow out the truth without
disguise.

Methinks, I hear the reader exclaim: what! the conduct of General Washington
defended by an Englishman! For my part, I cannot see how it can be more
offensive to a real American to hear the conduct of the President defended by
an Englishman, than to hear it condemned by a Frenchman. If meddling be at all
commendable, it certainly is as much so in the former as in the latter case.
But, the reader need not alarm himself. He will not be disgusted with nauseous
panegyrics on GENERAL WASHINGTON. I have not treated him as the CRAWLING
DEMAGOGUES of this country treat the sovereign people. If the GENERAL'S
character or conduct stood in need of defense, it would not find a defender in
me. In my answer to Franklin, on this subject, I have had the same object in
view, that I have had in view in every other sentence I have yet published;
what that object is, I shall leave for the sagacious democrats to find out.

From the volumes, or rather bales, that have already appeared against the
treaty, I have selected the "Letters of Franklin," not because they are the
worst things that have been written on the subject, and, God knows, it is not
because they are the best; but because they contain upon the whole, the fairest
sample, I have yet seen, of the opinions and language of the opposers of the
treaty.

I will, with the reader's leave, close this preface with an observation,
which, though rather foreign to the subject before us, is nevertheless nearly
enough connected with democratic affairs to be worthy of a place.

This very day, a twelve month ago, the bells of this City were ringing, the
cannons firing, Tom the Tinker toping, bawling, and dancing a la canibale round
the altar of La Liberte, and every blackguard in the City rolling drunk about
the street, to celebrate that happy event the destruction of LOUIS XVI. Today
there is none of all this: all is as still as death! What can this mean? Is
patriotism upon the wane, even after the taking of Amsterdam and the death of
the Dauphin? Surely my dream See the first part of the Bone to Gnaw.
about the last year's fete civique cannot have interrupted any thing? Can it
be possible that conscience has at last struck Tom the Tinker? Was he afraid of
seeing Old William Penn in reality? Oh! could I but flatter myself that I had
worked a reformation there! Could I but hope, that I had scared POOR TOM into
his senses, I should die in peace!

PHILADELPHIA, August 10th 1795.
A LITTLE PLAIN ENGLISH, ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
A TREATY of amity, commerce, and navigation, with Great Britain, is a thing
which has been so long and so ardently desired on your part, and so often
solicited by your government, that one cannot help being astonished that even
the democratic, or French, faction should have the temerity to raise a cry
against it, now it is brought so near a conclusion. It is true, this perverse
faction is extremely contemptible, as to the property they possess, and the
real weight they have in the community; and their dissatisfaction, which is
sure to accompany every measure of the Federal Government, is a pretty certain
sign of the general approbation of those who may be properly called the people:
but, it must be acknowledged at the same time, that they have for partisans
almost the whole of that description of persons, who, among us royalists, are
generally designated by the name of ^^ob. Being an enemy to the administration,
be it what it may, is always a sufficient recommendation with these latter, and
is looked upon as an ample compensation for a lost reputation or a want of
talents. Those who are simple enough to listen to a demagogue, don't care much
about his moral character. With the rights of the citizens, their virtue, and
their sovereignty, eternally vibrating on his lips, he may, for ought they
care, have a heart as black as Tartarus. If he writes, let him fill his pages
with frothy declamation, and vaunting bombast, with the canting jargon of
modern republicans, and it matters little what arrangement he makes use of.
Ambiguity and confusion are even an advantage to him, they are a labyrinth in
which he loses the wretches whom he has enticed from their duty. In short, his
business is to awaken in his reader, jealousy, envy, revenge, and every passion
that can disgrace the heart of man, to lull his gratitude, reason, and
conscience, asleep, and then let him loose upon society. Such is the eloquence,
and such the object of Franklin.

Far be it from me to pretend to a rivalship with this fawning mob orator; I
would not for the world make one convert from his tattered flock; unenvied I
leave him to the plaudits of his cajoled fellow citizens, and the fraternal
hugs of your insidious friends and allies.

It is become a kind of established custom, even among those who are the firm
friends of your government, to yield to the prejudice of the populace, in
passing eulogiums on the reigning powers in France; or, at least, in observing
a cautious silence with respect to their insidious, not to say hostile, conduct
toward the United States. These gentlemen have, undoubtedly their reasons for
this; for my part, I have none, and therefore I shall take the liberty to say
what, I am sure they must think on the subject.

On all hands it is allowed, that the parasite of a prince is a most despicable
character; a popular parasite must then be doubly despicable. It is possible
for the supple courtier to find something like an apology for his
self-humiliation; one may be dazzled by the splendor of a crown, or blinded by
the munificence of a friend and protector; but what must be the man (if,
indeed, he be worthy of the name,) who can crawl to the dregs of mankind? Who
can make a voluntary surrender of the superiority with which nature has endowed
him; who can sacrifice truth, honor, justice, and even common sense, to the
stupid stare and momentary huzza of the populace, of the populace whose welfare
affects him not, and whom, in his heart, he despises?

The Letters of Franklin are a string of phillipics against Great Britain and
the Executive of the United States. They do not form a regular series, in which
the subject is treated in continuation: the first seems to be the overflowings
of passion bordering on insanity, and each succeeding one the fruit of a
relapse. To follow the author step by step through such a jumble, would be to
product the same kind of disgust in you as I myself have experienced; I shall
therefore deviate from the order, or rather disorder, which Franklin has found
it convenient to employ, and endeavor to bring the subject before you in a
less complicated point of view.

The censure of Franklin has three principal objects; the treating with Great
Britain at all, the terms of the treaty, and the conduct of the President
relative to the negotiation.

I. He asserts, that to form a commercial treaty, with Great Britain is a step,
at once unnecessary, impolitic, dangerous and dishonorable.

II. That, if forming a treaty with Great Britain were consistent with sound
policy, the terms of the present treaty are disadvantageous, humiliating and
disgraceful to the United States.

III. That, supposing the terms of the treaty to be what every good American
ought to approve, yet the conduct of the President, relative to the negotiation
and promulgation of it, has been highly improper, and even monarchical, and,
for which, he deserves to be impeached.

If Franklin has made out any one of these assertions, if he has proved, that
to treat with Great Britain is unnecessary, impolitic, dangerous and
dishonorable, that the terms of the present treaty are disadvantageous,
humiliating and disgraceful, or that the President has pursued a conduct in the
negotiation for which he deserves to be impeached, you will all do well to join
the remonstrating throng, that are now hunting the good Old General to his
retreat at Mount Vernon; but if he has proved none of these; if all that he has
said on the subject be mere cavilling and abuse, scolding, reviling, and
execrating; if he be every where detected of misrepresentation, inconsistency,
and flat contradiction; if, in short it appears, that his ultimate object is to
stir up the unwary to an indecent and even violent opposition against the
Federal Government, then, if you consult your own interests, you will be upon
your guard, and weigh well the consequences, before you determine on such an
opposition.

I. Franklin asserts, that to form a commercial treaty with Great Britain is a
step, at once unnecessary, impolitic, dangerous, and dishonorable.

1. It is unnecessary, because commercial treaties are an artificial means to
obtain a natural end. They are the swathing bands of commerce, that impede the
free operations of nature. This will not detain us long; it is one of those
chimerical notions that so well characterize the Parisian school. Nobody but a
set of philosophical politicians ever imagined the plan of opening all the
ports in the world to all the vessels in the world, of interweaving and
confounding the interests of all nations, of forming the inhabitants of the
earth into one vast republic, of rendering the whole family of mankind
enlightened, free, and happy. When this plan shall be put in execution with
success, I will allow that commercial treaties are unnecessary, but 'till then,
I must contend for the contrary.

The two countries, says Franklin, if necessary in their products to each
other, will seek an intercourse. This is all I wanted him to admit, to prove
that an exchange of commodities between our countries is necessary; for that
they have sought an intercourse with each other, and that they do now seek that
intercourse more than ever, is most certain; so much so with respect to this
country that about one half of her exports are now made to Great Britain and
her dominions. But says he, this exchange ought to be left to itself; for the
commerce of nations ought to be like the trade between individuals, who deal
with those who give them the best treatment and the best bargains. I subscribe
to the justice of the latter part of this remark with all my heart: nothing
could be more convenient for my purpose; for if nations, like individuals,
trade with those who treat them best, and give them the best bargains, how much
better treatment and better bargains must you receive from Great Britain than
from other nations, when you purchase from her three times as much as from all
the rest of the world put together? But, that this extensive exchange, however
necessary to both parties, should be left to regulate itself, I cannot believe;
for, keeping up the comparison, the commerce of nations being like the trade
between individuals, it will ever be found I believe, that treaties are as
necessary to a continuance of good understanding in the former as written
contracts are in the latter.

In observation preserve itself here, which must not be omitted. Franklin
objects to forming a treaty with Great Britain, because, says he, She is famed
for perfidy and double dealing, her polar star is interest, artifice with her
is a substitute for nature, etc. etc. God knows if all this, and much more that
he has said, be true; but, if it be, I am sure it makes strongly for a treaty,
in place of against one; for, proceeding still upon his own comparison, that
commerce between nations is like trade between individuals, certainly no
individual would ever think of dealing to any amount, with a person famed for
perfidy and double dealing, without binding him down by written articles.

Out of this observation grows another of not less importance. Franklin has
taken an infinite deal of pains to persuade you that the President should have
formed a treaty with France instead of Great Britain? Your commerce with
France, even in the fairest days of her prosperity, never amounted to more than
a fifth part of your commerce with Great Britain; and if what Franklin says be
true, France is the most magnanimous, generous, just, honorable, (humane!)
rich, and powerful nation upon the earth; and can you then want a written
bargain with France, when a mere trifle is the object, and none with Great
Britain, when half you have is at stake? Shall it be said that you distrust
France, that honorable, that rich nation? that you bind her down with "hard
biting laws," while you admit Great Britain, "whose days," Franklin assures
you, "are numbered," to a kind of family intercourse, where the bands of
affection are supposed to supply the place of law?

Franklin incautiously acknowledges, that you repeatedly solicited a commercial
treaty with Great Britain, and this is very true. The first question put to Mr.
Hammond, on his arrival here, was to know, if he was authorized to treat on
that subject. This was also the ostensible object of Mr. Madison's famous
resolutions. To force the nations of Europe, and particularly Great Britain, to
enter into commercial treaties with you. The words nations of Europe were
afterward changed for Great Britain. These resolutions were a long time and
are still, a favorite theme of panegyric among the French Faction; all the
democratic societies in the union have passed resolves in approbabation of
them; they have been toasted at every patriotic dinner, every civic feast, and
even our Franklin himself sings forth their praises. How comes it then, that
all these people now deprecate the idea of making a treaty with Great Britain?
This will be no longer a secret, when Patriot Madison's real object is known,
and to know this you have only to compare his resolutions with a passage in
Citizen Genet's instructions. The fact is is, Patriot Madison had no such thing
as a treaty in view; nothing on earth was further from his wishes. War was his
object; but this he could not propose in direct terms, and therefore, he
proposed such restrictions on the British commerce, as he was sure, if adopted,
would produce a war. He failed, and Great Britain, in consenting to what he
pretended was the object of his resolutions, and the President and senate in
ratifying it, are now loaded with the execrations of all his partisans. But
what must be the Patriot's remorse? What will he be able to say against
treating with a nation, whom he wished to force to a treaty with you?

2d. Treaties are impolitic, because they lead to to war: and consequently a
treaty with Great Britain is exceptionable on that account. This is another
idea borrowed from the legislators of your Sister Republic, and surely it is
not, for that reason, less whimsical. "Treaties lead to war," says Franklin,
"and war is the bane of republican government." Treaties of alliance offensive
and defensive lead to war, it is their object; but how treaties of amity,
commerce, and navigation, can lead to war; how a treaty like that under
consideration, made expressly to terminate all differences in an amicable
manner, to produce satisfaction and good understanding, to establish universal
peace and true friendship between the parties, how a treaty like this can lead
to war, is, to me, inconceivable. With just as much reason might it be said
that treaties of peace lead to to war, that independence leads to subjugation,
that liberty leads to slavery, and that good leads to evil.

Treaties, says our Demagogue, are like partnerships, they establish
intimacies, which sometimes end in profligacy, and sometimes in ruin and
bankruptcy, distrust, strife, and quarrel; and then on he goes with an abusive
apostrophe (which decency prevents me from copying here) inferring that you
ought, on this account, to avoid a connection, as he terms it, with Great
Britain. This comparison is not so good as the last we quoted; treaties of
amity and commerce do not at all resemble partnerships. "The commerce of
nations is like trade between individuals;" but commercial treaties resemble
contracts between individuals of separate interests, and not co-partnerships. A
co-partnership implies an union of interests, a participation in profits and
losses, in debts and credits. Are any of these understood by a commercial
treaty? Assuredly not. In a commercial treaty two nations say: on these terms
we will buy and sell, of and to each other. Had you made a treaty with Great
Britain to club your merchandise and revenues, and to carry on trade under the
firm of Madam Britain and Miss America, such a treaty would, indeed, have
resembled a partnership, and would very probably have been attended with all
the inconveniences, stated by Franklin; but commercial treaties are, I repeat
it, among nations what written bargains are among individuals, and the former
have exactly the same tendency as the latter, that is, to render mistakes,
disputes, and quarrels, less frequent.

But, however, even if treaties do lead to war, it is rather surprising to hear
Franklin object to them on that account, when one third part of his book is
taken up with invectives against the President for not forming a treaty with
France, the direct object of which was your taking a part with her in the
present war. The treaty proposed by Citizen Genet, says he, was a treaty on
liberal and equitable principles. What were these liberal principles now?
Citizen Genet came forward with an offer to treat, which offer, it must be
confessed contained no express desire of involving you in a war; but what were
the Citizen's private instructions concerning this treaty? for it is from these
that you are to judge, and not from the contents of a mere complimentary
letter. What were they then? "Citizen Genet," says the Executive Council, shall
open a negotiation, which may become a national agreement in which two great
people shall suspend their commercial and political interest, to befriend the
empire of liberty, wherever it can be embraced. -- "Such a pact, which the
people of France will support with all the energy that distinguishes them, will
quickly contribute to the general emancipation of the New World. -- But should
the American administration adopt a wavering conduct, the Executive Council
charges him, in expectation that the American Government will finally determine
to make a common cause with us, to take such steps as will appear to him
exigencies may require, to serve the cause of liberty and the freedom of the
people. -- The guarantee of our West India Islands shall form an essential
clause in the new treaty which will be proposed: the Executive Council, in
consequence, recommend to Citizen Genet to found early the disposition of the
American government, and to make it a sine qua non of their free commmerce to
those Islands, so essential to the United States. Here then are the "liberal
principles," so much boasted of by the partisans of France! A treaty on these
principles is what Franklin would have approved of. For not forming a treaty on
these principles he loads your President with abuse, while he declares, that
his objection to treaties, is, they lead to war, and war is the bane of
republican government! A demagogue, like a liar, should have a good memory.

3d. To form a treaty of commerce with Great Britain is dangerous, he says;
because it is forming a connection with a monarch, and the introduction of the
fashions, forms, and precedents of monarchical governments, has ever
accelerated the destruction of republics. Here we might ask our demagogue, as
the Clown did Malvolio: are you a fool indeed, or do you but counterfeit? For,
to suppose him in earnest would be to believe him guided by something below
even the imbecility of a frenchified republican. It would be to suppose him
almost upon a level with a Member from the Southward, who gave his vote against
a law, merely because it appeared to him to be of monarchical origin, while, at
the same moment, he represented a State, whose declaration of rights says; The
good people are entitled to the common law of England, and the trial by jury,
according to the course of that law, and to the benefit of such of the English
statutes, as existed at the time of their first emigration, and which, by
experience, have been found applicable to their local and other circumstances,
and of such others as have been since made in England, or Great Britain, and
have been introduced here, etc. Can the people who have been so careful in
preventing their future rulers from depriving them of the benefit of the laws
of England, who look upon the being governed by those laws as the most
inestimable of their rights, be afraid of introducing among them the fashions,
forms, and precedents of England? Can it be possible, that they are afraid of
introducing among them what they already possess, and what they declare they
will never part with?

It is not my object to intrude on you my opinion of the fashions, forms, and
precedents, as Franklin calls them, of the British government; they may be
better or they may be worse than those of other governments; but be they what
they may, they are nearly the same as your own, and they are the only ones,
ever adopted by any nation on earth, to which yours bear the most distant
resemblance; therefore, admitting, for a moment, what Franklin says to be true;
that you should make treaties with no nation whose fashions, and forms are
different from your own, it follows of course, that, if you ought not, on this
account to make treaties with Great Britain; you ought to do it with no nation
in the world.

But this would not suit the purpose of Franklin, who, at the same time that he
reprobates the idea of making a treaty with Great Britain, inculcates the
propriety and even necessity of making one with France. If foreign connexions
are to be formed, says he, they ought to be made with nations whose influence
and example would not poison the fountain of liberty, and circulate the
deleterious streams to the destruction of the rich harvest of our revolution --
Tell me your company, and I will tell you who you are. And then he tells us,
that there is not a nation in Europe, with an established government, whose
example should be our imitation, but, that France is our natural ally; that she
has a government congenial with our own, and that there can be no hazard of
introducing from her, principles and practices repugnant to freedom. Take care
what you are about, Mr. Franklin! If there be none of the established
governments in Europe congenial to your own, and if the government of France be
congenial to your own, the inevitable conclusion is, that neither you nor your
Sister Republic have an established government! Do you begin to perceive the
fatal effects of your want of memory?

But, I should like to be told how Franklin came to discover a resemblance
between your government and that of France, or between you and the French. To
say that such a resemblance exists is a trait of slander that, were I an
American, I should resent with the utmost indignation. Are you governed by an
assembly of ignorant caballing legislators? An assembly of Neroes, whose
pastime is murder, who have defied the God of Heaven, and, in idea, have
snatched the thunder from his hand to hurl it on a crouching people? And do you
resemble the republican French? Have you cast off the very semblance of virtue
and religion? Do you indeed, resemble those men of blood, those profligate
infidels, who, uniting the frivolity of the Monkey to the ferocity of the
Tiger, can go dancing to the gallows, or butcher their relations to the air of
ah, ca ira? If you do, you have not much to fear from the introduction of the
fashions, forms, and precedents of other nations.

Another source of danger, that Franklin has had the sagacity to discover in
treating with Great Britain, is, that, she meditates your subjugation, and a
treaty will give her a footing amongst you which she had not before, and
facilitate her plans. The executive council of France ordered Citizen Genet to
tell you something of this sort, in order to induce you to embark in the war
for the liberty and happiness of mankind. In this situation of affairs," say
the Executive Council, "when the military preparations in Great Britain become
every day more serious, we ought to excite, by all possible means, the zeal of
the Americans, who are as much interested as ourselves in disconcerting the
destructive projects of George III, in which they are probably an object. I
beseech you to pay attention to this passage of the instructions. When military
preparations were making against France, she wanted your aid, and so the good
Citizen was ordered to tell you that you were the object of those preparations.
The Citizen was ordered to tell you a falsehood; for the war has now continued
three years, and George III. has made not the least attempt against your
independence.

You have the surest of all guarantees that Great Britain will never attempt
any thing against your independence, her interest. I agree with Franklin, that
her interest is the main spring of all her actions, and that, had not her
interest been implicated, the commercial relation between you and her would
long since have been destroyed Her interest will ever dictate to her to keep up
that relation, and certainly making an attempt on your independance is not the
way to do that; for, as to her succeeding in such an attempt, I think every
American will look on that as impossible. The idea of your again becoming
colonies of Great Britain may be excused in Franklin and the other
stipendiaries of the French republic, but an American, who holds the good of
his country in higher estimation than a bundle of assignats, and who entertains
such a disgraceful belief, must have the head of an idiot and the heart of a
coward.

Besides, has not our Demagogue himself given a very good reason for your
having nothing to apprehend from Great Britain? Happy for this country, says
he, the days of that corrupt monarchy are numbered; for already has the
impetuous valor of our insulted French brethren rushed like a torrent upon the
Dutch Provinces, and swept away the dykes of Aristocracy. Perhaps Heaven will
direct their next steps to Great Britain itself, and by one decisive stroke,
relieve the world from the miseries which that corrupt government has too long
entailed upon mankind. I shall not stop here to prove, that it was not an act
of a corrupt government to frame such laws, as the people of these states have
bound their rulers never to depart from; nor have I time to prove, that
peopling the United states, changing an uncouth wilderness into an extensive
and flourishing empire, in little more than a century, was not entailing
miseries upon mankind. I hasten to my subject; and, I think, I need take no
great deal of pains to prove to you, that, if Great Britain be in the situation
in which Franklin has described her, you have very little to fear from her. A
nation whose days are numbered, and particularly, who is in continual
expectation of a domiciliary visit from the French, is rather to be pitied than
feared.

And yet this same Franklin, who tells you that the days of Great Britain are
numbered, that she is upon the point of annihilation, and that nothing can save
her but repentance in sackcloth and ashes; this same Franklin, who says all
this, and much more to the same purpose; this same Franklin winds up almost
every one of his letters in declaring, that you have every thing to fear from
her, and that nothing on earth can save you but France! That gallant nation,
whose proffers we have neglected, is the sheet anchor who sustains our hopes,
and should her glorious exertions be incompetent to the great object she has in
view, we have little to flatter ourselves with from the faith, honor, or
justice of Great Britain. -- The nation on whom our political existence depends
we have treated with indifference bordering on contempt. -- Citizens your only
security depends upon France, and, by the conduct of your government, that
security has become precarious. Now before I go any further, I shall bring
another sentence from Franklin, which will certainly give you a favorable idea
of the veracity and consistency of that Demagogue. Insulated as we are, not an
enemy near to excite apprehension, and our products such as are indispensable,
we need neither the countenance of other countries, nor their support! What! no
enemy near to excite apprehension, no need of support, and yet France is the
sheet anchor of your hopes!" and yet your political existence depends upon her!
and yet, because your government has refused to make a common cause with her,
your security is become precarious! To a hireling writer nothing is so
necessary as memory.

If Great Britain had really been so foolish as to form a design upon your
independence, and your political existence had depended upon France, it would,
I believe, have been at an end long before this time. Citizen Genet was ordered
to promise you, that his country would send to the American ports a sufficient
force to put them beyond insult; but, if they had defended your possessions no
better than they have their own, they would have brought you into a poor
plight. If the fleet, they were so good as to offer you had been no more
successful than the others they have sent out, it might as well have remained
at home, blocked up, as their fleets now are, and left you to the defense of
your own privateers. They have given but a poor sample of their protecting
talents, either at home or abroad. Letting two thirds of their colonies be
taken from them, and making war upon the rest themselves, is not the way to
convince me that you would have been safe under their protection. Nobody but a
madman would ever commit his house to the care of a notorious incendiary.

Franklin proceeds exactly in the manner of Citizen Genet (of whom he is a
pupil, as we shall see by and by); First, he tells you that Great Britain has
contemplated either your misery or subjugation, and that armaments were made to
this end. Then he tells you, that France alone has saved you; that she is now
fighting your battles; that you owe her much; that she gave you independence,
and that she alone is able to preserve it to you. After this, fearing that
these weighty considerations may not have the desired effect, he has recourse
to the last trick in the budget of a political mountebank, menaces. He tells
you dreadful tales about the resentment of France, and this he makes a third
source of danger in treating with Great Britain.

"The conduct of the French Republic," says he, toward us has been truly
magnanimous, and, in all probability, she would have made many sacrifices to
preserve us in a state of peace, if we had demeaned ourselves toward her with
a becoming propriety; but can we calculate upon her attachment, when we have
not only slighted but insulted her? To enter into a treaty with Great Britain
at this moment, when we have evaded a treaty with France; to treat with an
enemy against whom, France feels an implacable hatred, an enemy who has
neglected no means to desolate that country, and crimson it with blood, is
certainly insult. Then on he goes to terrify you to death. Citizens of
America," says he, " Sovereigns of a free country, your hostility to the French
Republic (in making a treaty with Great Britain, he means) has lately been
spoken of in the National Convention, and a motion for an inquiry into it has
been only suspended from prudential motives. -- The book, of account may soon
be opened against you -- what then, alas! will be your prospects! -- To have
your friendship questioned by that nation is, indeed, alarming! -- There spoke
the Frenchman! there broke forth the vanity of that vaunting Republic!

The above are certainly the most unfortunate expressions that ever poor
demagogue launched forth. What he has here said, completely destroys the
position he meant it to support. If you must be so cautious in your demeanor
toward the French Republic, if you dare treat with no nation against whom she
feels an implacable hatred, if to treat with a nation that has endeavored to
desolate that country, is to expose your conduct to an inquiry in the National
Convention; if to have your friendship questioned by that nation is an alarming
circumstance; if to refuse treating with her, when and how she pleases, is to
open the doomsday book of account against you; if all this be so, I can see no
reason for apprehensions on account of your independence, for your are no more
than mere colonies of France. Your boasted revolution is no more than a change
of masters.

If you cannot enter into a treaty with Great Britain, without insulting
France, and, consequently, exposing yourselves to her vengeance, neither can
you with any other nation on whom she thinks proper to make war, and against
whom she pleases to feel an implacable hatred. Thus she might cut you off from
all the nations in the world. An arrangement, for instance, with Spain, has
long been looked on as a desirable object; but as she is an enemy of France at
this time, as she has neglected no means to desolate that country and crimson
it with blood, you would not, according to Franklin, dare enter into a
negotiation with her, however opportune the moment and however advantageous the
terms. Falsely, then, does he call you the Sovereigns of a free country; it is
mere mockery to give you this title, if you dare not exercise any one act of
sovereignty, without exposing yourselves to danger, without being liable to
chastisement.

The fact is, as you stand in no need of the protection of France, so you have
no cause to fear her resentment. She may grumble curses against you, but speak
out she will not, she dares not. She dares not make a second attempt to
overturn your Federal Government, by appealing from the President to the
Sovereign people. You are "the sheet anchor" of her hopes, and not she of
yours. To you she clings in her shipwrecked condition, to you her famished
legions look for food, and to you her little pop-gun fleets fly for shelter
from the thundering foe. What have you then to expect, what to fear, from a
nation like this? Nothing, alas! but her insidious friendship.

4. Franklin asserts that it is dishonorable to treat with Great Britain;
because says he, her king is a tyrant that invaded our territory, and carried
on war against us. He seems to have made a small mistake here; for at the time
the King of Great Britain invaded your territory, it was his territory, and you
his loving subjects, at least, you all declared so. However, without recalling
circumstances, that can be of no use in the present discussion, admitting all
that has been said on this subject to be true; that the fault was entirely on
the side of Great Britain, that all her conduct was marked with duplicity and
cruelty, and all yours with frankness and humanity; admitting all this, and
that is admitting a great deal, yet, how long has it become a principle in
politics, that a nation, who has once done an injury to another, is never after
to be treated with upon a friendly footing? Is this a maxim with any other
state in the world? How many times have you seen France and England, after the
most bloody contests, enter into an amicable treaty of commerce, for their
mutual advantage. Have they not done so since the American war? and will they
not do so again as soon as the present war is over? Nay; has not France very
lately, unmindful of her promises and oaths, entered into a treaty of amity,
and almost alliance, with His Royal Majesty of Prussia, who had invaded her
territory, without having the least shadow of excuse for so doing? Is it for
you alone, then, to sacrifice your interest to your vengeance, or rather to the
vengeance of France? Are you to make everlasting hatred an article of your
political creed, because she wills it?

Your revolution certainly was not founded upon this basis: all that was
contemplated by it, was, a political separation from Great Britain. The
Declaration of independance, that act, passed by the Worthies of America, and
of which you are so very proud, does not inculcate the doctrine of perpetual
revenge; just the contrary. Nor have we been wanting to our British brethren
(not French brethren, observe): we have warned them, from time to time, of
attempts made by their legislature, to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction
over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and
settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity This
Congress, you see, were not of opinion that their ancestors were "treacherous,
cruel, savage monsters." They were not like the patriots of the present day;
but then, they were not animated by the gold of the French Republic; this
circumstance makes a considerable difference.
, and we have conjured them, by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these
usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They, too, have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war
-- in peace friends. Now, conform yourselves to these good old principles, turn
a deaf ear to the insinuations of your new brethren, and I am sure you will see
nothing in the King of Great Britain's invading his own dominions in the year
1776, to prevent you from making a treaty with him, upon honorable terms, in
1795.

To this old grudge Franklin adds some injuries recently received from Great
Britain. The first of these is, her depredations on your commerce. To urge the
depredations on your commerce as a reason against treating is to find fault
with a thing for being calculated to accomplish its object; by treating you
have guarded against such depredations for the future, and have obtained a
compensation for the past. I shall enter more fully into this subject, when I
come to speak of the terms of the treaty: at present it is necessary to speak
of the depredations, only as they render a treaty with Great Britain
dishonorable.

In the first place the injury does not appear to me to be of so outrageous a
nature, as Franklin would persuade you it is. It was possible, at least, that
the orders of the British Court might be misunderstood, or misconstrued. It is
also possible that great part of the vessels seized were really employed in a
commerce, that would justify their seizure, by the law of nations. Admitting,
however, that the British cruizers and courts of admiralty have done no more
than fulfill the intention of their King, and that none of your captured vessels
were employed in a contraband trade; yet, I cannot allow that the depredations
committed on your trade is a sufficient reason, or, indeed, any reason at all,
for your not treating with the nation who has committed them. To maintain the
contrary is to adopt that system of eternal irreconcialition, which I shall
ever deprecate, and which militates against every principle of justice and
sound policy. The partisans of France, and Franklin among the rest, were for
demanding satisfaction in such a manner as they knew it would not be granted,
in a manner that Great Britain, consistent with her honor (for I must be
excused for thinking she has some left) could not grant it; but, must not a
treaty have been the consequence, at last? Suppose they had succeeded in
plunging you into a war, that war itself must have ended in a treaty, and a
treaty much more dishonorable, perhaps, than the one now negociated; unless,
indeed, their intention was to wage a bellum eternum, side by side with their
French brethren, till there should be no government left to treat with. These
people are always for violent measures; they wanted a commercial treaty with
Great Britain, but then she was to be "forced" into it; and now again they
wanted satisfaction, but it is not worth a farthing, because no violence has
been used to obtain it. They are of the taste of Swift's true English dean that
was hanged for a rape; though they have all their hearts can wish for, their
depraved appetites render it loathsome, because it has been yielded to them
without a struggle.

But, it is, or ought to be, the opinion of Franklin himself, that depredations
on your commerce ought to be no bar to your treating with the nation who has
committed them; for he has exhausted himself to persuade you, that a treaty
ought to have been made with France, and yet it is notorious, that her
depredations have very far outstripped those of the British. Within the last
five or six months the French have seized upwards of 200 of your vessels, some
they have confiscated, others they have released after having taken their
cargoes, and others are yet in suspense. Many of these vessels have been seized
in their own ports, where they went in full confidence, and with the most
upright intentions. The mariners have been thrown into prison, where many of
them now are; the masters have been robbed, stripped, and beaten, by some of
the vilest wretches that ever existed. They have the insolence to call the
American Masters, the caned Captains; "Les capitaines a coup de baton." Let
Franklin find you, if he can, an instance of an American ship being seized at
sea, by the English, and burnt, without further ceremony. These things the
French have done, and yet he would not think it dishonorable to enter into a
treaty with them.

I know, I shall be told, that the depredations of the French, here mentioned,
have taken place since the departure of Mr. Jay for Great Britain; we will,
then, confine ourselves to the depredations, committed by the two nations at
that epoch. And here, luckily, we have not to depend upon rumor, upon
news-paper report: we have a sure guide, the report of the Secretary of State
to the President, which was communicated to the Senate and House of
Representatives on the 5th, of March, 1795.

Against the French it is urged; 1st. that their privateers harrass our trade
no less than those of the British. 2d. that two of their ships of war have
committed enormities on our vessels. 3d. that their courts of admiralty are
guilty of equal oppression. 4th that, besides these points of accusation, which
are common to the French and British, the French have infringed the treaties
between the United States and them, by subjecting to seizure and condemnation
our vessels trading with their enemies in merchandise, which that treaty
declares not to be contraband, and under circumstances not forbidden by the law
of nations. 5th. that a very detrimental embargo has been laid on our vessels
in French ports. 6th. that a contract with the French government for coin has
been discharged in depreciated assignats.

If then the French privateers had harrassed your trade no less than those of
the British, if their ships of war also had committed enormities on your
vessels, if their courts of admiralty had been guilty of equal oppression, and
if they had, besides, infringed the treaty already existing between you, had
embargoed your vessels, and cheated your merchants by discharging a contract
for cash in depreciated assignats, what could you see in their conduct to
invite you to a treaty with them, whilst a treaty with Great Britain would, on
account of the depredations committed by her, be dishonorable?

On this subject Franklin takes occasion to introduce one of his Conventional
threats. As long, says he, as we kept up the farce, that the negotiation was
designed to produce, an indemnity for the past, and security for the future, so
long did France not complain; but now we have abandoned it to the same
uncertainty as before, and have favored Great Britain at her expense, she
cannot, she will not be passive; and then he says, if France should act as our
conduct merits, she will now seize our vessels. Without enquiring here what
reason France can have to complain about your not having obtained an indemnity
for your losses; without inquiring how your conduct merits her resentment,
because you have abandoned your commerce to the same uncertainty as before;
without inquiring what she ought to do, you have only to look at what she has
done, and you have no reason to fear that the treaty will increase her
depredations. In short, ever since the French found, that your government was
determined not to join them in the war, they have neglected no opportunity of
doing you mischief, wherever they could, and dared to do it, and, perhaps, it
is owing to the British Freebooter (as Franklin calls Admiral Murray), that you
are not now blocked up in your ports. I know nothing of the British Admiral's
instructions; perhaps they were no more favorable to you than those of the
French Minister; but I think, you ought to feel a considerable obligation to
him for having rid your coasts and towns of the swarthy red-cap'd citizens that
infested them.

Another injury which Franklin says you have received from Great Britain, and
which renders a treaty with her dishonorable, is her letting the Indians and
Algerines loose upon you. Great Britain, says he, urged on the Savages, by the
mouth of Dorchester (it might have been Lord Dorchester in his mouth), to
butcher our citizens, and desolate our frontier; and, by her intrigues, let
loose a band of Algerine robbers, barbarous almost as Britons, to prey upon our
commerce, and make slaves of free men. I have more than once observed, that
having received an injury from a nation cannot, in itself, render the treating
with such a nation dishonorable; if, therefore, the charge with respect to the
Indians were well founded, it could make nothing against the present treaty.
But, I deny that the fact has ever been proved. Governor Simcoe denies it
positively, and no evidence has ever been produced to substantiate it. It is,
at best, then, but a matter of surmise; and when Franklin asserts, that, In the
action between General Wayne and the Indians at Fort Recovery, a number of
British Officers and soldiers were joined with the Savages and led them on to
the combat, and that they were painted to conceal their diabolical character,
he discovers a character full as diabolical as that of those persons would have
been, had his assertion been true.

The populace of this country are easily imposed on by an observation that the
French emissaries never fail to make on this subject. They tell them, and which
is very true, that the Indians receive their implements of war from the
British: but they fail to tell them, at the same time, that these implements of
war are the commodities, that the Indians receive in exchange for their furs,
and that, to make such an exchange a subject of complaint against the British,
is to tell them that they shall not trade with the Indians, because you are at
war with them. Considering the temper which has been but too prevalent in these
States during the present war; considering how convenient this accusation
against the British is to some of your military people, how many defeats it has
accounted for; and how many more it may yet account for; considering how
eagerly stories of this sort are fought after, and how they are exaggerated, by
a set of newspaper printers, who have rendered a free press almost a public
curse; considering all this, people ought to be very cautious how they form
their belief on events at such a distance, events, concerning which imposition
is so easy, and detection so difficult, concerning which passion, character,
and interest all combine to propagate deception.

With respect to the charge against Great Britain and the Algerines, it is the
most whimpering, babyish complaint that ever disgraced the lips of manhood, and
when a Member of the House of Representatives made mention of it, he deserved
to have his backside whipped. Great Britain, for her convenience, has, it
seems, employed her mediation, and prevailed on the Dey of Algiers to make an
arrangement with the Court of Lisbon, which arrangement gives the Algerines an
opening into the Atlantic, where they take your vessels. This is unfortunate
for you; but how is it hostile toward you, on the part of Great Britain? How
is it letting the Algerines loose upon you? It is, indeed, letting them loose
upon the great ocean, where they may do what they can; but to call it letting
them loose on you, is mere childishness. One would think, to hear Franklin,
that Great Britain held the Indians and Algerines in a string, like a brace of
bull-dogs, ready to let loose on whomsoever she pleases. A clear proof that
this is not the case, (a proof that pleases me the better, because I am sure
Franklin and all his tribe will subscribe to it) is, she has not yet let the
Algerines loose on their French brethren; a thing that she most certainly would
have done, if she could.

But, it seems, Great Britain is not only to refrain from every act and deed,
that may give the Algerines an opportunity of incommoding you; she is not only
to sacrifice her interest, and that of her allies, to yours; but she ought to
take an active part in your protection. A writer against the treaty expresses
himself thus: Our negociator has omitted to make any stipulation for the
protection and security of the commerce of the United States to Spain, Portugal
and the Mediterranean, against the depredations of the Algerine and Barbary
corsairs, although he knew that this forms one of the most beneficial branches
of our trade. See the Aurorae of the 21st July, 1795.
This writer certainly forgot, that you were independent. He talks about Mr.
Jay's making this stipulation, just as if it depended upon him alone. When he
was about it, he might as well have stipulated for Great Britain to protect you
against all the nations in the world, as she used to do formerly. And do you
then stand in need of Great Britain to protect you? Do you stand in need of the
protection of this "ruined nation?" This nation whom "nothing will save but
repentance in sackcloth and ashes?" This "insular Bastile of slaves?" Do you
stand in need of them to protect you, "the Sovereigns of a free country?" Is it
dishonorable to treat with Great Britain, and yet is it honorable to accept
of her protection? Prevaricating demagogues! You accuse the Envoy Extraordinary
of having made a humiliating treaty, while you blame him for not having made
you drink off the cup of humility to the very dregs.

The truth is, these depredations on your commerce by all the belligerent
nations, and by the Algerines, is what ought to surprise nobody; it is one of
those little rubs to which your situation naturally exposes you: independence,
for some years, at least, is not a rose without a thorn. All that ought to
surprise you in contemplating this subject, is, that France, to whom alone you
give shelter, for whose cause your good citizens have ever felt the most
unbounded enthusiasm, and for whose successes they have toasted themselves
drunk and sung themselves hoarse a thousand times, should stand foremost on the
list of the spoilers; and that, notwithstanding this, your Patriots should
insist upon a close alliance with her, while they reprobate the treating with
Great Britain as an act at once unnecessary, impolitic, dangerous, and
dishonorable.

Having now gone through Franklin's reasons for not treating with Great
Britain, I proceed to examine his objections to the terms of the treaty itself.

II. Franklin asserts, that, if forming a treaty with Great Britain were
consistent with sound policy, the terms of the present treaty are
disadvantageous, humiliating, and disgraceful to the United States.

This is the place to observe, that The Letters of Franklin were written,
before the contents of the treaty were known. He introduces his subject in the
following words: The treaty is said to be arrived, and as it will be of serious
consequence to us and to our posterity, we should analize it, before it becomes
the supreme law of the land. That is to say, before it be known. "It will be
said," continues he, to be a hasty opinion which shall be advanced before the
treaty itself shall be before us; but when it shall be promulgated for our
consideration, it will have all the force of law about it, and it will then be
too late to detect its baneful effects. Certainly no mortal ever heard
reasoning like this before; what a lame apology for an inflammatory
publication, intended to prepossess the rabble against the treaty! What candor
could be expected from a demagogue, who found it just and fit to analize a
thing, before he knew what it contained? Who can be surprised to hear him
assert, that the Western Posts are the price of a commercial treaty, that no
provision is made for indemnity to the merchants, that the French are
sacrificed to the British, that Great Britain has been meanly courted, and that
all the essential interests of the United States are given up?

To answer objections, made thus at random, would be taking advantage of the
poor Demagogue; I shall, therefore, lend him the aid of those that have been
made since, by the citizens of Boston, assembled in Town-Meeting. What
description of persons these citizens were of and in what manner their
deliberations were conducted, will be seen in the supplement.


It is not my design to dwell upon every objection that has been started,
either by Franklin or the Town-Meeting; I shall content myself with answering
those only in which they discover an extraordinary degree of patriotic
presumption or dishonesty.

Art. I. Says that there shall be peace and friendship between the two
countries.

As nobody but the French can have any thing to say against this article, and
as I have already answered all that their emissary Franklin has said on the
subject, I look upon it as unexceptionable.

Art. II. Stipulates, that the Western Posts shall be evacuated in June next;
that, in the mean time the United States may extend their settlements to any
part within the boundary line as fixed at the peace, except within the
precincts and jurisdiction of the posts; that the settlers now within those
precincts shall continue to enjoy their property, and that they shall be at
full liberty to remain there, or remove; that such of them as shall continue to
reside within the said boundary lines, shall not be compelled to become
citizens of the United States, but that, they may do so if they think proper,
and that, they shall declare their choice in one year after the evacuation of
the Forts, and that, all those who do not declare their choice during that
time, are to be looked upon as citizens of the United States.

The citizens of the Boston Town-Meeting object to this article, because it
makes no provision to indemnify the United States for the commercial and other
losses, they have sustained, and the heavy expenses to which they have been
subjected in consequence of being kept out of possession for twelve years in
direct violation of a treaty of peace.

The good citizens, before they talked about indemnity, should have been
certain that Great Britain was not justifiable in her detention of the Western
Posts; because, if it should appear that she was, to make a claim for indemnity
would be ridiculous.

By the treaty of peace, Great Britain was to give up these Posts, and, by the
same treaty, the United States were to remove certain legal impediments to the
payment of British Debts, that is to say, debts due to British merchants before
the war. These debts were to a heavy amount, and Great Britain had no other
guarantee for their payment than the Posts. Your credit, at that time, was not
in the most flourishing state; and that the precaution of having a security was
prudent, on the part of Great Britain, the event has fully proved. Nobody
pretends that the impediments, abovementioned, are removed; nay, some of the
States, and even their Members in Congress, aver that they ought not to be
removed; what right have you, then, to complain of the British for not giving
up the Posts? Was the treaty to be binding on them only? If this be the case,
your language to Great Britain resembles that of Rousseau's tyrant: I make a
covenant with you, entirely at your expense and to my profit, which you shall
observe as long as it pleases me, and which I will observe as long as it
pleases myself. This is not the way treaties are made nowadays.

It is said that the Federal Government has done all in its power to effect the
removal of the impediments, according to stipulation; but to this I answer;
that all in its power is not enough, if the impediments are not removed. Are
they removed, or are they not? is the only question Great Britain has to ask.
The States from which the debts are due (or rather a knot of interested
individuals, devoid of honor, in each of them) having enacted laws, that
counteract those made by the General Government, may be pleaded in
justification of the latter, in a domestic point of view; but every one must
perceive, that it would be childish in the extreme to urge it as an excuse for
a failure toward foreign nations. The very nature of a treaty implies a power
in the contracting parties to fulfill the stipulations therein contained, and,
therefore, to fail from inability is the same thing as to fail from
inclination, and renders retaliation, at least, just and necessary. Upon this
principle, founded on reason and the law of nations, Great Britain was
certainly justifiable in her detention of the Western Posts. The foundation of
indemnity being thus removed, the superstructure falls to the ground.

Another objection, though not to be found in the resolutions of the Boston
citizens, deserves notice. That the leaving British subjects in possession of
their lands, etc. in the precincts of the Forts, will be to establish a British
Colony in the territory of the United States, etc. See the Aurora, 21st July.
This is an objection that I never should have expected from the true
republicans. The treaty says that the settlers in those precincts shall have
full liberty to choose between being subjects of the King of Great Britain and
citizens of the United States: and can these republicans doubt which they will
choose? Can they possibly suppose that the inhabitants near the Forts will not
rejoice to exchange the humiliating title of subject for the glorious one of
citizen? Can they, indeed, imagine that these degraded Satellites of the tyrant
George will not be ready to expire with joy at the thought of becoming
"sovereigns of a free country?" Each individual of them will become a Prince
and legislator by taking the oath of allegiance to the United States; is it not
then, sacrilege, is it not to be a liberticide to imagine that they can
hesitate in their choice? How came these enlightened citizens to commit such a
blunder? How came they to suppose, that the people in the precincts of the
Forts were more capable of distinguishing between sound and sense, between the
shadow and the substance than they themselves are. Thousands of times have you
been told that the poor Canadians were terribly oppressed, that they were ripe
for revolt, that the militia had refused to do their duty, and, in short, that
the United States had nothing to do but to receive them. And now, when a
handful of them are likely to be left amongst you, you are afraid they will
choose to remain subjects to the King of Great Britain!

But suppose they should all remain subjects; what will be the consequence of
it to you? Here are hundreds and thousands of British subjects on the eastern
parts of the States; men who never have nor ever will take the oath of
allegiance to the United States, and certainly they are none the worse for it.
An arrival from Ireland is boasted of through the whole country, though perhaps
it consists of a hundred or two of poor devils, capable of nothing but eating
and drinking; and is not a colony already settled, a colony consisting of
persons born in the country, understanding in the trade with the indians, and
calculated to give that trade a start in your favor, at once; is not a colony
like this preferable to any thing of the sort, you can purchase in Europe?

Art. III. Stipulates for a free intercourse and commerce between the two
parties, as far as regards their territories in America. This commerce is to be
carried on upon principles perfectly reciprocal; but it is not to extend to
commerce carried on by water, below the highest ports of entry. The only
reservation in this article, is, the King of Great Britain does not admit the
United States to trade to the possessions belonging to the Hudson's Bay Company.

To this the citizens of Boston object; because it admits British subjects to
an equal participation with our own citizens of the interior traffic of the
United States with the neighboring indians through our whole territorial
dominion; while the advantages ostensibly reciprocated to our citizens, are
limited both in their nature and extent.

The word ostensibly is the only one of any weight in this objection. They
could not say that the advantages were not reciprocal, as stipulated for; they,
therefore, found out the word ostensible to supply the plan of contradiction.
The article provides for advantages perfectly reciprocal, and to say that they
are only ostensibly so, is to say; the treaty says so, to be sure, but it does
not mean so. The fault then naturally falls upon the words, which say one thing
and means another.

Art. IV. Relates to a survey of a part of the Missisippi.

Art. V. Relates to a survey of the River St. Croix.

It would have been extremely hard, indeed, if these articles had not escaped
censure. I cannot, indeed, say that they have escaped it altogether; for, I
have been informed that the Democratic Society of Pennsylvania have declared
that the United States should be bounded by nothing but the sea. This, we may
presume, is in consequence of the intimation of the Executive Council of
France, who ordered Citizen Genet to assure the Americans, that with their
help, nothing was easier than to finish the emancipation of the New World.

Art. VI. Relates to debts due by citizens of the United States to British
subjects, and provides, that by the operation of various lawful impediments
since the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has been delayed,
but also the value and security thereof have been, in several instances
impaired and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings,
the British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and receive full and
adequate compensation, for the losses and damages which they have thereby
sustained: It is agreed, that in all such cases where full compensation for
such losses and damages cannot, for whatever reason, be actually obtained, had
and received, by the said creditors in the ordinary course of justice, the
United States will make full and complete compensation for the same to the said
creditors. Then the article provides for the appointment of commissioners, who
are to be invested with full power to determine finally on the several claims.
Two commissioners are to be appointed by each party, and these four are to
appoint a fifth. -- 18 months, from the day on which the commissioners shall
form a board, shall be assigned for receiving complaints and applications. --
And the United States undertake to cause the sums so awarded to be paid in
specie, etc.

Art. VII. Relates to the spoliations on your commerce by British subjects, and
provides, that during the course of the war, in which his Majesty is now
engaged, certain citizens of the United States have sustained considerable loss
and damage by reason of irregular, or illegal captures or condemnation of their
vessels and other property under color of authority or commissions from his
Majesty; and that from various circumstances belonging to the said cases,
adequate compensation for the losses so sustained cannot now be actually
obtained, had and received, by the ordinary course of judiciary proceedings; It
is agreed, that in all cases where adequate compensation cannot, for whatever
reason, be now actually obtained, had and received, by the said merchants and
others in the ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for
the same will be made by the British Government to the said complainants." --
"And for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of such losses and damages five
commissioners shall be appointed, and authorized to act in London, exactly in
the manner directed with respect to those mentioned in the preceding article."
-- "The same term of 18 months is also assigned for the reception of claims,
and they are in like manner authorized to extend the same." -- "And his
Britannic Majesty undertakes to cause the same to be paid to such claimant in
specie, etc.

I have placed these two articles opposite to each other to give the reader an
opportunity of comparing them; because the citizens of Boston Town-meeting seem
to found their objection to both on the dissimilarity between them. The
capture, say they, of vessels and property of the citizens of the United
States, made under the authority of the government of Great Britain is a
national concern, and claims arising from such captures ought not to have been
submitted to the decision of their admiralty courts, as the United States are
thereby precluded from having a voice in the final determination in such cases.
Besides, the indemnification proposed to be made, is to be sought by a process
tedious and expensive, in which justice may be delayed to an unreasonable time,
and eventually lost to many of the sufferers from their inability to pursue it;
and this mode of indemnification bears no proportion to the summary method,
adopted for the satisfaction of British claims.

You will not be able to account for this, 'till you are told, that the
Town-meeting citizens never read the treaty, before they had sanctioned these
resolutions. You see by the 6th and 7th articles, that the mode of
indemnification to the British subjects and American citizens is one and the
same, that both are to be finally determined by commissioners, and both paid
punctually in specie; and yet the citizens of the Boston Town-meeting see a
difference in every part of it. They complain that the decision of American
claims is left to the English courts of admiralty, when the treaty says it
shall be left, in cases where satisfaction cannot be obtained in the ordinary
course of justice, to commissioners, with full power to determine finally. They
oppose things to each other which are not only the same in substance, but
almost word for word. What must the President think of the Town-meeting, when
he received from them a senseless memorial, or rather ordonance, like this?

It would be truly curious to know what mode of indemnification these citizens
would have wished for. Can there be a fairer, more honorable mode, than that
fixed on by the treaty? It is likely they would have been contented, if George
and Pit had been made to ask pardon of their Majesty's the sovereigns of
America. I do not think it is at all improbable that they might believe, that
this was easy for Mr. Jay to accomplish. They have been so long cozened and
cajoled by their public servants, as some of their masters, have the
complaisance to call themselves, that they begin to think themselves the
sovereigns, not only of the United States, but of the universe.

What do they mean by the mode of indemnification bearing no proportion to the
summary method, adopted for the satisfaction of British claims? Can any method
be too summary in the payments of debts, that have been due for twenty years? I
think not. However, as I have already observed, summary or not summary, the
method is exactly the same as that adopted for the satisfaction of American
claims, and, therefore, if you have reason to complain, so have the British,
and this would be singular, indeed.

Art. VIII. Provides for the payment, etc. of the above mentioned commissioners.

This article has had the good fortune to escape censure.

Art. IX. Stipulates, that the subjects of Great Britain holding lands in the
United States, and the citizens of the United States now holding lands in the
dominions of his Britannic Majesty, shall continue to hold them, and, in what
respects those lands, shall not be regarded as aliens.

The Boston Town-meeting citizens say nothing about this article. It was for
some days a subject of newspaper abuse; but the opposers soon began to
perceive, that they were fighting against nothing; the article not being made
to introduce a new system, but merely to establish an old one.

Art. X. Stipulates, that neither the debts due from individuals of the one
nation to the individuals of the other, nor shares, nor money which they may
have in the public funds, or in the public or private banks, shall ever, in any
event of war, or natitional differences, be sequestered or confiscated.

That people who disapprove of paying debts that have been due twenty years,
should also disapprove of this article is not at all surprising; accordingly
the citizens of the Boston Town-meeting highly disapprove of it; because, say
they, the exercise of this right (the right to confiscate etc.) may contribute
to preserve the peace of the country, and protect the rights and property of
the citizens.

It is well known (and will be well remembered too) that, before Mr. Jay's
departure for England, a resolution was entered into by the House of
Representatives, on the motion of Mr. Dayton, to sequester all debts and funds,
(...) property of British subjects: The article before us guards against this,
and as there was not an honest man in the Union on (a majority of the House of
Representatives excepted), who did not execrate Mr. Dayton's plundering motion,
as it was called, so, I believe there is not one of that description, who does
not most cordially approve of the article which will, for the future, render
such motions abortive.

It was easy to foresee that the King of Great Britain would never come to any
arrangement, without a provision of this kind. It would have been much better
for his subjects to break off all communication with you at once, than to have
not only their profits but their capitals depending on the arbitrary will of
your government. Where would be the security of merchants trading to this
country, if the debts due them might at any time be seized to pay for damages,
received by Americans from somebody else.

Credit is with nations as with individuals; while unimpaired it is almost
unbounded, it can perform any thing; but one single retrograde step, and it is
blasted, it is nothing. Your credit has suffered much from the motion of Mr.
Dayton, and had the sequestration become a law, or had the mercantile world
been left in doubt concerning what might happen in future, one half of the
great capitals that now give wings to your commerce. would have found their way
to other countries, Riches seek security, as rivers seek the sea.

It is pretended by the Town-meeting, that a power to confiscate might
contribute to the peace of the country. This was certainly a very curious
reason on which to found an objection to the article, and not less so, as
coming from a faction, who have constantly censured the President for not
joining France in the present war. But, in place of contributing to the peace
of the country, would it not be an eternal source of war? and is not this the
true reason why all the old committemen, privateersmen, and confiscators are
loath to abandon it? I think so. It is to be supposed that the Congress will,
for some years, consist, partly, of men who would prefer the glutting of their
impotent revenge to the good of their country; and of others who, while your
connexions with France continue, will, for solid reasons too evident to need a
mention, prefer her interests to yours. These men will ever seek a quarrel with
Great Britain. With respect to war, however, they will be cautious, as far as
open professions go. The people have not yet forgot what war is. But, armed
with confiscating powers, they would brandish them at every turn; and plunder
is a thing that pleases the populace so much better than fighting, it is so
much easier to beat in the door of a (...), than to beat a British fleet or
army, there is very little fear of their confiscating measures being approved
of by the majority in number. But, would all end here? Would the British look
tamely on? I am of opinion they would not. If the object of Great Britain, in
offending you, should be to provoke a war, she would disregard five or six
millions of dollars; should it not be war, an act of sequestration or
confiscation would certainly produce a war. Thus, in both cases, you would have
war, and with this disadvantage, that you would give your enemy a a fair
pretext; from being the injured party, you would become the aggressors, unite
every heart and hand against you in Great Britain, and excite the mistrust and
contempt of other nations.

To say that you have no other means of defending the rights and property of
your citizens, is beyond expression degrading; but the Town-meeting are not
singular in this opinion. A writer in the Aurora of Philadelphia, observes,
that confiscation may be regarded as the American weapon of defense, and that
to abandon it, is an outrage on humanity, policy, justice, and natural right.
What! a nation of sovereigns no weapon of defense but that of a swindler! Tell
us no more, then, that you are a great people; give up all pretension to a
place among the nations of the earth, for none of them have ever avowed so
vile, and pusillanimous a principle. " Justice is outraged," because you have
stipulated not to make the innocent suffer for the misdeeds of the guilty!
Because you have engaged not to ruin a few honest individuals for injuries
received from a nation, you have outraged humanity! Ah! you preachers of
humanity, I never liked you, and now I hate you from my soul.

"The capture" (say the Town-meeting in another of their resolutions) The
capture of the vessels and property was a national concern. Here, then, there
is a good reason for depreciating Mr. Dayton's motion, in place of approving of
it. But, Franklin has something so very striking on this subject, that it must
not be passed over in silence. In one place he blames the President for
preventing the adoption of Mr. Dayton's resolution, which he calls a dignified
measure; and in another place, speaking of the indemnity obtained by the treaty
he says, The aggression was an offense against the nation, and therefore no
private compensation ought to be deemed competent. As the depredations on our
commerce and the indignities offered to our flag, were a national outrage,
nothing short of national satisfaction ought to be admitted. The piracies of
Great Britain were committed under the authority of the government, the
government therefore ought to be answerable for them. And yet, the same man
that has made this plain, unequivocal declaration, has also declared, that it
was a dignified measure, to seize the property of innocent individuals, lodged
in the banks, and the funds of this country, or in the hands of their friends!
He has declared it to be a dignified measure, to rifle the bureau of the
merchant, pry into the secrets of the friend, sanction the proceedings of the
villain, and forbid the honest man to pay his debts.

One thing, above all, ought to be considered on this subject: that an act of
sequestration or confiscation must ever fail in its operation, or establish the
most consummate tyranny. Do these humane citizens think, that I, for example,
would give up what had been entrusted to me by a friend, or what I owed to a
correspondent? No; I should look upon the oaths they might impose on me, as
taken with a dagger at my breast. In short, their plundering law, could never
be put in execution, except under the government of a French Convention.

Art. XI. Is only an introduction to the following ones.

Art. XII. Is to be the subject of a future negotiation, and, therefore, is not
a part of the treaty as approved of by the Senate.

Art. XIII. Consents, that the citizens of the United States may carry on a
free trade to and from the British territories in India, but they must carry
the merchandise shipped in the said territories, to some part of the United
States, and that the citizens of the United States cannot settle in the said
territories, or go into the interior of the country without express permission
from the government there.

To this the Town-meeting object; because the commerce we have hitherto enjoyed
in India, in common with other nations, is so restricted by this article, that,
in future, it will be of little or no benefit to our citizens. This objection
seems to have been founded on a mistake (perhaps a willful one), that has been
propagated with a good deal of industry: that this article prevents you from
re-exporting the merchandise brought from the British territories in India. It
was excusable in the citizens to follow up this error, because they either did
not, or could not, read the treaty; but, I hope, they will now take my word,
and assure themselves, that if ever any of them should acquire property enough
to be concerned in mercantile affairs, and should receive a cargo from India,
they may ship it off again as soon as they please.

Art. XIV. and XV. Stipulate for a free intercourse between the British
dominions in Europe and the United States. The advantages are perfectly
reciprocal, as far as they can be rendered so by treaty. The two parties agree
that no higher duties shall be paid by the ships or merchandise of the one
party in the ports of the other, than such as are paid by the like vessels and
merchandise of all other nations. This is the principal object of these
articles; but there are some particular stipulations respecting the
equalization of duties, etc. in which Great Britain appears to have reserved to
itself a trifling advantage.

To these articles the Town-meeting have some particular objections; but as
these are founded upon an opinion, expressed afterward in a general objection,
it will be sufficient to answer the general objection only. Because the nature
and extent of the exports of the United States are such, that in all their
stipulations with foreign nations they have it in their power to secure a
perfect reciprocity of intercourse, not only with the home dominions of such
nations, but with all their colonial possessions.

It is first necessary to observe, that, what these citizens mean by
reciprocity, goes a little beyond the common acceptance of that term. They do
not mean, an advantage for an advantage, they mean all the advantage on their
side, and none on the other; they mean, that all the ports of all the nations
with whom they trade ought to be as free for them as for the subjects of those
nations; they mean, that other nations should maintain fleets and armies to
keep up colonial possessions, and that they should reap the profit of them; in
short, they mean, that all the poor subjects in the world are made for the
citizens of the United States to domineer over. Nor is it much to be wondered
at that they should entertain these lofty pretensions, if we consider how they
have been becitizened and besovereigned up within these few years. One half of
them believe, that it is in their power to starve the whole world, when they
please to make the government put on an embargo; they were fretted to death
that the President would not let them go to take Canada, Nova Scotia and the
West Indies; nor would they have been pacified, if they had not been assured,
that they should have them all in a hundred years time.

This is all very well for these Citizen-sovereigns, and Sovereign-citizens;
but for you who, I hope, have no pretension to this kind of civic royalty, it
becomes you to talk and think like reasonable creatures.

Before I go any further, I must notice what Franklin says on the subject. The
articles of commerce in the United States are generally the necessaries of
life; few of its luxuries are born, or cultivated among us; does it appear,
then, that a commercial treaty is necessary to afford an outlet to things of
the first requisition? It is a fact well ascertained, that the West India
Islands are in a state of dependence among us, and by means of this dependence,
we are enabled to make such regulations with respect to our commerce, as shall
render a treaty with Great Britain wholly superfluous. It is equally
ascertained, that in our commerce with Great Britain herself, the balance of
trade is considerably in her favor, and from this circumstance likewise she
would be induced to reciprocate interests, without a commercial treaty, were
those means pursued which are in our power. Now, to know the real value of the
term reciprocity, take the following sentences. If we cede an advantage for an
advantage ceded to us, whence the boast of a treaty? She (Great Britain) can
grant us no commercial priveleges that our situation does not enable us to
exact; why then wave the most important demands, to obtain a grant of
commercial advantages, which we could compel? This is the language of all the
Patriots of the present day.

If what the Patriots say be true, then, you have it in your power to exact
from Great Britain what conditions you please; 1st. because your articles of
exportation are, in great part, necessaries of life; 2d. because the British
West Indies are in a state of dependence on you; 3d. because the balance of
trade with Great Britain is greatly in her favor.

1. Beause your articles of exportation are in great part, necessaries of life.
This idea is originally of the populace, who look upon every barrel of
provision shipped off to the West Indies, or else where, as so much loss to
themselves, and as a kind of alms to keep the poor foreign devils from
starving: and, in return for this generosity on their part, they imagine they
have the power to compel the beggars to do just what they please. From the
populace it found its way into Congress, under the auspices of a member of that
body who made it the ground work of his famous resolutions, intended to force
Great Britain to yield you commercial advantages. No wonder, then, that it
should now be taken up by Franklin, and all the opposers of the treaty. They
cannot conceive how a nation, to whom you throw a morsel of bread when you
please, should dare refuse you any thing.

That your exports being, in great part, necessaries of life (that is eatables)
ought to give you a preference in commercial relations, is an error, and not
the less so for being a popular one. Commodities being eatabes may give the
seller a preference in a town during the time of a seige, but not in the great
world of commerce. It is as necessary for you to sell your produce as for a
toy-man to sell his toys. If they rot in your stores their being necessaries of
life will not diminish the loss. If the land is obliged to lie fallow, the mill
stand still, and the vessels rot at the wharfs, little satisfaction will it be
to the farmer, the miller and the merchant, that they all used to be employed
in cultivating and distributing the necessaries of life. When a man is reduced
to beggary for want of a vent for his goods, it signifies not a farthing to
him, whether these goods were necessaries of life, or luxuries. No; it is the
pecuniary (...) arising from trading with a nation, which ought to give, or
which can give, that nation a right, or a power, to exact commercial
advantages; and not the nature of the merchandise she has to export.

2. Because the British West Indies are in a state of dependence upon you. For
my part, I cannot conceive how they make out this state of dependence. The
exportation of your articles being as necessary to you as the importation of
them is to the Islands, you depend upon them, as much as they depend upon you.
You receive Sugar, Molasses, Coffee, and Rum, from the Islands; these, too, are
necessaries of life; and such as you could not possibly do without. I cannot
pretend to say what proportion your imports from the Islands bear to your
exports to them; but there must be a balance of trade either for or against
you. If the balance be against you, you receive more of the necessaries of life
from the Islands, than you carry to them, and they cannot, then, be in a state
of dependence, on that account: if the balance be in your favor, then the
trade is an advantageous one for you, and, if it makes a dependence on either
side, it makes you dependent on the Islands. Observe here, that the Patriots
suppose you have the power of compelling Great Britain to do what you please,
because, in her trade with you, the balance is greatly in her favor, and
because, in your trade with the West Indies, the balance is in your favor.
Thus the West India Islands are in a state of dependence on you, because you
gain by them; and Great Britain is in the same state because she gains by you!
No wonder the citizens of the United States should think themselves sovereigns.

3. Because the balance of trade with Great Britain is greatly in her favor.
This balance of trade, assert the Patriots, is to give you what terms you
please to exact, if you pursue the means that are in your power. These means
are prohibiting the importation of British merchandises; and this, they assert,
would do her much more harm than it would you. A better reason of action than
this might, perhaps, be found; but as it seems to be a favorite one with them,
and, indeed, the only one by which they are actuated, I shall take them up upon
it, and endeavor to convince you, that they are mistaken.

I will suppose, with the Patriots, that the manufactures you receive from
Great Britain are not necessary to you. I will suppose that you have the
capitals and raw materials for establishing manufactories of your own; I will
suppose one third of your peasants (I beg pardon, I meant Yeomen) and sailors
changed by a presto into weavers, combers, fullers, whitesmiths, etc. etc; I
will suppose the manufactories going on, and all of you inspired with
patriotism enough to be happy, dressed in the work of their hands; I will
suppose, in short, that you no longer stand in need of British manufactures.
This is allowing my adversaries every thing they can ask, and all I ask of them
in return, is, to allow me, that Great Britain stands in no need of your
manufactures. If they do not refuse me this, as, I think, they cannot, I have
not the least doubt but I shall prove, that cutting off all communication
between the countries, would injure you more than Great Britain.

The imports being prohibited on each side, and both being able to do without
them, the injury must arise from the stoppage being put to the exports; and as
Great Britain sells you much more than you sell her, the Patriots maintain,
that this stoppage would do her more harm than it would you. This was the
shield and buckler of Mr. Madison. He compared the United States to a country
gentleman and Great Britain to a pedlar; and declared, that you might do
without her, but that she could not do without you.

How illusive this is we shall see in a minute. It is a maxim in commerce, that
the exports of a nation are the source of her riches, and that, in proportion
as you take from that source, she is injured and enfeebled; hence it follows,
that cutting off the communication between Great Britain and you would injure
her more than you, in proportion to the balance now in her favor; that is to
say, if the total of her exports and the total of your exports were to the same
amount. But this is far from being the case: your exports amount to no more
than 20 millions of dollars, or thereabouts, 9 millions of which go to Great
Britain and her dominions, while the exports of Great Britain amount to 100
millions of dollars, no more than 15 millions of which come to the United
States. Suppose, then, all communication cut off at once; you would lose 9
twentieths of your exports, while Great Britain would lose only 15 hundredths
of hers: so that, if there be any truth in arithmetic, you would injure
yourselves three times as much as you would her.

These considerations will, of course, have no weight with the honest
stipendiaries of France; but with those whose only desire, is to injure Great
Britain more than the United States, they ought to have some weight.

If what I have advanced on the subject be correct, "the nature and extent of
your exports" do not give you a power to demand, to exact, to compel, what
conditions you please in your commercial relations with Great Britain; and it
follows, of course, that Franklin and the citizens of Boston Town-meeting are
mistaken.

Art. XVI. Relates to consuls.

This article has not been meddled with, as yet.

Art. XVII. Permits, or rather expressly, stipulates for what is allowed by the
law of nations, the seizing of an enemies property on board the vessels of
either party.

Art. XVIII. Specifies what are contraband articles, and settles an honorable
and equitable system of seizure.

As these two articles have been objected to by nobody but the agents of
France, as they seem to affect the French more than any body else, and as that
august diet, the Convention, may be at this time debating on the subject, it
would be presumption in the extreme for me to hazard an opinion on it.

Art. XIX. Provides for the protection of the vessels and property of the
subjects and citizens of the contracting parties.

I have heard nothing urged against this article.

Art. XX. Stipulates that the two contracting parties will not only refuse to
receive pirates into their ports, etc. but that they will do the utmost in
their power to bring them to punishment.

Without objection; for any thing I have heard.

Art. XXI. Stipulates, that the subjects and citizens of each of the
contracting parties shall not commit violence on those of the other party, nor
serve in the fleets or armies, or accept of commissions from its enemies.

Some of the friends of neutrality object to this, as it prevents them from
assisting the French and from making war upon Great Britain for the future,
under the cloak of neutrality.

Art. XXII. Stipulates, that no act of reprisal shall take place between the
parties, unless justice has first been demanded, and refused, or unreasonably
delayed.

This is opposed by the friends of sequestration and confiscation, as it would
give people time to shelter their property from the claws of the Patriots.

Art. XXIII, XXIV, and XXV. Provides certain regulations concerning ships of
war, privateers, and prizes taken from the enemies of the contracting parties.

Much was said about these articles, 'till it was proved that they were copied
from the treaty of commerce made between France and England since the American
war; since your treaty with France. This was a circumstance that the Patriots,
who are none of the best read in such things, were not aware of.

Art. XXVI. Provides for the security and tranquillity of the subjects and
citizens of the two parties, living in the territory of each other at the
breaking out of a war.

This article has escaped censure.

Art. XXVII. Stipulates for the giving up of murderers and forgers.

This article has been the innocent cause of much alarm. The Patriots, lately
imported from Great Britain and Ireland, and several members of the Democratic
societies in this country, were afraid that it was to have a retrospective
effect. Upon receiving an assurance to the contrary, their fears are in some
measure dissipated; but they nevertheless oppose the treaty, on this account,
with all their might. A writer (and I am mistaken if he be not the same who has
drawn up a certain petition to the President) affirmed in one of your papers, a
few days ago, that this article was a cruel stab to the sovereignty of the
people, and militates against the law of nature!

From the description of the persons who have hitherto opposed the treaty, and
from the futillity of the reasons they have given for their opposition, there
is every reason to imagine, that great part of them object (in the bottom of
their hearts) to this article only. If this be the case, it is pity the article
was introduced. Forgers and murderers, if left to themselves for a time after
their flight, would not fail to meet the fate, which the article was made to
insure to them, and it is little matter in what country they suffer.

Art. XXVIII. Relates to the duration of the foregoing ones, and the
ratification of the treaty.

This article, which ends the treaty, is of such a nature as to admit of no
objection.

Now, you will observe, that it is not my intention to render this treaty
palatable to you; I shall not insist, therefore, that the terms of it are as
advantageous as you might wish, or expect them to be; but I insist that they
are as advantageous as you ought to have expected. Great Britain grants you
favors, she has never grantted to any other nation; and that no other nation,
not even your Sister Republic, has granted you. Nor can it be said, that, in
return, you grant her favors, which you have not granted to other nations;
several favors, granted to France, you have still withheld from Great Britain,
even if the present treaty goes into effect. Great Britain does not, then,
receive favors, as it has been absurdly asserted, but she grants them.

Had the terms of the treaty been so decidedy advantageous to the United States
as to destroy every principle of reciprocity, it might, perhaps, have escaped
much of the censure that has been passed on it; but would any man of
discernment have been pleased with such a treaty? Would he have seen in it the
foundation of a lasting peace? No; he would have suspected that it had been
yielded to, in a moment of embarrassment, merely to amuse you, 'till a change
of circumstances would enable Great Britain to assume another tone, and refuse
you every thing; and, whatever your demagogues may say to the contrary, such a
change was near at hand.

I cannot dismiss this part of my subject, without observing, that Charles Fox
made, in the British Parliament, exactly the same objections to the treaty, as
the Patriots in this country have made. It was humiliating to Great Britain, he
said. Unfortunate, indeed, must be the negociators, who have made a treaty
humiliating to both the contracting parties! Mr. Fox's censure is the best
comment in the world on that of the American Patriots, and theirs on his.

I now come to the third object of the censure of Franklin: the conduct of the
President relative to the treaty.

III. That supposing the terms of the treaty to be what every good American
ought to approve, yet the conduct of the President, relative to the negotiation
and promulgation of it, has been highly improper, and even monarchical, and for
which he deserves to be impeached.

Franklin has not obliged the world with articles of impeachment regularly
drawn up; but, as far as can be gathered from his letters, he would have the
Chief Magistrate of the Union impeached; 1st. for having appointed Mr. Jay as
Envoy extraordinary; 2d. for having appointed an Envoy extraordinary, on this
occasion, contrary to the opinion of the House of Representatives and of the
Democratic Society; 3d. for his reserve toward the Senate, previous to Mr.
Jay's departure; 4th. for his reserve toward the people; and, 5th. for having
evaded a new treaty with France, while he courted one with Great Britain.

The first of these, the appointing of Mr. Jay as Envoy extraordinary, is
declared to be unconstitutional. The Man of the people, says Franklin, it was
believed, would not have consented to, much less have originated a mission,
hostile to the Constitution, unfriendly to the functions of the legislature,
and insulting to a Great people, struggling against tyrants. The appointment of
the Chief Justice of the United States as Envoy extraordinary, to the court of
Great Britain, put to defiance the compact under which we have associated, and
made the will of the Executive paramount to the general will of the people. The
principle laid down by this appointment, strikes at the root of our civil
security; nay, it aims a deadly blow at liberty itself. The word
unconstitutional is, with the opposers of the government, a word of vast
import: it means any thing they please to have it mean. In their acceptance of
the word, therefore, I cannot pretend to say that the conduct of the President,
in appointing Mr. Jay, was not unconstitutional; but if unconstitutional be
allowed to mean, something contrary to the Constitution, I think it would be
very difficult to prove, that the appointment was unconstitutional; for,
certain it is, there is no article in the Constitution, that forbids, either
literally or by implication, the employing of a Chief Justice of the United
States on an extraordinary embassy. "The Constitution," says Franklin, has
provided, that the different departments of government should be kept distinct,
and, consequently, to unite them is a violation of it, and an encroachment on
the liberties of the people, guaranteed by that instrument. -- The appointment
of John Jay, Chief Justice of the United States, as Envoy Extraordinary to the
court of Great Britain, is contrary to the spirit and meaning of the
Constitution; as it unites in the same person judicial and legislative
functions. If as it is here asserted, the President had united the judicial
with the legislative functions, it must be confessed, that he would have
departed from the spirit and meaning of the Constitution; but, has the mere
negotiation of a treaty any thing to do with the legislative functions? It
appears to me not. Treaties are the supreme law of the land, and, therefore,
the sanctioning of them, the making of them laws, is a legislative act; but the
mere drawing of them up, the preparing of them for the discussion of the
legislature, is no legislative act at all.

If negociating be a legislative act, it naturally follows, that nobody but the
legislature, or some member or members of it, could be employed in a
negotiation; and the Constitution expressly provides, that, no member of
Congress shall, during the time for which he was elected, be appointed to any
civil office, under the authority of the United States which shall have been
created during such time. Thus then if the spirit of the Constitution makes
negociating a legislative act, and, consequently, requires a legislator to
negociate a treaty, and the latter positively forbids it, the whole clause
respecting treaties is superfluous, for there ought never to be any such thing
as treaties.

When the secretary of either department brings forward a plan for the
consideration of Congress, does he act in a legislative capacity? And what more
is an unratified treaty? In short, if a negociator acts in a legislative
capacity, so does every petitioner; nay, every clerk and printer, employed by
Congress.

The Chief Justice is further objected to as an Envoy Extraordinary; on this
occasion, because, treaties being the supreme law of the land, it becomes the
duty of the judiciary to expound and apply them, and, therefore, to permit an
officer in that department to share in their formation, is to unite distinct
functions, tends to level the barriers of our freedom, and to establish
precedents pregnant with danger. If the mere formations of laws by gentlemen of
the bar tends to level the barriers of your freedom, I am afraid the barriers
of your freedom are already levelled; for I believe, there are very few laws
that do not pass through their hands, or concerning which their advice is not
asked, before they are sanctioned. Franklin (perhaps through ignorance)
confounds the formation with the making of a law; how essentially they differ I
leave you to determine.

To object to the Chief Justice as a negociator, because it would become his
duty to expound and apply the treaty he was to negociate, is what I should
expect from nobody but Franklin or some one of his faction. Was ever a man,
before, supposed to be less capable of expounding and applying a law, because
he had assisted in framing it? Or was he, on that account, ever supposed to be
less desirous of seeing it duly and faithfully executed? Pursue this monstrous
maxim, and see where it will end. If it be unsafe to trust the expounding and
applying of a law to him who has assisted in framing it, must it not be much
more unsafe to trust the expounding and application of it to those who have
assisted in making it? And, is it not, then, unsafe to admit gentlemen of the
law into Congress, without incapaciating them from pleading at the bar, or, at
least, from becoming judges, for ever after? Suppose, for instance, that one of
the present Senators were to be appointed Chief Justice in the room of Mr. Jay,
would he not have to expound and apply the treaty which he has just assisted in
making? And should some of the gentlemen of the other house be, at a future
period, appointed judges of the supreme court, would they not have to apply the
laws, which, as legislators, they have assisted in making? Should a commander
in chief propose to Congress a plan for the regulation of the troops, and
should it become a law, would it be said, that the General had united the
legislative with the military functions, and that he ought to be dismissed from
the service, as unfit to expound and apply the law which he had proposed. The
principle of Franklin, if adopted, would render it absolutely impossible for
the Congress to avail themselves of the talents or integrity of any one out of
their own body.

But, at any rate, had this objection been well founded; had there been cause
to fear the consequences of leaving the treaty to be expounded and applied by
him who had assisted in framing it, the danger is now over: Mr. Jay is no more
Chief Justice; the freemen of the State of New York knew how to estimate his
merit rather better than Franklin. Fortune seems to have lent a hand in
depriving the enemies of the government of all grounds of complaint, and yet
they make a shift to keep the Union in an uproar.

Another objection to sending the Chief Justice on this mission, is, that a
President might thereby escape from the hands of justice, or, at least, elude a
trial. "From the nature," says Franklin, and terms of an impeachment against a
President of the United States, it is not only necessary that the Chief Justice
of the United States should preside in the Senate, but that he should be above
the bias which the honor and emolument in the gift of the Executive might
create. It Is true, the constitution says, that, when the President of the
United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside. But, waving the
insolence and most patriotic ingratitude of this insinuation; admitting your
President to be what Franklin would make you believe he is, and that the
necessity of impeaching him was a thing to be expected, I cannot perceive any
great inconvenience that could arise from the absence of the Chief Justice. The
President could not be impeached before the opening of Congress, and, by that
time, it was reasonable to suppose, that the object of the extraordinary
mission would be accomplished, and the Envoy ready to return. An impeachment
against the President could hardly be hurried on in such a manner as not to
leave an interval of four months between his accusation and trial, a space
quite sufficient for recalling the Chief Justice. And as to the bias, that the
honor and emolument attached to the office of Envoy might create in favor of
the culprit President, that could not be very powerful, because, the office of
Envoy must cease, before the Chief Justice could enter on his functions as
Judge on the President; and Franklin ought to know by his own heart, that
gratitude for past services would have but very little weight in favor of the
offender.

There is one objection remaining, which, if well founded, is really of a
serious nature. Franklin positively asserts, that the appointment of the Envoy
Extraordinary was strongly protested against by a very respectable minority of
the Senate; and not by them alone, but by the Democratic Society of
Pennsylvania also! That this respectable minority should coincide in sentiment
with the Pennsylvania democratic society is, indeed, a circumstance that
deserves to be well attended to; and, no doubt, it has had, and will yet have,
due weight with the President.

How it came into the head of Franklin to introduce his club on this occasion,
it is not easy to imagine. He does not pretend, I hope, that there is something
unconstitutional here also? The Constitution says, that the President shall
take the advice of the Senate, but it is totally silent with respect to the
democratic society of Pennsylvania. Mightily "alarming," indeed, that the
President should not consult this club of butchers, tinkers, broken huksters,
and transatlantic traitors! Had he wanted a fellow to fell an ox or mend a
kettle, to bilk his creditors or blow up an insurrection, he would have done
well to address himself to the democratic society of Pennsylvania for advice;
but to ask their advice in the appointment of an Envoy Extraordinary would have
been as preposterous as consulting the devil in the choice of a Minister of the
Gospel.

I have now answered, and I hope to your satisfaction, what Franklin calls his
constitutional objections to the appointment of Mr. Jay as Envoy Extraordinary:
it remains for me to take notice of one of a more personal nature.

Franklin, conscious that Mr. Jay's character for wisdom and integrity was
unimpeachable, has conjured up against him an opinion, which he gave some time
ago, concerning the Western Posts. He says: After the declaration made by John
Jay that Great Britain was justifiable in her detention of the Western Posts,
it was a sacrifice of the interests and peace of the United States to commit a
negotiation to him, in which the evacuation of those posts ought to form an
essential part." This unqualified declaration, "that Great Britain was
justifiable in her detention of the Western Posts, is a most shameful
misrepresentation of Mr. Jay's opinion on the subject. By this declaration
Franklin insinuates, that Mr. Jay had given it as his opinion that Great
Britain would be justifiable in her detention of the Western Posts for ever;
whereas his opinion was, that she was justifiable in detaining those posts,
only 'till the stipulation of the treaty of peace with respect to debts, due to
British Subjects from some of the States, should be fulfilled. And was there a
candid, honest man in the United States who differed in opinion from Mr. Jay,
on this subject? Very few I believe, except it were through ignorance. I am
fully convinced, that there is not, at this time, a single well informed man in
this country, who is not satisfied, that Great Britain was justifiable in her
detention of the Posts; to object then, to Mr. Jay as an Envoy Extraordinary,
because he had given his opinion to that effect, was to object to him for
having spoken the truth, like an independent honest man: indeed, the Patriots
seem to look on honesty as a natural disqualification, and, therefore, their
objection to Mr. Jay is not so unaccountable as it otherwise would be.

Must not those people, who so boldly assured you, that John Jay would betray
your interests, that he would sell the Western Posts, etc. have blushed when
they saw that a surrender of these Posts was the first thing he had stipulated
for? No; a Patriot's skin is like the shield of the Grecian hero; blood cannot
penetrate through "ten bull hides."

The following anecdote will at once prove the injustice of charging Mr. Jay
with a wish to abandon the Western Posts to the British, and confirm the
Prudence of the President's choice.

"From here," says Mr. Brissot, we went to New Rochelle. This place will always
be celebrated for having given birth to one of the most distinguished men of
the American Revolution; a republican remarkable for his firmness and his
coolness, a writer eminent for his nervous style, and his close logic, Mr. Jay.

At the time of laying the foundation of the Peace of 1783, Mr. de Vergennes,
actuated by secret motives, wished to engage the ambassadors of Congress to
confine their demands to the fisheries, and to renounce the Western Territory.
The minister required particularly, that the independence of America should not
be considered as the basis of the peace; but, simply, that it should be
conditional. To succeed in this project, it was necessary to gain over Jay and
Adams. Mr. Jay declared to Mr. de Vergennes, that he would sooner lose his life
than sign such a treaty; that the Americans fought for Independence; that they
would never lay down their arms 'till it should be fully consecrated; that the
court of France had recognized it, and that there would be a contradiction in
her conduct, if she deviated from that point. It was not difficult for Mr. Jay
to bring Mr. Adams to his determination; and Mr. de Vergennes could never shake
his firmness.

Mr. Jay was equally immovable by all the efforts of the English Minister,
whom Mr. de Vergennes had gained to his party. Mr. Jay proved to him, that it
was the interest of the English themselves, that the Americans should be
independent, and not in a situation which would render them dependent on their
ally. He converted him to his sentiment; for his reasoning determined the court
of St. James's. When Mr. Jay passed through England in his return to America,
Lord Shelburne desired to see him. Accused by the nation of having granted too
much to the Americans, he desired to know, in case he had persisted not to
accord to the Americans the Western Territory, if they would have continued the
war -- Mr. Jay answered that he believed they would, and that he should have
advised it.

This is the man whom the Patriots accuse of intentions of rendering the United
States dependent on Great Britain, and of abandoning the Western Posts! This is
the man, who, after twenty years spent in the service of his country, after
having a second time ensured its happiness and prosperity, is called a slave, a
coward, a traitor, and is burnt in effigy for having bartered its liberty for
British gold! The ingratitude of republics and republicans has long been
proverbial.

2. Franklin would have the President impeached, for having appointed an Envoy
Extraordinary to Great Britain contrary to the opinion of the majority of the
House of Representatives. A majority of that House, says Franklin, were in
favor of dignified and energetic measures; they spurned the idea of a patient
and ignominious submission to robbery and outrage. The different propositions
of of Messrs. Madison, Clarke, and Dayton substantiate this assertion. -- And
yet the Executive nominated an Envoy Extraordinary in coincidence with the
minority, apparently to defeat the intentions of the representatives of the
people. This fact is serious and alarming. That the President did nominate,
and, by and with the advice of the Senate, appoint, the Envoy Extraordinary,
contrary to the opinion of the majority of the House of Representatives, is, at
least, doubtful, because no such question could be agitated in that house; but
that he would have been justifiable in so doing is not doubtful at all. Your
Constitution, which this Demagogue affects to call the palladium of your
liberty, says that the President, with the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors,
etc. and not a word about the House of Representatives.

Without directly denying the authority of the President and Senate in the
appointment of an Envoy Extraordinary, Franklin asserts that the exercise of
that authority was in the present instance, interfering with the dignified and
energetic measures that were pending in the House of Representatives. If the
constitution had made an exception here, if it had provided that the President
and Senate should not appoint an Envoy, but that their functions should be
suspended, while dignified and energetic measures, were pending in the other
House, I should be ready to confess, that the former had stepped beyond their
authority; but, as the Constitution is silent on this subject, I cannot. It was
possible, indeed, for the House of Representatives to fall into an indelicate
inteference with the Executive, on this occasion, and, perhaps, they did so;
but the Executive could not intefere with them, unless they had first begun to
meddle with a branch of authority, which the Constitution had forbidden them to
touch. What would be said of the President and Senate, were they to frame a
money bill, pass it, and send it to the other House? Just as consonant to the
Constitution is it for that House to intefere in the nomination, or
appointment, of an Envoy to a foreign court.

Besides, as to the fact, how did the appointment of the Envoy interfere with
the dignified and energetic measures? They were adopted by the House of
Representatives, and presented to the Senate, who rejected them, and who would
have rejected them, whether the Envoy had been previously appointed or not.
This is evident, because had they intended to sanction the dignified and
energetic measures, they would not have appointed the Envoy; and therefore, by
delaying the appointment, 'till these measures were rejected by the Senate,
nothing could have been gained but a loss of time.

Franklin seems to triumph in proving, that the President acted contrary to the
opinion of the House of Representatives. I have already observed that that
House had nothing to do in the appointment in question; but, even suppose they
had, is the Senate nothing? What is the use of three branches in the
Constitution, if two of them must ever yield to the will of the third, or to
the whim of a faction? To what end has a power been given to the Senate to
reject bills sent to them by the other House, if they are never to exercise it,
unless it should should happen to be agreeable to the democratic clubs? In
short, why is there a Senate and President at all? And, indeed, it seems to be
the opinion of your countryman Franklin, that these two branches, at least, are
useless. If, says he, the immediate Representatives of the people were to
decide upon treaties, the secrecy in relation to them would be more tolerable.
After this sentence, it is perfectly ridiculous to hear him censure the
Administration for acting unconstitutionally; full as much so, as it is to hear
my old friend Priestley rebuking Tom Pain.

If the immediate Representatives of the people, as Franklin is pleased to call
them, were permitted to decide upon treaties, there is no one act of authority
that they would not soon exercise exclusively. Very soon would the whole power
of the state be consecrated in one heterogeneous assembly, split up into
committees of confiscation, war, and murder. Very soon would your legislature
resemble that of your Sister Republic, where every crude idea that comes
athwart the brain of a harlequin legislator, becomes a law in the space of five
minutes, and issues forth amidst the acclamations of the sovereign people,
bearing terror and devastation through the land. You may thank God that your
Constitution has provided against a legislative scourge like this. It is this
prudent provision alone that has saved you from the dreadful consequences,
which the dignified and energetic measures of the patriotic triumvirate,
Madison, Clarke, and Dayton, would most inevitably have produced.

After having censured the President for not acting in coincidence with the
sentiment of the majority of the House of Representatives, Franklin returns to
the charge by censuring him for acting in coincidence with the sentiment of the
minority of the same House; this he calls, "a serious and an alarming fact,"
just as if it was not an unavoidable consequence of the other. But, it is not a
little extraordinary to hear him censure the President for acting in
coincidence with the minority of the House of Representatives, when, a few
pages before, he censures him for not acting in coincidence with the sentiment
of the respectable minority of the Senate? Perhaps the epithet respectable,
which Franklin has bestowed on his minority of the Senate (and of which, I
suppose, the respectable Mr. Mason was one), render them superior to the
majority, and, if so, their opinion certainly ought to have been followed. But,
the truth is, I believe, this respectable minority of the Senate were in favor
of those dignified and energetic, or dragooning, plundering, measures, which
the President did not approve of, and so were the majority of the House of
Representatives; and this is the reason why Franklin, who is a sort of war
trumpet, would have had him guided by the minority of one House and by the
majority of the other.

The President's having acted in coincidence with the minority of the House of
Representatives ought to be looked upon as a mere matter of accident; for, on
the appointment of an Envoy, it was not necessary for him to take cognizance of
what was passing amongst them; but, as to his acting in coincidence with the
majority of the Senate, it was a duty that the Constitution imposed on him.
According to the wish of Franklin, the President should have rejected the
advice of that branch of the legislature which the Constitution has associated
with him in the appointment of an Envoy, to adhere to the advice of another
branch, to which the Constitution has allotted no participation in such
appointments. This is what the Patriots would have called acting
constitutionally.

Not content with accusing the President of acting unconstitutionally in
nominating an Envoy to Great Britain, Franklin adds, that he did it apparently
to defeat the intentions of the Representatives of the people. There is a good
deal of bitterness in this. If, by the Representatives of the people, Franklin
means the majority of the House of Representatives alone, I assent to the truth
of his remark: nay, I will go further, and own, that I am fully persuaded, the
President did appoint the Envoy Extraordinary on purpose to defeat their
intentions. But, were I an American, very far should I be from imputing this to
him as a crime; for, had he not defeated their intentions, you would by this
time have been objects of pity rather than of envy.

There was no person of the least discernment who was not well assured that the
object of your patriotic Members of Congress, was to reduce you to the
necessity of making a common cause with the French. I know they pretended, that
they wished to preserve peace. With this desirable object in view one proposed
laying such duties on British merchandise and ships, as would go nearly to a
prohibition; another proposed an entire prohibition; and a third, in order to
preserve peace with Great Britain, proposed seizing all debts and funds, the
property of British subjects! These were something like the peace measures
adopted in 1776, and had there been a second Independence to gain, no good Whig
could have objected to their being revived; but this gaining of Independence is
a game of hazard that no nation ever ought to play but once. At the present
time, it would be an exceedingly silly game for you; you have every thing to
lose, and nothing to win.

I am totally at a loss to account for these gentlemen's motives in
endeavoring to plunge this country into a war with Great Britain. I will not
affect to believe, that they were under the influence of foreign gold, though I
believe them to be as corruptible, at least, as Mr. Jay. Interested
considerations could have no weight with them; for, they appear to have lost
all idea of private as well as public interest. But whatever might be their
motives, the measures they proposed were fraught with beggary, ruin, and
dishonor, and if the President, by his nomination of the Envoy to Great
Britain, contributed to their being rejected, though supported by the majority
of the House of Representatives, he is entitled to the blessing of every lover
of this country.

3. Franklin would have the President impeached, for his reserve toward the
Senate previous to Mr. Jay's departure. Franklin says the advice of the Senate
was not taken in the treaty with Great Britain. By this, he ought to mean, that
the Senate was not informed of the particular objects to be obtained by Mr.
Jay's mission; for, if he means (which is possible) that their advice was not
taken on the subject of the mission itself, and of the person to be employed on
it, he wishes to impose on the unwary what he knows to be untrue. On these
subjects their advice was taken, and any further it was not necessary, either
in a constitutional or prudential point of view.

By the Constitution, says Franklin, all treaties are to be made by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate. The term advice has a natural and obvious
reference to negotiation; that no negotiation shall be entered into but with
the advice of the Senate. Before I take the liberty of contradicting our
Demagogue here, give me leave to make him contradict himself. "The President,"
says he, in another place, has power by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate to conclude treaties; that is, the Senate has the power to accept or
reject any treaty negociated by the President; but this power has not gone to
prevent him from opening a negotiation with any nation he thought proper. This
Patriot was determined no one should triumph in confuting it. A disputant that
thus contradicts himself point blank, without any kind of ceremony or apology,
sets his adversary at defiance.

Reserving myself 'till by and by to account for these contradictory
expositions of the same text, I am ready to allow, that the latter of them
exactly meets my sentiments; that is, that the share of power, in making
treaties, allotted to the Senate, does not go to prevent the President from
opening a negotiation with any nation he may think proper. This is so clearly
pointed out by the Constitution, that one is astonished to hear it controverted
by persons capable of reading. "He shall," says that instrument, have power, by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to to make treaties, provided
two thirds of the Senators present concur: and he shall nominate, and by and
with the advice of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, etc. And yet
Franklin, in one place, insists that the term advice has a natural and obvious
reference to negotiation only; for, says he, it would be the extremity of
absurdity to say, that advice was necessary after the thing was done. Whether
he has wilfully, or through ignorance, confounded the making of a treaty with
the forming of a treaty, is to me a matter of uncertainty (for he possesses
qualities that render either probable), but that he has confounded them is a
clear case. A treaty is not made 'till it be ratified and, therefore,
presenting it to the Senate for their consideration, before it be ratified, is
not taking their advice after the thing is done. It is taking their advice
before it is done; but not, as he seems to think ought to be the case, before
it is begun. The natural and obvious sense, and, indeed, the only sense of the
clause of the Constitution just quoted, is, in my opinion; that the Senate is
to be consulted in making treaties, but not in opening negociations.

Franklin has had the ingenuity to give to the words advice and consent an
application, that most certainly never entered into the thoughts of those who
framed the Constitution. Can he be serious in confining advice to what precedes
the negotiation, and consent to what follows it? If this were correct, the
Senate ought never to give their consent to a negotiation, nor their advice
concerning a ratification.

To me the sense of the Constitution is extremely clear, as to this point. The
words advice and consent have both a reference to what follows the negotiation;
and this will fully appear, if their import in the latter part of the above
clause be well weighed. The President shall nominate, and, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, appoint Ambassadors, etc. Now, if advice in
the making of treaties, has a natural and obvious reference to negotiation; so,
in the appointment of Ambassadors, it must have reference to nomination. I
leave any one to judge how nonsensical it would have been to authorize the
Senate to consent to the appointment of a person, whose nomination they had
before advised; and yet it would not be more so than to give them the power of
consenting to the terms of a treaty formed by their advice.

Indeed, it would be slandering the Constitution, to suppose that it contained
any thing approaching so near to the anarchical, as to subject the particular
objects of a negotiation to an assembly, not obliged to secrecy, before the
negotiation is opened. Were this ever to be the case, it easy to foresee that
it would be impossible to conclude any treaty of moment, or, at least, to
conclude it with advantage. Suppose, for instance, that the threatened rupture
with Great Britain had rendered it necessary for you to form a close alliance
with some power in Europe, and that the President had been obliged to make
known every stipulation to be made on your part, before the departure of the
Envoy; can you believe that, with such a person as Mr. Mason in the Senate
(and, from the degeneracy of human nature, you ought to expect that there ever
will be some such in it), the affair would have been kept secret, 'till
concluded? or even 'till it was begun? No; I Will be hanged if it would. It would
have been known in London long before the Envoy's arrival in Europe, and you
would have had an English fleet upon your coast, before he could possibly have
fulfilled his mission.

Among thirty persons there must ever be a difference in opinion, there must
ever be a majority and a minority, and a recent, a very recent, example ought
to convince you, that a person of a factious disposition, who has the
mortification to find his schemes disconcerted, to find himself lurched in a
minority, will go above half way to hell to frustrate the intentions of the
majority. It was therefore wise in the framers of the Constitution to give the
President a power to treat, without previously consulting the Senate with
respect to the objects to be obtained by the treaty.

4. The President ought to be impeached, according to Franklin, for his reserve
toward the people.

When ignorance or factiousness, or both together, have led a man beyond the
bounds of truth and candor, they never let him go, 'till they have plunged him
into an abyss of absurdity. Thus has it happened to Franklin. After having
persuaded himself that the President ought to withhold nothing from the
knowledge of the other branches of the legislature, it was natural for him to
pursue the error, 'till he found, that, to withhold the contents of a treaty
from the people, 'till it was ratified, indicated a contempt for public
opinion, and a monarchical supremacy.

He says that Republics ought to have no secrets, and adds, in the words of
Thomas Pain, "the secrets of courts, like those of individuals, are always
their defects." I do not know whether Franklin has strengthened his position or
not, in your opinion, by bringing to his aid a maxim of the old broken
exciseman, Pain; in my opinion, he has weakened it by such an auxiliary.
Pain, if I mistake not, was one of the half dozen of Lycurguses who framed
that Constitution of your Sister Republic, which is commonly called The
Constitution of 1793, and which the gaunt Parisians imagine will shower down
bread amongst them, like manna from heaven. When this Constitution begins to
operate, there will, undoubtedly, be no such thing as secrecy in the happy
country which is to be governed by it; but it will be prudent in you to wait,
'till you see its effects, before you act upon its principles; and, in the mean
time, as you enjoy peace and prosperity under your present half-English
Constitution, it will be right to guard it as much as possible against the
attacks of the modern Patriots.

In the compact, says Franklin, entered into by the citizens ot the United
States, certain concessions were made by them, and these concessions are
specified in the Constitution; but, have they conceded a right to an
acquaintance with their own affairs? Yes, if his question applies, as it
evidently does to the terms of an unratified treaty, the people have conceded a
right to an acquaintance with their own affairs; for, in the right of making
treaties is necessarily included the right of observing a prudent secrecy
concerning them, and, as the former is expressly conceded to the President and
Senate, so is the latter. The people have conceded the right of making
treaties, and the concession is unconditional; they have made it without
reserving to themselves the right of demanding their promulgation, before they
become the law of the land; without reserving to themselves the right of
advising, disputing, and caballing about their contents, before they are known,
or of tormenting and reviling the Executive, and burning the negociators in
effigy, when their contents are known.

But, would not Franklin be very far from being content with the people's
having this knowledge of their own affairs? Would he be willing to stop here?
No. "Where the people" says he are virtually, and not nominally, the sovereign,
the magistrates participate, but do not monopolize the supremacy. As he applies
this to the treaty, it is evidently his wish to persuade you, that somebody
else, besides those who now make treaties, ought to participate therein, and
who this somebody is, he takes care to inform you in the next sentence. If the
people, he continues, have the right and capacity to govern themselves, they
are certainly entitled to a knowledge of their own affairs; if they are not, a
republican government is wholly unfitted to them, for this form of government is
founded upon the presumption that they possess such a capacity. The people
being the legitimate sovereign of our government, they have the same right to a
knowledge of the affairs of state as a Monarch, and every restraint upon this
knowledge is an abridgement of their rights. Now, without descanting upon the
superabundant nonsensicalness of this passage; without insisting on the
absurdity of a government's being founded upon the presumption that the people
are capable of governing themselves; without enquiring what is meant by the
legitimate sovereign of a government, I shall come at once to Franklin's
republican Monarch. It is well known, that a Monarch ought to be at the head of
all the great affairs of state, and if the people in a republic ought to have
the same sway, a treaty could not only never be ratified, but it never could be
negociated, without their advice being previously taken, and their consent
obtained. Franklin's great fault, as a writer, is, want of memory. Must it not
shock the reader to hear him give to his Sovereign People exactly the same
rights as those exercised by a Monarch, when, in the very same page, he
affirms, that, "to naturalize the practices of Monarchies in a republic is a
direliction of every just principle."?

To establish the principle that the sovereign people ought to take an active
part in the making of treaties appears to be the real object of Franklin, while
he is talking about their being acquainted with their own affairs. To connect,
says he, the secrecy of a divan with the formation of a treaty is to double the
insecurity of committing the trust out of the hands of the people; for a treaty
may be made to barter away our essential interests, and the people may remain
ignorant of it, 'till it is too late for a remedy. His meaning here is by no
means equivocal. If it be insecure to commit the trust out of the hands of the
people, it ought to remain in their hands: if the people have the right to
apply a remedy, they must have the right of prevention also, which is much
better. And, indeed, this is a self-evident conclusion; for, it would be mere
nonsense to pretend, that they have a right to be informed of all the secrets
of a negotiation, without having a right to break it off. If they have not a
right to prevent a treaty's going into effect, where would lie the advantage of
having it communicated to them previous to its ratification? What satisfaction
could they derive from being tantalized with a view of dangers, that they could
not avoid.

Franklin has been pleased to say something about concessions, made by the
people; but, according to his subsequent account of the matter, I cannot
perceive that they have made any at all. For where is the use of their having
said to the President and Senate, you shall have the sole power of making
treaties, if they are to make them themselves? If, notwithstanding their having
conceded the power of making treaties to the President and Senate, they still
retain that power, the same will hold good with respect to every other power
they have conceded by the Constitution; and then, what concession have they
made? None at all; with their capacity to govern, they still retain all their
governing powers, and every nation that would treat with the United States,
ought to address itself to His multifarious and many-headed Majesty, The People.

5. Franklin would advise the impeachment of the President, for having evaded a
new treaty with France, while he courted one with Great Britain.

This is the great offense; to bring this home to the President seems to have
been the chief object of Franklin, who is affected by nothing that does not
concern the French Republic.

Before I proceed any further, it is necessary to give you a brief history of
the "Letters of Franklin." Whoever reads these letters with the smallest
attention, must perceive, that they are, originally, a French production. Every
one of them ends with an address to the passions of the sovereign people. These
declamatory parts betray their origin in a more striking manner than the rest
of the performance. Here we see every where a close and servile imitation of
the illiterate new fangled jargon of the French Convention, a heterogeneous
mixture of insolence, servility, vaunting, and lamentation. The author, or
rather translator, is easily guessed at, if you pay attention to his
affectionate expressions toward Citizen Genet. He calls Mr. Jay the libeller
of Citizen Genet;" and great part of his malice against that Gentlemen seems to
have no other foundation. In short, I am fully persuaded, that this Franklin is
the same personage who rendered himself so extremely odious in the diplomatic
dispute between Citizen Genet and your government.

The quarter, too, from whence these Letters issued, seems to correspond with
the rest of their history. They were first published, in a paper famous for its
anti-federal principles. The printer who is also a Colonel, went to France in
1792, to combat, in the cause of liberty and humanity, against the satellites
of the combined despots; and he returned to Philadelphia in 1793, about the
time that Citizen Genet arrived there. What rank this Colonel and Printer bore
in the armies of your Sister Republic, or whether he be still in her service, I
know not; but it ought not to be wondered at, if his zeal in her cause, in "the
cause of the human race," should have prompted him to serve her in Philadelphia
as well as in Flanders; the Colonel might do as much execution with his
printer's balls as with his cannon balls; perhaps more; and (which is a
circumstance by no means to be overlooked) the former are employed with less
danger than the latter.

Now, with this key, you will be able to enter into the spirit of many
expressions and passages of Franklin, which, without it, must appear totally
incomprehensible.

We have, says Franklin, treated the overtures of France for a treaty, with
neglect. The nation that has barbarously insulted us, and plundered us, we have
courted, meanly courted, and the nation on whom our political existence
depends, and who has treated us with affection, we have treated with
indifference bordering on contempt. Citizen Genet was empowered to propose a
treaty with us on liberal principles, such as might strengthen the bonds of
good will which unite the two nations. How your government has courted Great
Britain, how your political existence depends on France, and how she has
treated you with affection, we have already seen; it only remains for us to see
what were the "liberal principles," which Citizen Genet was authorized to treat
upon, and whether it was prudent on your part, to refuse to treat upon those
"liberal principles," or not.

But, previously, it is necessary to observe, that, let these "liberal
principles" be what they might, the President's conduct in refusing or evading
to treat on them could amount to no more than imprudence. The President, I
agree, has power to open negociations with any nation he thinks proper, and
then, says Franklin, why did he not treat with Citizen Genet? To which I
answer, that the Constitution, in authorizing the President to open
negociations with any nation whom he thinks proper to treat with, has not
obliged him to open negociations with every nation that thinks proper to treat
with him. It has not obliged him to open negociations with a nation so
circumstanced as not to be depended on for the value of a cargo of flour, with
a nation in jeopardy, with an assembly who had declared themselves a commit
of insurrection against every government on earth not founded on their
principles, with an Executive Council composed of half a dozen unhappy
wretches, who were all either publicly executed or outlawed, before the treaty
with them could have been ratified; no; the Constitution has obliged him to
nothing of this sort, if it had I am sure, he never would have accepted the
post of President. The Constitution has left it entirely to his own prudence to
make or to avoid treaties; whether he has on the present occasion, made a good
use of the trust reposed in him, or not, we shall now see.

As a preliminary, I must observe, that the President's Proclamation of
Neutrality was received by you all, with a very few exceptions, with the most
unequivocal marks of approbation. If, then, the treaty proposed by Citizen
Genet went directly to render that Proclamation nugatory, or to make it a
masque to cover the hostilities of such Americans as chose to make war upon the
enemies of France, you will be obliged to approve of the President's conduct in
avoiding to treat with Citizen Genet, or expose yourselves to a charge of the
most palpable inconsistency.

Soon after the Citizen's arrival at Philadelphia, he announced to the
President, through the Secretary of State, that he was authorized to open a
negotiation with the government of the United States. I have not room to give
you his letter at length here. It was one of those fanfaronnades for which the
French Republicans are so famous, and for which any man, supposed to be in his
senses, would deserve a good kicking. -- I will give it a place; it is a
diplomatic curiosity that merits to be preserved.

SIR,
Single against innumerable hordes of tyrants and slaves, who menace her rising
liberty, the French nation would have a right to reclaim the obligations
imposed on the United States, by the treaties she has contracted with them, and
which she has cemented with her blood; but strong in the greatness of her
means, and of the power of her principles, not less redoubtable to her enemies,
than the victorious arm which she opposes to their rage, she comes, in the very
time, when the emissaries of our common enemies are making useless efforts to
neutralize the gratitude, to damp the zeal, to weaken or cloud the view of your
fellow citizens; she comes, I say, that generous nation, that faithful friend,
to labor still to increase the prosperity and add to the happiness which she
is pleased to see them enjoy.

The obstacles raised, with intentions hostile to liberty, by the perfidious
ministers of despotism; the obstacles whose object was to stop the rapid
progress of the commerce of the Americans, and the extension of their
principles, exist no more. The French Republic, seeing in them brothers, has
opened to them, by the decrees now enclosed, all her ports in the two worlds;
has granted them all the favors her own citizens enjoy in her vast
possessions; has invited them to participate the benefits of her navigation, in
granting to their vessels the same rights as to her own; and has charged me to
propose to your government, to establish in a true family compact, that is in a
national compact, the liberal and fraternal basis, on which she wishes to see
raised the commercial and political system of two people, all whose interests
are confounded.

I am invested, Sir, with the power necessary to undertake this important
negotiation of which the sad annals of humanity offer no example, before the
brilliant era at length opening on it.


This letter admits of half a dozen interpretations. One would imagine by its
outset, that the French Convention was graciously pleased to suffer you to
remain in peace, notwithstanding she had a right to reclaim the obligations
imposed on the United States, and which she had cemented with her blood; but,
what follows seems to overturn this supposition; for the Citizen declares that
the emissaries of your common enemies were making useless efforts to neutralize
the gratitude, and to damp the zeal of your fellow citizens etc. Citizen Genet
arrived soon after the proclamation of neutrality was issued, and he took the
earliest opportunity of declaring, that useless efforts had been made to
neutralize the gratitude of the citizens of America; and yet Franklin and all
the other stipendiaries of France assert, that France with a magnanimity which
she alone seems susceptible of, has not urged the fulfillment of her treaty
with you; but that, she has expressed her wish, and her conduct has proved it,
that you should remain in peace.

We will allow that Citizen Genet's letter might mean, that France wished you
to remain in peace (for it may be made to mean any thing) yet that letter is
not the document to which you are to look, to know the gracious intentions of
your Sister Republic. At the same time that the Citizen came forward with his
republican fanfaronnade to propose negociations; he carried in his pocket
certain instructions according to which the proposed treaty was to be formed,
and from which he could not depart. By the extracts that I am going to make
from those instructions, it will appear to every one of you, who is not so
prepossessed in favor of the French as to be incapable of conviction, that the
new treaty was to accord you no advantages, of which your participation in the
war was not to be the price, and that Citizen Genet was to plunge you into a
war, with or without the consent of your government, to make a diversion in
favor of France, at the expense of your prosperity, and even your very
existence as a nation.

Citizen Genet, though abundantly assuming and insolent, though uniting the
levity of a Frenchman to the boorishness of a Calmuck, though deserving of much
censure from your government, has, however, been loaded with a great deal of
unmerited odium by the people of the United States. The man acted in full
conformity to his instructions in all his attacks on your independence, and,
therefore, his conduct is to be attributed to the Government of France, or the
sovereign people of that happy Republic, and not to the poor citizen himself.
He was a mere machine in the business, and his not being ordered home to answer
for his conduct, is a strong presumptive proof, that the sovereigns of France
apprroved of it, without daring to avow it openly. I say without daring to avow
it; because, though you could not have directly chastised them, yet they wanted
your flour, and it is well known, that empty cupboards are no less formidable
than great guns.

Now for the citizens instructions.

Struck with the grandeur and importance of this negotiation, the Executive
Council prescribe to Citizen Genet, to exert himself to strengthen the
Americans in the principles which led them to unite themselves to France: --
The Executive Council are disposed to set on foot a negotiation upon those
foundations, and they do not know but that such a treaty admits a latitude
still more extensive in becoming a national agreement, in which two great
people shall suspend their commercial and political interests to befriend the
empire of liberty, wherever it can be embraced, and punish those powers who
still keep up an exclusive colonial and commercial system, by declaring that
their vessels shall not be received in the ports of the contracting parties.
Here we see the ground work of the resolutions of Citizens Madison and Clarke.
Such a pact which the people of France will support with all the energy which
distinguishes them, will quickly contribute to the general emancipation of the
New World. It is to convince the Americans of the practicability of this that
Citizen Genet must direct all his attention: for, besides the advantages which
humanity (humanity!!) will draw from the success of such a negotiation, we have
at this moment a particular interest in taking steps to act efficaciously
against England and Spain, if, as every thing announces, these powers attack
us. -- And in this situation of affairs we ought to excite by all possible
means, the zeal of the Americans. The Citizen was to excite the Americans, and
to convince the Americans, and not the American government.
-- The Executive Council has room to believe that the consideration of their
own independence depending on our success, added to the great commercial
advantages, which we are disposed to concede to the United States, will
determine their government to adhere to all that Citizen Genet shall propose to
them on our part. As it is possible, however, that they may adopt a timid and
wavering conduct, the executive Council charges him, in expectation that the
American government will finally determine to make a common cause with us, to
take such steps us will appear to him exigences may require, to serve the cause
of liberty, and the freedom of the people. What people? If the American people
are not meant here, the passage has no meaning at all.
-- Citizen Genet is to prevent all equipments in the American ports, unless
upon account of the French Nation. He will take care to explain himself upon
this object with the dignity and energy of the representative of a great This
is republican modesty!
people, who in faithfully fulfilling their engagements know how to make (ah!
make!) to make their rights respected. -- The guarantee of the West India
Islands is to form an essential clause in the new treaty. Citizen Genet will
found early the disposition of the American Government, and make this a
condition, sine qua non, of their free commerce to the West Indies, so
essential to the United States. -- The minister of the marine department will
transmit to him a certain number of blank letters of marque, which he will
deliver to such French and American owners as shall apply for the same. The
minister at war shall likewise deliver to Citizen Genet, officers commissions
in blank for several grades (ranks) in the army Under some of these
commissions, certain citizens of the United States have made an irruption into
the Spanish Settlements, which must end in an indemnity, to come out of the
pockets of the people, or in a war with Spain.


Now, was your taking part in the war, that your Sister is carrying on for the
good of the human race, to be the price of a treaty with her, or was it not? --
The President, then, not only acted consistently with his duty in avoiding it,
but consistently also with your sentiments, already decidedly expressed by your
approbation of his Proclamation of neutrality.

But, say the Patriots, we could forgive him for not treating with France, if
he had not treated with Great Britain. He treated with her while he refused to
treat with our French brethren. -- But, for this accusation to have any weight
with even the friends of France, it ought to be proved that the treaty
negociated with Great Britain, bears some resemblance, at least, to the one
proposed by Citizen Genet, Can this be done? Has the President stipulated with
Great Britain to suspend your commercial and political interests in order to
befriend the empire of liberty, wherever it can be embraced? Has he promised
that you shall contribute to the general emancipation of the New World? Has
Great Britain asked you to assist her in the war? Are you to make a "common
cause with her?" Has she made your guarantee of her Islands an essential clause
in the treaty, and a sine qua non of your free commerce with them? -- Where,
then, is the likeness between the two treaties? And if there be none, by what
sort of patriotic reasoning do they prove that the President, because he had
refused to treat with France, ought not to have treated with Great Britain?
This, however, appears to be the heaviest charge against him. "So bold an
attack," says your Demagogue Franklin, upon the palladium of our rights,
deserves a serious enquiry. However meritorious a motion for such an enquiry
might be, if suggested in the Senate, yet, it could not be considered in place;
for enquiries of this sort belong to the House of Representatives, as the
Senate are the constitutional judges to try impeachments. If the grand inquest
of the nation, the House of Representatives, will suffer so flagrant a breach
of Constitution to pass unnoticed, we may conclude, that virtue and patriotism
have abandoned our country. Hence you are to conclude, then, that General
Washington must be impeached, or virtue and patriotism have abandoned your
country.

It is not for an Englishman to determine whether this be true, or not; but, if
it be true, you will excuse him for saying; the Lord have mercy upon your
country!

The only fair way for you to judge of the President's conduct relative to the
treaty negociated with Great Britain, and the one proposed by France, is, to
draw a comparison between your present situation, and the situation in which
you would have now been, had he followed a different conduct. As the tree is
known by its fruit, so are the measures of the statesman by their effects. Look
round you, and observe well the spectacle that the United States present at
this moment. Imagine its reverse, and you have an idea of what would have been
your situation, had the President yielded to the proposals of Citizen Genet, or
those of the war party in Congress. The produce of the country would have been
at about one third of its present price, while every imported article would
have risen in a like proportion. The farmer must have sold his wheat at four
shillings a bushel in place of fourteen, and in place of giving four dollars a
yard for cloth, he must have given ten or twelve. Houses and lands, instead of
being risen to tripple their former value, as they now are, would have fallen
to one third of that value, and must, at the same time, have been taxed to
nearly half their rent. In short, you would have been in the same situation as
you were in 1777, and without the same means of extricating yourselves from it.
However, such a situation might, perhaps, be a desirable one to you. Habit does
great things. People who were revolution mad, might look back with regret to
the epoch just mentioned, and might even view with envy the effects of the
French Revolution. If so, it is by no means too late yet; the President has
only to refuse (...) ratification of the treaty with Great Britain, and adopt
the measures proposed by the honest and incorruptible friends of the French
Republic, and you may soon have your fill of what you desire. If you have
wished to enjoy, once more, the charms of change, and taste the sweets of war
and anarchy (for I look upon them as inseparable in this country,) then, the
President may merit an impeachment at your hands; but, if you have desired to
live in peace and plenty, while the rest of the world has been ravaged and
desolated, to accuse the President now, is to resemble the crew of ungrateful
buccaniers, who, having safely arrived in port, cut the throat of their pilot.

SUPPLEMENT.
THE proceedings of the Patriots, previous to the departure of Mr. Jay, and
during his absence, throw a good deal of light on their present obstinate
opposition to the treaty. At the time of Mr. Jay's appointment as Envoy, a
recent dispute had convinced the public that he was no friend to the dragooning
system, proposed by Citizen Genet, and adhered to by the war, or confiscating,
party in Congress. The Patriots were morally certain, that a continuation of
peace between Great Britain and this country would be the consequence of his
mission, and, of course, that their golden dreams of plunder would end as
dreams generally do end. Accordingly, no sooner was his appointment made known,
than the whole Union began to ring with their vociferations.

The Democratic Society of Pennsylvania (never last in the pursuit of mischief)
gave the signal of malcontentedness. They published their resolves These
resolves have been re-published since the return of Mr. Jay. This is saying to
the people: look here; what we foretold is now come to pass! The democrats knew
what Mr. Jay ought to do, it was not, therefore, very difficult for them to
foretell what he would do, and to condemn it beforehand; nevertheless they now
hold up their predictions as a proof of their sagacity. I must confess, they
are a sort of wizzards, and I only lament that they had not lived in New
England about 130 years ago.

This re-publication was signed by one Israel Israel; Rabin of the democratic
tribe of Pennsylvania. Can this be the same Israel Israel, who was put in
durance for having publicly declared his wish, that not one of those who
marched against the Western Rebels would return alive? If he should be the
same, I think, his wish on that occasion may serve as an excellent comment on
the resolves.


against the appointment, and were soon followed by all those self-created
clubs, which, in the patriotic cant of the day, they term their "Sister
Societies." It is unnecessary to say what were the sentiments contained in
these resolves; as is the source, so is the stream. One circumstance ought not,
however, to pass unnoticed: joining France in the present war appeared to be
the leading object of every one of the societies. Then sentiments, and even
expressions, on this subject bear such a perfect resemblance, that it is almost
impossible they should not have been prescribed by some agent of that
regenerated, rich, great, generous, humane, happy, valiant and victorious
republic.

The following extract, from the resolves of the democratic society, met at
With Court House, in Virginia, will serve as a specimen. Shall we Americans,
who have kindled the spark of liberty, stand aloof and see it extinguished,
when burning a bright flame in France, which has caught it from us! If a
despot prevails, we must have a despot like the rest of the nations. If all
tyrants unite against free people, should not all free people unite against
tyrants? Yes, let us unite with France, and stand or fall together. This is the
society, who, after a great deal of abusive language against the President,
propose to the people of the United States, so to amend the Constitution as to
incapaciate any man to serve as President for more than eight years
successively. It was well known that the President had served six years, at
that time.

Nor were the Patriots idle during the absence of the Envoy. Every piece of
news, that could be picked up concerning his conduct at the Court of St.
James's, was made the means of sarcasm, and conjured into prognostics of his
making a dishonorable treaty. Even the formalities of his introduction at
Court could not escape the malicious observatlons of the patriotic crew. His
kissing the Queen's hand was termed prostrating at the feet of Majesty the
sovereignty of a great people, and for which it was affirmed he deserved to
have "his lips blistered to the bone." Had I been in Mr Jay's place, perhaps I
should have preferred the hand of one of the Queen's daughters; but his taste
was, at any rate, as good as that of the Patriot's; for, who would not rather
kiss the shrivelled hand of the Queen of England than the monstrous beef-stake
lips of an African Patriot, The greatest part of the negroes are most excellent
Patriots, and firm friends of the modern French.
or the (...) chops of a regenerated Baboon?

From men in this disposition of mind, it was to be expected that any
arrangement, tending to prevent a rupture with Great Britain, would meet a
clamorous opposition; but few people, I believe, thought that the first attack
would come from a member of the Senate. Nobody imagined, that any member of
that venerable body would have so far lost sight of his country's interest, of
its peace, as to divulge the terms of an unratified treaty, and even become
instrumental in its promulgation, not only without the permission, but against
the wish and intention of the President and the majority of the Senate. Mr.
Mason's motives were but too evident. He might have said to himself (with the
hypocritical Mark Anthony, after he had divulged to the plebians the Will of
Caesar); Now let it work. Mischief thou art a foot, take thou what course thou will.

The effects of this legislative tattling were not long in discovering
themselves. The treaty was published at Philadelphia on the 2d. of July,
prefaced by a letter from Mr. Mason, authorizing the printer to make what use
of it he thought proper. On the fourth of July the most scandalous scene was
exhibited, in this capital of the Union, that ever disgraced a civilized
country. To avoid a charge of misrepresentation here, I shall give an account
of it in the Patriots' own words, as published in their gazette, the Aurora, of
the 9th July.

The day (the 4th. of July,) was closed by the exhibition of a transparent
painting with the figure of John Jay upon it. The figure was in full statue,
holding in his right hand a pair of scales, containing in one scale, American
liberty and Independence, kicking the beam; in the other, British Gold, in
extreme preponderance. In his left hand a Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and
Navigation, which he extended to a group of Senators, who were grinning with
pleasure and grasping at the Treaty. From the mouth of the figure issued these
words, come up to my price, and I will sell you my country. The figure was
burned at Kensington amid the acclamations of hundreds of citizens. Thus ended
the procession, and thus terminated the anniversary of American Independence.

This was a good setting out. Meanwhile the Treaty got spread about, and a
systematical opposition to it was determined on. The first remonstrance was
drawn up at Boston, and in such haste were the citizens of that town to get the
start of those of other places, that the first copy of the treaty had not been
arrived in town twenty four hours, before a town meeting was convened to
condemn it. At this meeting a motion was made to read the treaty, at least,
before they remonstrated against it; but this motion was not even seconded.

The citizens of New York were not much behind their brethren of Boston in
point of time, and in other respects very far outstripped them. A town meeting
being called to take the treaty into consideration, a great number of persons,
of all descriptions attended. A chairman being named, a proposition was made
for adjourning to some more convenient place for a fair and full discussion of
the treaty, but this was opposed with much clamor by many of the citizens.
There appeared, however, to be a majority in favor of a fair discussion, but
those who were against it were the most noisy; interruption, disorder and
confusion ensued. In the course of the affair three stones were thrown at Mr.
Hamilton, who was for a fair discussion, the second of which glanced his
forehead, one of the others struck a gentleman standing by him. From the
beginning standards were displayed bearing the colors of the United States and
France. A party of those who had opposed a fair discussion went off to the
battery, bearing a standard with French and American colors, where they burnt
the treaty, and then returned with an accession of numbers. Now, will any one
in his senses believe, that this rabble, or, at least their ringleaders, were
not hired to oppose the government on this occasion? What did the French flag
do at this meeting? What had the French Sailors at New York, to do with a
treaty between this country and Great Britain? On the third of July the
following card appeared in the Gazette, called the Argus, of New York.

The good Frenchmen, who are at New York, having taken cognizance of the treaty
passed with the English, beg the Americans of this city to take away the
tricolored flag from the Coffee House, finding it, in this circumstance,
displaced.


Humiliating scene!

There was certainly a very great majority of the merchants, traders, and
people of property, of New York in favor of the treaty and yet brick-back
eloquence has prevailed, and a remonstrance has been sent off to the President.

Philadelphia was the next scene of action. A vast concourse of Citizens of the
right true blue stamp assembled nearly in the same manner, and for the same
purpose, as the citizens of New York. It would be useless to describe the
stupid stare, the dirty shirts, and long beards, of these sovereigns, or the
patriotic strut an imaginary consequence of their chairman and committee men. I
shall notice only a circumstance or two, which, though trifling in themselves,
characterize the meeting better, perhaps, than the most minute account of their
proceedings and principles could do.

The important business being ended, a citizen made a motion, that the welcome
of the meeting should be given to a firm friend of the Rights of man, just
arrived from Ireland (last from France), Citizen Archibald Hamilton Rowan. The
name of Rowan was hardly out of his mouth, when the whole assembly burst out
into an acclamation, such as is heard from the summit of mount Rhodope, when
the drunken God retires to his pleasures; or (to make use of an apter
comparison) such as resounds through the infernal regions, when Satan announces
the arrival of one doubly damned. Silence being at last restored, the same
citizen, holding up a little pamphlet containing one of Mr. Mason's treaties,
exclaimed, what a damned treaty! After a short pause, he continued; I make a
motion, that every good citizen in this assembly kick this damned treaty to
Hell. He must have supposed that his good fellow citizens know the way to Hell;
and to tell the truth, some of them had much more the appearance of furies than
of sober honest men.

The business of the meeting being closed by this patriotic exhortation, some
of the lukewarm citizens retired home, while others of a more determined
character paid the House of Mr. Bingham a visit. It was thought by some, that
violence was their intention; but they were so moderate as to be contented with
insult and execration. Mr. Bingham has, without dispute, the finest house in
the city, and he is said to be, besides, one of the wealthiest as well as
worthiest men in the country; it must, therefore, be confessed, that he was, on
every account, a proper object of attack.

Such are the opposers of the treaty, such the sovereign people, who are now
tormenting the President with their remonstrances, which some of them have the
insolence to call, instructions to their public servant, and who will ere long,
unless their power be contracted, tyrannize over the peaceable inhabitants of
these States. When once the lower orders of the people, those who have nothing,
begin to give law to those who have something, a state of anarchy is at no
great distance. This dreadful scourge now menaces the United States, and the
only way of avoiding it is for every honest man, every man of property, to give
his hearty and sincere support to the General Government.

POSTSCRIPT.
I have this moment cast my eyes on an extract of a letter from Mr. Pinckney,
the American Ambassador in London, which I think well worthy of a place here;
because Franklin after some compliments to the patriotism of that gentleman
insists that, if the negotiation had been left to him, you would have had a
treaty such as would have been worthy an independent nation. What will this
demagogue now say

Extract of a letter from Thomas Pinckney, Minister Plenipotentiary, to the
Secretary of State, dated London, 16th November, 1793.
Mr. Jay communicated freely with me on this subject during the course of the
negotiation, and I have witnessed the great difficulties which have occurred in
adjusting several of the articles. Although some points might have been
arranged more beneficially for us if the treaty had been dictated entirely by
the United States, yet when it is considered as a composition of differences,
where mutual complaints had rendered mutual concessions necessary to establish
a good understanding, I think it may fairly be said, that as little has been
conceded by Mr. Jay, and as much obtained for the United States as, all
circumstances considered, could be expected: the business upon the whole, has
been concluded more beneficially for us than I had any hope we could obtain by
negotiation six months ago, and, in my opinion; places us in a more
advantageous situation than we should have been by becoming parties to the war.


FINIS.

