Dr. DANA'S SERMON On practical Atheism.

The folly of practical atheism.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE CHAPEL OF YALE-COLLEGE ON Lord's Day, NOVEMBER
23, 1794.

BY JAMES DANA, D.D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN NEW HAVEN.

Printed at New Haven by T. and S. GREEN.

The folly of practical atheism.
PSALM LIII. 1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God.


THE folly of practical atheism is the subject proposed for present
consideration. The fool is not here supposed to deny the being of a God,
considered as a speculative truth, but as it relates to practice; or the idea
of a God considered as moral Governor, to whom he must give account. His
practice declares the language of his heart to be this: No God: I would there
were none. What influence his wish may possibly have on his opinion, we shall
not tarry to enquire. It has been much doubted, whether there ever was a
speculative atheist. Be this as it may, the folly of another kind of atheism is
to be laid open in the ensuing discourse. It is to be shown that the practical
atheist is a fool. His life declares the wish of his heart to be that expressed
in the text. He is thus described in the following part of the psalm: Corrupt
are they, and have done abominable iniquity. God looked down from heaven upon
the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did
seek God. Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy:
There is none that does good, no not one. St. Paul applies the passage to the
body of the Jewish nation. Romans, iii. 1^, -- 19.


According to this description of the atheist, he either neglects the worship
of God, although he may acknowledge his existence: Or he lives viciously, although he
attends to the externals of religion: Or he uses religion as a cloak to his
wicked designs. Let us examine each of these cases.

1. To what end is the existence of God acknowledged, if his worship is
neglected? To deny him our worship, is to all intents to say, There is no God.
What could a speculative atheist say or do more? He does not call upon God,
because he maintains that no God exists. He acts consistently. For he that
comes to God must believe that he is. But the practical atheist admits that he
is, and yet does not come to him. Where is the material difference between
denying him religious homage, and denying his existence?

The ancient Epicureans professed to believe a God, but denied his moral
perfections and providence. They described him as a God at ease, indifferent
to, and even ignorant of, the conduct of his creatures. Their own
voluptuousness was but an imitation of their god. They who restrain prayer,
cast off fear. They may possibly say, "We do not deny that God is to be
worshipped, any more than we deny his being." May we not reply, as an apostle
did in another and similar case? "Show thy faith by thy works. The devils
believe that there is one God, and tremble," and blaspheme.

2. Do any pay God an external worship, whose general course of life is a
denial of his perfections and providence? Applicable to such are the words of
St. Paul, "Be not deceived, for God is not mocked." Their religious
performances declare one thing; their uniform practice, another. From which are
we to determine whether they own or disown a God? Their actions say that they
have no awe of God, no desire of his approbation, or fear of his displeasure.
What less can we conclude than this, that, might they have their choice, there
would be no God?

3. Such as use religion as a pretext to their sinister ends, may conceal their
real character in a great measure from the world, and even from themselves. But
is there more impiety in avowed atheism, than in making use of God and religion
to patronise hypocrisy, and crimes which shock humanity? While men would be
thought to do God service, yea, while they have thought themselves in the first
class of his favorites, they have faught against him. In the judgment according
to truth, the higher any one's pretensions, while the inward temper is most
repugnant to religion, the higher indignity is offered to God; the more are his
perfections and existence denied and reproached.

Is there a God of all perfection? Should we not then set him always before us?
Should we not, in a steady course, solemnly recognize his being, perfections
and providence? Should we not be habitually impressed with the contemplation of
him in his works, his word, and his administration? Should not our hearts and
lives, as well as our lips, express our faith in him? If there is a God of all
perfection, of what high concern is it, that we be conformed to him, and the
objects of his special love?

From the general view we have taken of the practical atheist's character, let
us proceed to show that he is deservedly pronounced a fool.

I. Were there no God, according to his wish, still the existence of a God is
greatly to be desired, and therefore it is folly to wish there were none.

The being of a God includes a wise, universal and perpetual providence, a
moral government, the immortality of the soul, and future ineffable rewards for
them who diligently seek him. It is the foundation of serenity and hope amidst
all the trials of life, and in the view of death. In the most favorable
circumstances which we can suppose on earth, man is conscious to desires and
capacities to which no external things are adapted -- desires and capacities of
a far superior nature to the animal appetites and affections. At his best
state, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, but not finding it, unless he
has imbibed the principles of religion -- is established in the belief of a
God, who made and governs the world, consummately blessed in himself, and
all-sufficient, of perfect moral rectitude, who delights in mercy, and will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him.

Moreover, what a variety of circumstances are there, in which we cannot take
outward satisfaction in the enjoyments of life, though surrounded with them;
and which they would yield, were it not for such circumstances? Such are
excruciating pains, languishing sickness, the loss of dearest connexions in
life, or anxiety for them in their misfortunes and distresses, or affliction
from their misconduct, or the calamities under which they are born and
continued, or which may have come on them. In such circumstances man feels his
need of the principles of religion.

Or could outward things satisfy us at present, were we exempt from all the
troubles of life; yet we cannot but be thoughtful for the time to come. Death
is the common lot of mankind, and must soon be our own lot. Persons of all
conditions and ages die suddenly by various means. None of them return to us.
We cannot promise ourselves another day, or hour. Shall we then take up
satisfied with the world, when we know not what a day may bring forth? Suppose
we shall die tomorrow, or this night, where shall we then be? No where!
nothing! if there is no God, who alone has immortality. What a damp must the
prospect of speedy annihilation cast over all the pleasant things of the world?
Must it not turn all joy into heaviness? Can the mind be reconciled to the
thought, that in a little time, perhaps in one hour, we shall cease forever!
Whenever death shall come, we shall perish as the beasts, if there is no God.
What pre-eminence then has man above them? What a fool, how brutish, is he who
would thus degrade the human species, next in the scale of beings to the
angels! Is it not more eligible and wise to believe an after state, free from
all the encumbrances, pains, sorrows and anxieties of this? a state of
unmingled, unceasing happiness, adapted to our intelligent, moral nature? The
assured expectation of such a state can calm the mind, reconcile it to the
sufferings of the present time, dispel the gloom of the grave, the house
appointed for all the living, and make us more than conquerers in passing the
vale of death.

The existence of a God therefore is most desirable. He who wishes there were
none, wishes misery to himself, and to mankind. Were his wish the real truth,
it would be the highest wisdom to embrace and act upon the contrary opinion,
for the sake of passing with ease through life, and closing it quietly and
joyfully. If he is mistaken who thinks there is a God, and conducts
accordingly, he is not a loser, but a gainer, by his mistake, in life. He
cannot repent his mistake after death; nor can any reproach him with it, if
death is a total extinction of being. So that even on the supposition there
were no God, the believer of one is wise, and the disbeliever a fool. The
atheist is a fool, should what he wishes turn out to be true. It is an happy
delusion to think and wish differently from him, whether we regard our own
comfort, or the welfare of mankind -- Happy to think and wish differently,
provided we also practice differently. For to believe a God, and not live
accordingly, can only alarm us with unnecessary fears -- Unnecessary, I mean,
on the supposition of the truth of atheism -- But,

Secondly, if there is a God, they who live as though there were none, must be
eternally ruined; and therefore the atheist is a fool.

It is the part of wisdom to choose and act on that side which in all events
will be most safe. If atheism is folly, even on the supposition of its truth,
much more is it folly on the supposition of its falsehood. Admit that the being
of a God is barely possible, what an hazard may the atheist run? The hazard is,
that he may possibly be miserable beyond expression, in body and soul, forever.
If the being of a God is probable, the hazard then is that he will probably be
thus miserable. And if the being of God is certain, the misery of the atheist
is not less so. How inconceivable then is his stupidity? Could he persuade
himself that the notion of a God is entirely a fiction, so as to be tolerably
calm through life, and to have no other apprehension at death than that of
annihilation; yet, should he then find himself mistaken, the consequence is too
dismal to be expressed or conceived. Even the shadow of a probability that he
may then find himself mistaken is abundantly sufficient to convict him of folly
in not providing against such probability -- call it contingency, if you
please. What wise man would run the smallest possible hazard, where such a
consequence may be depending?

We have shown that the atheist's opinion, acted upon, abridgeth him of the
truest satisfaction in life, and cuts him off from all hope in death. What a
dreadful leap does he then take, if the opposite opinion should be true* His
error, not discovered till too late to be corrected, he must fruitlessly
lament, and experience its effects under the final displeasure of that God who
is a consuming fire. Had he acted on the supposition that there is a God, he
would have run no hazard, if this be a mistake. For who could punish or
reproach him for it? If he had worshipped as God an ideal being, his error and
his existence would terminate together, and he would have enjoyed the temporary
consolation, which the practical belief of a Deity must afford in this state.

Suppose atheism were the general opinion of mankind, and that a believer in
God and true worshipper of him must sacrifice every thing dear in life, and
life itself, to his belief and practice, would he not be the wise man, and all
others fools, admitting the truth of religion? Their gain would be temporal,
their loss eternal; but his gain would be eternal, his loss temporal.

Thirdly, it is the summit of folly to live in such a manner as must impel them
to choose that there were no God, when at the same time men suspect, and even
conclude, there is one.

Such is the fool described in the text. His heart is at variance with his
head. He acts against his own sentiments, as well as against the sentiment of
all the world. For this principle, the being of a God, has had the consent of
all mankind. The athiest "half believes a God;" why else does he fear one? It
is folly to fear the mere phantom of a Deity. If a Deity is merely a phantom,
he thinks it a reality, or it would not terrify him. The psalmist observes, v.
5, con. "There were they in great fear, where no fear was." The vicious, the
profane and atheistical scoffers at religion, as they have cause, are the
greatest cowards, in certain circumstances. The sound of a shaken leaf chaseth
them; and they fly as from the sword, when none are pursuing them. Many
imaginary fears are the effect of guilt. In time of danger it takes from hardy
veterans in vice all fortitude. When their iniquity does but seem to have found
them out, they betray guilt in their aspect, their behavior, their manner of
defense; and sometimes make immediate confession.

But these fears, you may say, are produced by the apprehension of civil
penalties, not by any sense of a God, or of accountableness to him. This,
however, does not account for the fears of the guilty, where no civil penalties
are apprehended. It does not account for their fear of death, from sickness or
otherwise. Nor is this merely a natural dread of dissolution. Something within
presages an after reckoning an after existence. They judge themselves, and
naturally apprehend an higher judgment.

That such as mock at sin, and in the general course of life have no fear of
God, are yet afraid when danger or death is nigh, proves that they believe
there is a God, though they wish there were not. When their powers of
reflection are by any means awakened, they are afraid of him. O thou afflicted,
tossed with tempest, and not comforted! why do thy thoughts trouble thee? What
is it within thy breast, that agitates thee, and prevents thy repose? what that
makes thee heavy in the midst of laughter, and drives sleep from thine eyes? If
there is no God, thou may certainly conclude that this officious intruder on
thy peace is a liar; and need not be troubled, because it writes bitter
things against thee. Why should the weakness of superstition, or sickly fancy,
cause thy countenance to turn pale, thy tongue to faulter, and thy joints to
tremble? Have thou found by thy wisdom that some crazy dreamer first started
the notion of a God? that fear circulated it? and that it was inculcated to
answer the ends of politicians? Why then art thou unmanned by the misgivings
and forebodings of thine own mind? Why should these confute thy declaration,
that there is no God?

The plain truth is this: The thoughtless, vicious and profligate, by their
manner of life, bring themselves to say in their heart. No God. Well were it
for us, if there were none. He is not our God, our Father and friend. We are
enemies to his government, and have naught else to expect but to be frowned
from his presence. O that there were no God! or that he had not brought us into
being!

When men have lived without God in the world, they have the temerity to wish,
what perhaps they dare not utter, that God might not be. They are resolved not
to alter their course. This, they are aware, must end in ruin, if God exists,
and governs the world. Hence the only alternative left them is to wish that
atheism were true. Surely these are fools. They are at variance with
themselves. For while they wish there were no God, they also wish to die in
favor with him. Can the atheist be named, who does not most sincerely join with
Balaam in his prayer: "Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his?" If this is even the atheist's prayer, judge ye whether his
atheism is any other than practical. And is he not a fool to live as no one can
be willing to die? -- estranged from God? By wishing to die as the righteous
man dies, he commends the life of the righteous, the part chosen and the
course pursued by him. The pious man's end could not be preferable to that of
the impious, unless his life were so. That choice or course, which ends well,
must be pronounced wise: that which ends ill, must therefore be unwise. The
atheist himself being judge, he lives and dies a fool; why else is it his wish
that he may die the death of the righteous?

Would we determine on wisdom and folly as relative to the characters and
pursuits of men, let us follow them to the closing scene. Let us observe
whether they go off the stage with honor or disgrace. Is death the end of all
men? Then they are wise who consider their latter end -- who refer their
conduct in life to this solemn period, and act such a part as they can the
review with approbation. If the atheist cannot then approve his own part, but
will be compelled to wish that he had acted the part of the godly man, is it
without reason that we call him a fool?

Can any subject of enquiry be more serious and important than this, whether we
so live as that it is our highest interest to suppose there is a God, or the
contrary? Could men, either from skeptical pride or dissolute manners, fix down
in the persuasion, that God is nothing but a name, they might then be exempt
from the perturbations of guilt, and apprehensions of a judgment. On this
supposition, they would neither approve nor condemn any affections, volitions
or actions in a moral view. Still, being endowed with sore thought, and
observing the frailty of the human race, they could not but be anxious whether,
or after what manner, they shall exist when they leave this world. If they are
settled in the opinion of atheism, what but palpable darkness is before them?
None of their friends who have been removed, return to inform them whether
there is another life; or if there is, of what sort. Atheism then does not
relieve their minds, naturally thoughtful for futurity, and solicitous to know
what may be at and after death -- an event which the wise and foolish alike
expect.

But if the wicked rather wish there were not a God, than really disbelieve,
what madness has led them to such a wish? Shall they profess that they know
and believe in him, and yet seldom have him in their thoughts, renounce his
fear, despise his goodness, and abuse his grace and patience? Shall their
practice speak this language, Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?
and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him? Is he the former of our
bodies, and the father of our spirit? Do we live, and move, and have our being
in him? Does every good gift come from him? Has he to all other gifts added
that of a Redeemer, which indeed comprehends all things? Can he save or
destroy? And shall his creatures, formed to show forth his praise, and for whom
he has delivered up his own Son, forget him, and live as though they were
self-made, and self-preserved? as though their good were in their own hands? as
though they were not accountable? had nothing to hope from his favor, nothing
to fear from his anger? Understand ye brutish, and ye fools when will ye be
wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall
he not see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Will you not
call on his name in public or private? Or will you use it only to profane it?
Or will you cry mightily to him in your calamity, or when danger is near; and
yet not have him in all your thoughts in the day of health, safety and
prosperity? Have you no concern with God, except in a time of extremity? and
would you apply to him then only? Or have you to do with him at all times, in
every place, in all circumstances? Those who fear before him habitually, who
bless him at all times, and acknowledge him in all their ways, shall not be
afraid of evil tidings. Their heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. He has not
given them a spirit of fear. He is their refuge, and very present help in
trouble. Such is the difference between religion and irreligion.

The atheist is a fool from choice, not from necessity. Were it owing to a want
or imbecility of understanding that he says there is no God, his folly would
be his excuse. But this is not the case. "The world by WISDOM knew not God.
Professing themselves to be WISE, they became fools." The grossest errors in
religion, and atheism itself, proceed from an affectation of superior wisdom.
Through the pride of knowing more than they have faculties for, it comes to pass
that men know nothing as they ought to know. Hence they put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; and call evil
good, and good evil.

How great is human depravity, that God should be disowned! that any of the
human race should indulge a wish in their hearts that HE were not! It is not
considered what this horrid wish implies. But is inconsideration an excuse* Is
it not a crime? A God may be clearly seen in his works -- particularly in our
own frame. The idea of a God, if not innate, has been a part of education among
all nations; it is demonstrable, if we ascend from effects to their cause,
whether it be or not in the other mode of descending from cause to effect. His
being and moral perfections are the only joy and hope of such a creature as
man, formed to contemplate and adore, capable of deliberating and preferring,
naturally conscious of liberty and accountableness, placed in this mixed state,
and apparently intended for another.

The government of an omnipotent Deity, the parent of the whole family in
heaven and earth, is matter of rejoicing to that part of his family to which we
belong, as well as to that above. Is it not then among the most affecting
proofs of man's fall and corruption, that he should practically deny the God
that is above! Surely he must be a very different creature from what God made
him, before he could wish in his heart, that his Creator and Father were not!
Would it be cruel to wish a numerous family of children might be left orphans!
Would it be most vile and absurd were a child of the family to wish the father
and head were taken away! What is this compared with his folly and vileness,
who wishes that all the offspring of God, angels and men, had no parent! What
must the conduct be, in which such a wish originates? It is his wish who goes
about seeking whom he may devour -- his wish who left his own habitation by the
eternal throne, and is compelled to say, "Farthest from God is best."

What has been discoursed should awaken reflection in those who have much
regard to the eye of man, but little or no regard to the eye of God. All things
are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. This is
forgotten, and practically denied, by all who do those things under cover of
the night, or in retirement, which, should they come abroad, would fill them
with fear or shame. To take pains in saving appearances, but no pains about the
principles and ends of our actions, all which are weighed by a God of
knowledge, is to deny that HE looks at the heart. They who have a form of
godliness, but deny the power, cherish this inward thought, that God does not
search the heart, in order to render to every man according to his ways. They
who practice secret fraud, liars, false accusers, perjured persons, thieves,
adulterers, envious persons, practically say, that God's eye is not on them.
They deny him in works, in the heart. When those whose eye is evil toward
others, learn the charity which envieth not -- when the unclean become chaste
-- when he that stole, steals no more, but works with his hands the things
that is good, that he may give to him that needs -- when the perjured have no
longer a right hand of falsehood -- when the profane learn to fear HIM who holds
not those guiltless that take his name in vain -- when liars cease from
falsehood -- when they who have defrauded others, learn to live in honesty --
when they who have taken great pains to conceal their sins from the world,
shall take like pains not to sin in secret -- when they who have done their
works to be seen of men, shall study to approve themselves to God -- Then all
these will best show that they believe a God. Then will they have reason to
conclude, that his being and perfections are the wish and joy of their hearts.
With him there is mercy, and plenteous redemption. The Savior of the world came
to call all manner of sinners to repentance.

Every one that does evil hates the light. An evil heart is an heart of
unbelief* It is inclined to deny or pervert the truth. Ahab said of Micajah, I
hate him; for he never prophesies good unto me, but always evil. Micajah had
told him the truth, and therefore was held as an enemy by Ahab, who cherished
as friends those who prophesied lies.

Suppose a man of an evil heart may have just sentiments of religion, and can
draw a fine picture of it; suppose him to have all knowledge, and the faith of
a martyr; yet he has not love to God or men, and is as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. If there be a God, we ought to love him with all the heart,
and soul, and strength and mind. It is good to draw near to him. They that are
far from him shall perish. The son in the parable, who, when commanded to work
in the vineyard, answered very respectfully, I go, sir; and went not, was as
destitute of filial reverence as he who petulantly answered, I will not. Trust
not to external professions. The divine command is, My son, give me thine
heart. "Keep thine heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
life." Next to the love of God, your neighbor claims your attention and regard.
The love of him should be measured by self-love. In other words, Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

If we walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, we shall redeem time, and
improve every talent, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. The wise
shall inherit glory; but shame shall be the promotion of fools.


