AN ORATION DELIVERED IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, AT ELIZABETH-TOWN, ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY, 1794, At the request of the Militia Officers, IT BEING THE
EIGHTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By Isaac Watts Crane, A. M.

Published at the request of a number of the auditors.

T^^ Reipublicae quasi membra comple^^ est;
Arts belli, arts pacis, religla^e^
Theod. (...) (...) -- PRINTED BY JOHN WOODS -- 1795.

AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1794.
THE little time allowed the speaker for preparation, together with the
inexperience of youth, will lay claim to the indulgence of candor and
benevolence, while a few observations are made with a desire to entertain this
polite and respectable assembly.

It is of particular importance that a nation make choice of a pure and
efficient government which shall preserve pure and inviolate, the rights and
liberties of every individual, in which no evils can arise from the
encroachments of arbitrary power, or from languor or want of energy in the
administration. That government may be called the best, as best promoting the
happiness of society, which will admit in its constitution the greatest share
of wisdom, virtue, fidelity, unity, secrecy and dispatch. Republicanism alone
will admit the union of these several powers.

In such a government the sovereign power rests in the people, who will most
certainly be faithful to themselves, as they are bound from every principle in
the wisest and best manner to promote the general welfare.

Wisdom and virtue no less than fidelity, are essential to a republican
government. As a meeting of every individual in a nation, if not wholly
impracticable, would be attended with numerous inconveniences, it is therefore
wisely concerted, that in a republic, the people choose persons delegated, to
devise plans of general utility. As it is always the interest, so it is the
practice of a free and an enlightened people, to choose men as their
representatives, who are celebrated for their wisdom and virtues; and in this
way, the wisdom and virtue of a republican government becomes fixed upon a firm
and permanent foundation. Unity, secrecy and dispatch, although generally
allowed to prevail most in a monarchical form of government, may be equally
enjoyed in a republic, where the people are cautious in choosing representatives
in whom they are willing to repose confidence in difficult emergencies, and
where a supreme magistrate is chosen, vested with suitable prerogatives.

Of such a nature is the government of the United States of America -- such, my
fellow citizens, is the government which we have the happiness to enjoy -- we
experience none of the evils of proud tyranny and arbitrary power on the one
hand, or of mad democracy and extravagant anarchy on the other -- no one here
fears the tyrants haughty frown -- no one here is subject to the wild phrenzy
and confusion of those who are without any form of government at all; but true
liberty founded on wise and equitable laws, pervades every part of the
community. Wisdom, virtue, and integrity prevail in our legislative; unity,
secrecy and dispatch in our executive departments. Our wise legislators,
sensible of the danger of arbitrary power, have enacted, that no magistrate or
(...) in government shall have any power, except what he receives from the laws
-- justice is administered to all with an impartial scale -- every one must be
subject to the laws of the state -- neither birth, fortune nor the most
honorable station, can exempt any from a strict obedience.

That the blessing of a government, founded on such principles, may be secured
to us, is our highest interest and should be the object of all our endeavors.
But, my fellow citizens, while we are enjoying so many of the rich bounties of
heaven* let us not forget that liberty is a blessing, more easily obtained than
preserved. It is natural for a people, who have been inured to habits of
freedom and activity, when threatened with immediate oppression, to rise up as
one man, and assert their liberties; but having a long time enjoyed the
blessings of peace, and of a mild administration of government, they are too
apt to grow languid, and by a negligence and inattention to those interests and
concerns which appear more distant, to be lulled into a state of dangerous
insensibility and unfitness so war. When in this condition, a sudden attack may
be made upon the country, and if slavery be not the consequence, irreparable
injuries may be committed. The security or perpetual safety of a nation,
therefore, becomes justly an object of general concern. To show in what
consists the safety of a nation, and of ours in particular, is my present
object.

That a nation be secure, it is necessary that it be not deficient in respect
to arms, the situation of the country, military skill and courage among the
inhabitants.

It is unnecessary to take up your time on the subject of military weapons --
we have nothing to fear in this country from the want of arms, ammunition and
military stores, if we have but prudence and courage to direct us, at what
time, and in what manner to use them -- from the watchful and provident care of
our government, there is reason to believe, that our arsenals and magazines
will soon be amply supplied.

The situation of a country is also a principal thing to be attended to, when
we are considering the means of defense. Hills, valleys and rivers render a
nation strong and impregnable; they not only afford places of refuge in time of
danger, but by the assistance of these, an enemy may often be led into some
dangerous and inconvenient situation, become surrounded and easily overcome --
Let us on this subject call to mind, the brave Leonidas, the Spartan General,
who at the head of only eight hundred men in the streights of Thermopylae, not
only defended himself, but gained a complete victory over the numerous armies
of Xerxes. To come nearer the present time, some of us, my fellow citizens,
have heard and others may have known from more evident testimony, that such was
the fate of the fierce and too confident Burgoyne, in the late American war.
Our country is peculiarly favorable on account of its situation, to the
preservation of liberty. As a friend to liberty Governor Livingston.
has justly observed, in order to conquer America, it would require, that an
enemy have forces so numerous as to cover every foot of land in our territory
-- the reason is obvious, because in proportion as we fall in one part, we rise
and become more powerful in another -- and although it may be called a
disadvantage, that we have such an extensive sea coast, by which we lie open in
so many places to foreign irruptions from the sea, yet it is to be considered,
that our ports and harbors may be fortified, and that when invaded, we have
time to rally our fortes and to act with united strength. "Admit that your
fleets could destroy our towns and ravage our sea coasts; these are
inconsiderable objects, things of no moment to men, whose bosoms glow with the
ardor of liberty. We can retire beyond the reach of your navy, and, without any
sensible diminution of the necessaries of life, enjoy a luxury, which from that
period you will want; the luxury of being free." -- Address of the Congress of
1775 to the inhabitants of Great Britain.


Military skill is in like manner very necessary for the security of a nation
-- discipline in war is as necessary to ensure success in the field, as
understanding and virtue to ensure the promotion of the common interests in the
cabinet. Regularity in every thing is attended with advantage, but in nothing
more than in troops destined to battle. From history it appears, that those
nations have generally excelled in war, who have paid the greatest attention to
military discipline. Among the ancient Romans, great attention was paid to the
military art, and Rome never shone with so much luster, as while this art was
in the highest perfection; but when luxury and pride prevailed to such a
degree, that the profession of arms became dishonorable, Rome sunk into a state
of the most abject stupidity and ruin -- she was in a desperate condition
indeed, when the young men made a practice of cutting off their hands and
fingers, that in their mutilated condition, they might be exempt from military
service, and when she was obliged to have recourse to foreign mercenaries for
aid against her enemies. See the second volume of Gibbon's decline and fall of
the Roman empire.


Valor or courage among the inhabitants, is in like manner necessary to the
security of a nation -- courage is the great support and handmaid of
discipline. They are both alike necessary, the best disciplined troops, without
courage, would be little more than a lifeless mass, and the most fierce and
intrepid without order, would only heighten the danger and hasten the ruin. The
discipline of the Romans, would have availed but little, had active courage
been wanting -- it was their virtue which in their language meant valor or
public spirit, that gained them such astonishing success in all their wars and
preserved their liberty and independence; it was the want of this, that (...)
the nation to a state of impotency and (...) bordering upon misery and ruin.
The example of ancient Rome suggests in lively colors, this useful principle
to every American, that a nation possessed of virtue, valor and public spirit,
will be possessed of liberty and independence, and will never be at a loss for
forces to repel incursions. In colors equally strong and lively, does the
example of the same nation suggest an equally interesting and established
truth, that luxury and effeminacy, pride and selfishness, and a want of that
glow of affection, of that patriotic spirit, which seeks the happiness of the
country at large, will be attended with the loss of liberty and the essential
rights of man.

Allow me here to consider, whether a standing army be necessary for the
defense and safety of the United States. By reason of the advantage in point of
military discipline, it has been asserted, that a standing army is preferable
to a militia, and if it be meant of a militia without regulations, the
assertion will most undoubtedly be just. Standing troops bred up to habits of
war, will act with more vigor and afford more resistance than an untrained
militia; but a militia may be under such good regulations, as to have all the
advantages without any of the disadvantages of a standing army. In despotic
governments, where the principle of governing is fear, a standing army must be
kept up, to awe the people into obedience -- but in free governments, where the
principle is virtue, there is no necessity for such an order of men; so far is
it from being necessary, that on the other hand, it is wholly unable to answer
the ends of such a government. In a land of liberty, like ours, it is extremely
dangerous, to make a distinct order of the profession of arms -- great
opportunity is in this way afforded for the overturning of government and the
introduction of all the horrors and calamities which attend a revolution; it
was the standing army of Julius Caesar, which overturned the Roman
commonwealth; it was the standing army of Oliver Cromwell, which turned the
long parliament out of doors; but besides the danger of a revolution, it is not
to be supposed that courage or public spirit will prevail as much among a
standing army, as among a militia. An army which consists of the people, and is
actuated by the same interests, which consists of men who have certain rights
to protect, will act with more spirit than an army composed of men, who neither
know, nor think any thing of the cause in which they are engaged -- with the
same discipline, therefore, they may be supposed to excel standing troops.

The militia of the United States is under good regulations, and daily
improving in discipline -- our wise and honest legislators have shown their
regard for our national security; as well as for the pure principles upon which
all free governments depend, by the wisdom and impartiality manifested in our
military establishments. Convinced of the danger of standing armies, they have
not made a distinct order of the profession of arms, but wisely uniting the
profession of the citizen and the soldier, have ordained, that every man
(excepting only those who perform the sacred functions of the desk) shall
prepare to meet the enemy in battle. No man in this government takes up arms,
but with a view to defend his country and its laws. The soldier puts not off
the citizen when he enters the camp, but it is because he is a citizen, and
would wish to continue such, that he makes himself, for a while, a soldier.

While we oppose standing armies as tending to overturn the government, to
support arbitrary power, and to introduce the greatest corruption of morals,
and would contend that in a free government, an army should always be taken
from the people, and actuated by the same interest; it is not denied that it
may be necessary, under certain circumstances of a country, to appoint a number
of the inhabitants, who shall be particularly disciplined, that th^^^ may be a
constitutional security for the public peace, and for protection against
foreign or domestic violence. No one, viewing the present commotions of Europe,
and the ignominious conduct of Great Britain toward us, can doubt the
propriety of our having a certain number of men in readiness, upon whom
reliance may be placed for our safety and honor. The late insurrection at
Pittsburgh, and in the western country, which has taken place since this
Oration was delivered, proves the truth of this observation.


The late military arrangements of Congress, must strike every one as
important; and it is presumed that there are not wanting brave. Americans in
sufficient numbers, who, if called upon, by urgent necessity, will not only be
willing, but will rejoice to have the honor of being defenders of their country.

A harmony or union in the measures of government among the citizens of the
United States, is also highly essential to the national security. -- It is the
interest of every citizen to unite in the wisdom of our federal government, the
grand palladium of our liberties -- this only can make us secure as
individuals; strong and powerful as a nation. -- Let the jarring interests of
individuals, subside and give way to the general good. That which will best
promote the happiness of the nation at large, will best promote the happiness
of every individual. Unless we act upon the principles of the confederation, we
are in great danger, both from home and abroad; unless we act upon the
principles of union and harmony, the most dreadful consequences may ensue; but
if we adhere to these exalted principles, liberty and glory will attend us. It
was for want of a confederation, in some measure similar to ours, that Europe
remained so long in a state of tyranny, usurpation and darkness. But when a
freedom of communication began to prevail, and the principles of the
confederacy received among the different powers of Europe; when, in a word,
civil government became fixed upon principles solid and permanent, then the
security and happiness of Europe became established. See Robertson's Charles V.
Introduction.


It is for want of adherence to this noble principle, that she is now covered
with blood, and experiencing all the horrors of war. From the misery of other
nations let America take warning! It becomes us, my fellow citizens, to
cultivate a spirit of peace and harmony with our friends, that we may be the
more formidable to our enemies.

Moderation and calmness among the people, and particularly among those
delegated to represent the people, are also in a high degree necessary for the
preservation of our liberties and the security of the nation. The misfortune,
however, always is, that when there is the greatest necessity for an unbiassed
judgment and a calm investigation, these qualities are most wanting, by which
means the nation becomes hurried into an expensive and unprofitable war, or
undergoes some weighty calamities. The want of these qualities in an
individual, is attended with great disadvantage, but of much geater
disadvantage is the want of them in a nation. When an individual is insulted,
forbearance and moderation are esteemed as superior to revenge and the impulse
of passion, and as far more likely to obtain redress. The former are frequently
attended with a reconciliation, the latter with fatal and alarming
consequences. In like manner, are the consequences of passion and revenge, in a
nation fatal and alarming, with this difference, that instead of the fate of
one, the fate of millions is concerned. It becomes Americans, the favored of
Heaven, to cultivate that spirit of prudent moderation, for which they have
hitherto been so remarkably distinguished, and although never afraid of war,
always to prefer the arts of peace. When therefore, we feel a desire for war
rankling in our breasts, we would do well to examine, whether it proceed from a
cool and impartial regard to justice, or whether revenge be not the instigator.
Passion should never be allowed to predominate ever reason. When we last
fought, we had reason, religion, and GOD on our side -- we were not in haste to
sound the alarm of war -- we took up arms, not to revenge ourselves, but free
our country -- we fought and conquered -- Heaven was on our side -- We
consulted and fought under the God of battles, whom we ought to consult again,
before we involve ourselves in all the horrors and calamities of war.

What wisdom and calmness has our government manifested in all its measures!
Had it not been for the prudence and moderation of our government, and
particularly for the well timed proclamation of our President, our country
might now be experiencing the ravages and desolations of an unprincipled
soldiery. But, my fellow citizens, we have cause to rejoice, that amidst all
the storms and tempests with which our political vessel has been assailed; the
careful management of some of our most experienced pilots has prevented its
dashing upon the rocks. Instead of blindly rushing into war upon the abusive
and mysterious conduct of Great Britain toward us, an Envoy extraordinary to
the British court was appointed. Mr. Jay was made choice of, who whether we
consider the proof he has given of his talents as a negociator, his local
situation, or his judicial character, is in every respect well qualified for
the important trust. Let good citizens unite in their prayers that the divine
blessing may attend his mission, and that war with all its concomitant evils
may be banished from our coasts.

But, my fellow citizens, should the British government persist in her refusal
to fulfill her treaty, should she in defiance of justice, deny us
indemnification for the injuries we have received, should she continue in her
ignominious conduct toward us, and, allow injuries and insults to go
unpunished, should it be necessary to appeal to her fears and a war,
notwitstanding our exertions, should again be rendered inevitable; have we
courage and resolution sufficient to support us on such an occasion?

In our late glorious struggle for liberty, every patriotic American felt
himself interested in the cause and was willing to sacrifice life or property
for the attainment of so desirable an object. It is presumed that those
patriotic principles have not yet been obliterated, and that they glow with as
much ardor in your breasts, and in the breasts of all free Americans,
throughout the United States, on the celebration of this day, as they did the
Fourth of July, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.

Many of those who fought have the satisfaction to see their children, whom
perhaps they were once obliged to leave helpless and exposed, now growing up in
the love and spirit of the same noble principles, and as if divinely influenced
by the sacred planet of liberty under which they were born, partaking of the
temper and genius of the parent and showing marks of their parents bravery in
every action.

Courage may be called a distinguishing trait in the American character. There
is neither age nor sex here but what feels the sacred fire -- the names of
liberty and independence convey the (...) pleasing and lively ideas to the
young, as well as to the aged. -- Our fathers have related to us instances of
valor and patriotism which they saw -- in lively colors have these virtues
been impressed upon our minds, and we hope that they will not vanish like a
thrice told tale, but be forever preserved pure and uncontaminated.

Should any of you, who are now present in this assembly, be ever called out in
the defense and service of your country, remember that you are to support the
character of brave Americans; remember that you are the defenders of liberty
and of the rights of man; that heaven is therefore on your side; and when you
fight resolve to conquer or resolve to die!

But it is unnecessary to recommend courage to you my respected audience --
allow me to say, that the appearance of this house to day, affords sufficient
proofs of valor and of love for our country -- whence else this glow of
martial zeal in every countenance, whence else the smile of generous bravery in
every face? -- The standard of liberty which you have just erected, with its
colors floating in the air and ^^^^^senting the fifteen United States, as so
(...) stars in the moral firmament, bespeaks aloud your unshaken patriotism --
Your past conduct is like wise a sufficient proof of your present courage and
public spirit -- Let yon fields bear witness, with what patriotic ardour, with
what undaunted courage, the brave citizens of Elizabeth pursued and harrassed a
^^erce, a cruel, and a turbulent foe.

Whose heart does not glow with gratitude to our military guardians, to the
gallant general as well as to the brave soldier for freedom from the threatened
yoke of oppression? -- Who will not shed the tear of sympathetic gratitude over
our departed heroes? The names of Warren, Mercer and Montgomery, who died
fighting the battles of their country, shall never, never be forgotton.

But ye are not dead illustrious captains! Ye are not dead but removed to the
armies of heaven! It is there with a complacent and holy submission, ye are
waiting to be rejoined by your renowned CHIEF, and with him to mingle among the
innumerable hierarchies that surround the throne of God; while your names with
his, embalmed by your glorious and shining actions, shall be had in sweet
remembrance, by your countrymen to the remotest ages of the world.

" The stars shall fade away,
" The sun himself grow dim with age
" And nature sink in years;"
But virtuous acts and glorious deeds like thine
Shall never suffer in the general wreck,
But stand unmoved amid the direful clang
Of falling nature and expiring worlds. --

