THE History of Little Jack. EMBELLISHED WITH A NUMBER OF ENGRAVINGS. TO WHICH
IS ADDED, THE LITTLE QUEEN, A MORAL TALE. NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BE. NATURAL
HISTORY OF THE SILKWORM. EPISTLE TO A FRIEND ON HIS RETURN FROM THE ARMY. AND
THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER, BY A. POPE, ESQUIRE.




BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. 1795.

THE HISTORY OF LITTLE JACK.
THERE was once a poor lame old man that lived in the midst of a wide
uncultivated moor, in the north of England. He had formerly been a soldier, and
had almost lost (...) use of one leg by a wound he had received in battle, when
he was fighting against the enemies of his country This poor man, when ^e found
himself thus disabled, built a little ^ut of clay, which he covered with (...)
dug ^om the common. He had a little bit of and which he made a thi^t to
cultivate with his own hands; and which supplied him with potatoes and
vegetables; besides this, he sometimes gained a few halfpence by opening a gate
for travelers, which stood near his house. He did not indeed get much, because
few people passed that way. What he earned was, however, enough to purchase
clothes, and the few necessaries he wanted. But though poor, he was strictly
honest, and never failed night and morning to address his prayers to God; by
which means he was respected by all who knew him, much more than many who were
superior to him in rank and fortune. This old man had one domestic. In his
walks over the common, he one day found a little kid that had lost its mother,
and was almost famished with hunger: he took it home to his cottage, fed it
with the produce of his garden, and nursed it till it grew strong and vigorous.
Little Nan, (for that was the name he gave it) returned his cares with
gratitude, and became as much attached to him as a dog. All day she browzed
upon the herbage that grew around his hut, and at night reposed upon the same
bed of straw with her master. Frequently did she divert him with her innocent
tricks and gambols. She would nestle her little head in his bosom, and eat out
of his hand part of his scanty allowance of bread; which he never failed to
divide with his favorite. The old man often beheld her with silent joy, and,
in the innocent effusions of his heart, would lift his hand^ to heaven, and
thank the Deity, that, even in the midst of poverty and distress, had raise^
him up one faithful friend.

One night, in the beginning of winter, the old man thought he heard the feeble
cries and lamentations of a child. As he was naturally charitable, he arose and
struck a light, and, going out of his cottage, examined on every side: It was
not long before he discerned an infant, which had probably been dropped by some
strolling beggar or gypsy. The old man stood amazed at the sight, and knew not
what to do. Shall I, said he, who find it so difficult to live at present,
incumber myself with the care of an helpless infant, that will not for many
years be capable of contributing to its own subsistence? And yet, added he,
softening with pity, can I deny assistance to an human being still more
miserable than myself? -- Will not that Providence which feeds the birds of the
wood and the beasts of the field, and which has promised to bless all those
that are kind and charitable, assist my feeble endeavors? -- At least, let me
give it food and lodging for this night; for without I receive it into my
cottage, the poor abandoned wretch must perish with cold before the morning.
Saying th^^* he took it up in his arms, and perceived it was a fine healthy
boy, though covered with (...) the little foundling too seemed to be sensible
(...) his kindness, and smiling in his face, stret^^ed out his little arms, as
if to embra^^ (...) ^enefactor.

When he had brought it into his ^ut, he ^egan to be extremely embarrassed how
to procure it food: but looking at Nan, he recollected that she had just lost
her kid, and saw her udder distended with milk: he, therefore, called her to
him, and, presenting the child to the teat, was overjoyed to find, that it
sucked as naturally as if it had really found a mother. The goat too seemed to
receive pleasure from the efforts of the child, and submitted without
opposition to discharge the duties of a nurse. Contented with this experiment,
the old man wrapped the child up as warmly as he could, and stretched himself
out to rest with the consciousness of having done an humane action. Early the
next morning he was awakened by the cries of the child for food, which with the
assistance of his faithful Nan, he suckled as he had done the night before. And
now the old man began to feel an interest in the child, which made him defer
some time longer the taking measures to be delivered from its care. Who knows,
said he, but Providence which has preserved this child in so wonderful a
manner, may have destined it to something equally wonderful in his future life;
and may bless me as the humble agent of his decrees? At least, as he grows
bigger, he will be a pleasure and comfort to me, in this lonely cabin, and will
assist in cutting turf for fuel, and cultivating the garden. From this time he
became more and more attached to the little foundling; who, in a short time,
learned to consider the old man as a parent, and delighted him with its
innocent caresses. Gentle Nanny too, the goat, seemed to adopt him with equal
tenderness as her offspring: she would stretch herself out upon the ground,
while he crawled upon his hands and knees toward her; and when he had sa^^^^
his hunger by sucking, he would nestle between her legs and go to sleep in her
bosom.

It was wonderful to see how this child, thus left to nature, increased in
strength and vigor. Unfettered by bandages or restraints, his limbs acquired
their due proportions and form; his countenance was full and florid, and gave
indications of perfect health; and, at an age when other children are scarcely
able to support themselves with the assistance of a nurse, this little
foundling could run alone. It was true, that he sometimes failed in his
attempts, and fell to the ground; but the ground was soft, and little Jack, for
so the old man called him, was not tender or delicate; he never minded thumps
or bruises, but boldly scrambled up again and pursued his way. In a short time,
little Jack was completely master of his legs; and as the summer came on, he
attended his mamma, the goat, upon the common, and used to play with her for
hours together; sometimes rolling under her belly, now climbing upon her back,
and frisking about as if he had really been a kid. As to his clothing, Jack
was not much incumbered with it; he had neither shoes, nor stockings, nor
shirt; but the weather was warm, and Jack felt himself so much lighter for
every kind of exercise. In a short time after this, Jack began to imitate the
sounds of his papa the man, and his mamma the goat; nor was it long before he
learned to speak articulately. The old man delighted with this first dawn of
reason, used to place him upon his knee, and converse with him for hours
together, while his pottage was slowly boiling amid the embers of a turf fire.
As he grew bigger, Jack became of considerable use to his father; he could
trust him to look after the gate, and open it during his absence: and, as to
the cookery of the family, it was not long before Jack was a complete
proficient, and could make broth almost as well as his daddy himself. During
the winter nights, the old man used to entertain him with stories of what he
had seen during his youth; the battles and sieges he had been witness to, and
the hardships he had undergone; all this he related with so much vivacity that
Jack was never tired of listening. But what delighted him beyond measure was to
see daddy shoulder his crutch, instead of a musket, and give the word of
command. To the right -- to the le^^ -- present -- fire -- march -- halt -- all
this w^ familiar to Jack's ear as soon as he could speak* and before he was six
years old, he poized and presented a broom-stick, which his daddy gave him for
that purpose, with as good a grace as any soldier of his age in Europe.



The old man too instructed him in such plain and simple morals and religion,
as he was able to explain. "Never tell an untruth, Jack, said he, even though
you were to be (...) alive; a soldier never lies." Jack held up his head,
marched across the floor, and (...) his daddy that he would always tell the
(...) like a soldier. But the old man, as he ^as something of a scholar, had a
great ambition that his darling should learn to read, and write; and this was a
work of some (...) ^ulty; for he had neither printed book, (...) ^en^, nor
paper in his cabin. Industry, however (...) enables us to overcome
difficulties, in the (...) time, as the old man sat before his (...) he would
draw letters in the sand, and teach Jack to name them singly, until he was
acquainted with the whole alphabet, he then proceeded to syllables; and after
that to words; all which his little pupil learned to pronounce with great
facility: and, as he had a strong propensity to imitate what he saw, he not
only acquired the power of reading words, but of tracing all the letters which
composed them, on the sand.

About this time, the poor goat which had nursed Jack so faithfully, grew ill
and died. He tended her with the greatest affection and assiduity during her
illness, brought her the freshest herbs for food, and would frequently support
her head for hours together upon his little bosom. But it was all in vain; he
lost his poor mammy, as he used to call her, and was for some time
inconsolable; for Jack, though his knowledge was bounded, had an uncommon
degree of gratitude and affection in his temper. He was not able to talk as
finely about love, tenderness, and sensibility, as many other little boys, that
have enjoyed greater advantages of education; but he felt the reality of them
in his heart, and thought it so natural to love every thing that loves us, that
he never even suspected it was possible to do otherwise. The poor goat was
buried in the old man's garden, and thither little Jack would often come and
call upon his poor mammy Nan, and ask her why she had left him? One day, as he
was thus employed, a lady happened to come by in a carriage, and overheard him
before (...) was aware. Jack ran in an instant to open (...) gate; but the lady
stopped, and asked him whom he was bemoaning so pitifully, and calling upon?
Jack answered, that it was his poor mammy, that was buried in the garden. The
lady thought it very odd to hear of such a burial place, and therefore
proceeded to question him, "How did your mammy get her living?" said she. "She
used to graze here upon the common all day long," said Jack. The lady was still
more astonished; but the old man came out of his hut, and explained the whole
affair to her, which surprised her very much; for though this lady had seen a
great deal of the world, and had read a variety of books, it had never once
entered into her head that a child might grow strong and vigorous by sucking a
goat, instead of eating pap. She therefore looked at Jack with amazement,
admired his brown but ^ted face, and praised his shape and activity. "Will you
go with me, little boy, said she, and I will take care of you, if you behave
well?" "No, said Jack, I must stay with daddy; he has taken care of me for many
years, and now I must take care of him; otherwise I should like very well to go
with such a sweet, good-natured lady." The lady was not displeased with Jack's
answer, and putting her hand in her pocket, gave him half a crown, to buy him
shoes and stockings, and pursued her journey.

Jack was not unacquainted with the use of money, as he had been often sent to
the next village to purchase bread and necessaries; but he was totally
unacquainted with the use of shoes and stockings, which he had never worn in
his life, or felt the want of. The next day, however, the old man bade him run
to town, and lay his money out as the lady had desired; for he had too much
honor to think of disobeying her commands, or suffering it to be expended for
any other purpose. It was not long before Jack returned; but the old man was
much surprised to see him come back as bare as he went out. "Heigh, Jack! said
he, where are the shoes and stockings which you were to purchase?" "Daddy,
answered Jack, I went to the shop, and just tried a pair for sport, but I found
them so cumbersome, that I could not walk, and I would not wear such things,
even if the lady would give me another half cro^^ for doing it; so I laid the
money out in (...) warm jacket for you, because the winter i^ coming on, and
you seem to be more afraid (...) the cold than formerly." Many such in (...) If
conduct did Jack display; from which it was easy to perceive, that he had an
excellent soul, and generous temper. One failing, indeed Jack was liable to;
though a very good natured boy, he was a little too jealous of his honor. His
daddy had taught him the use of his hands and legs, and Jack had such
dispositions for the art of boxing, that he could beat every boy in the
neighborhood, of his age and size. Even if they were a head taller, it made no
difference to Jack, provided they said any thing to wound his honor; for
otherwise he was the most mild, pacific creature in the world. One day that he
had been sent to the village, he returned with his eyes black, and his face
swelled to a frightful size: it was even with difficulty that he was able to
walk at all, so sore was he with the pomelling he had received. "What have you
been doing now, Jack?" said the old man. -- "Only fighting with Dick the
butcher." "You rogue, said the old man, he is twice as big as you are, and the
best fighter in all the country." "What does that signify, said Jack, he called
you an old beggarman, and then I struck him; and I will strike him again
whenever he calls you so, even if he should beat me to pieces; for you know,
daddy, that you are not a beggarman, but a soldier."

In this manner lived little Jack, until he was twelve years old; at this time
his poor old daddy (...) sick and became incapable of moving about. (...) did
every thing he could think of for the (...) man; he made him broths, he ^ed him
(...) his own hands, he watched whole nights (...) his bedside supporting his
head and helping him when he wanted to move. But it was all in vain; his poor
daddy grew daily worse, and perceived it to be impossible that he should
recover. He one day therefore called little Jack to his bedside, and pressing
his hand affectionately, told him that he was just going to die. Little Jack
burst into a flood of tears at this information, but his daddy desired him to
compose himself, and attend to the last advice he should be able to give him.
"I have lived, said the old man, a great many years, in poverty, but I do not
know that I have been worse off than if I had been rich. I have avoided,
perhaps, many faults, and many uneasinesses, which I should have incurred had I
been (...) another situation; and though I have often wanted a meal and always
fared hard, I h^^ enjoyed as much health and life as usually fa^ to the lot of
my betters. I am now going (...) die; I feel it in every part; the breath will
soon be out of my body; then I shall be put in the ground, and the worms will
eat your poor old daddy." At this Jack renewed his tears and sobbings, for he
was unable to restrain them. But the old man said; "Have patience, my child;
though I should leave this world, as I have always been strictly honest and
endeavored to do my duty, I do not doubt but God will pity me, and convey me
to a better place; where I shall be happier than I have ever been here. This is
what I have always taught you, and this belief gives me the greatest comfort in
my last moments. The only regret I feel, is for you, my dearest child, whom I
leave unprovided for. But you are strong and vigorous, and almost able to get
your living. As soon as I am dead, you must go to the next village and inform
the people, that they may come and bury me. You must then endeavor to get into
service, and work for your living; and, if you are strictly honest and sober, I
do not doubt that you will find a livelihood, and that God, who is the common
father of all, will protect and bless you. Adieu, my child, I grow fainter and
fainter; never forget your poor old daddy, nor the example he has set you; but
in every situation of life discharge your duty, and live like a Soldier, and a
Christian." When the old man had with difficulty uttered these last
instructions, his voice entirely failed him, his limbs grew cold and stiff, and
in a few mi^utes he expired without a groan. Little Jack, who hung crying over
his daddy, called upon him* in ^ain, in vain endeavored to revive him. At
length he pulled off his clothes, went into ^^s daddy's bed, and endeavored
for many hours to animate him with the warmth of his own body; but finding all
his endeavors fruitless, he concluded that he was indeed dead; and therefore,
weeping bitterly, he dressed himself, and went to the village as he had been
ordered. The poor little boy was thus left entirely destitute and knew not what
to do; but one of the farmers, who had been acquainted with him before, offered
to take him into his house, and give him his victuals, for a few months, till
he could find a service. Jack thankfully accepted the offer, and served him
faithfully for several months; during which time he learned to milk, to drive
the plough, and never refused any kind of work he was able to perform. But, by
ill luck, this good-natured farmer contracted a fever, by over-heating himself
in the harvest, and died in the beginning of winter. His wife was therefore
obliged to discharge her servants, and Jack was again turned loose upon the
world, with only his clothes, and a shilling in his pocket, which his kind
mistress had made him a present of. He was very sorry for the loss of his
master; but he was now grown bigger and stronger, and thought he should easily
find employment. He therefore set out upon his travels, walking all day, and
inquiring at every farm-house for work. But in this attempt he was unfortunate,
for nobody chose to employ a stranger and though he lived with the greatest
econ^my, he soon found himself in a worse situation than ever, without a
farthing in his pocket* o^ a morsel of bread to eat. Jack, however, was not of
a temper to be easily cast down; he walked resolutely on all day, but toward
evening was overtaken by a violent storm of rain, which wetted him to the skin
before he could find a bush for shelter. Now, poor Jack began to think of his
old daddy, and the comforts he had formerly enjoyed upon the common, where he
had always a roof to shelter him, and a slice of bread for supper. But tears
and lamentations were vain; and therefore, as soon as the storm was over, he
pursued his journey, in hopes of finding some barn or out-house to creep into
for the rest of the night. While he was thus wandering about, he saw at some
distance a great light, which seemed to come from some prodigious fire. Jack
did not know what this could be; but, in his present situation, he thought a
fire no disagreeable object, and therefore determined to approach it. When he
came nearer, he saw a large building which seemed to spout fire and smoke at
several openings, and heard an incessant (...) of blows, and the rattling of
chains. Jack was at first a little frightened, but summoning all his courage,
he crept cautiously on to the building, and looking through a chink, discovered
several men and boys employed in blowing fires and hammering burning masses of
it^m. This was a very comfortable sight to him in his present forlorn
condition; so finding a door (...) open, he ventured in, and placed himself
(...) ^ear as he dared to one of the fla^^ng fur^. It was not long before he
was disco^ed by one of the workmen, who asked him* roughly, what business he
had there? Jack answered with great humility, that he was a poor boy, looking
out for work; that he had had no food all day, and was wet to the skin with the
rain, which was evident enough from the appearance of his clothes. By great
good luck, the man he spoke to was good natured, and therefore not only
permitted him to stay by the fire, but gave him some broken victuals for his
supper. After this, he laid himself down in a corner, and slept without
disturbance till morning. He was scarcely awake the next day, when the master
of the forge came in to overlook his men, who finding Jack, and hearing his
story, began to reproach him as a la^ vagabond, and asked him why he did not
wo^ for his living. Jack assured him there (...) nothing he so earnestly
desired, and that if (...) would please to employ him, there was nothi^ that he
would not do to earn a subsistence. Well, my boy, said the master, if this is
true, you shall soon be tried; nobody need be idle here; so calling his
foreman, he ordered him to set that lad to work, and pay him in proportion to
his deserts. Jack now thought himself completely happy, and worked with so much
assiduity, that he soon gained a comfortable livelihood, and acquired the
esteem of his master. But unfortunately, he was a little too unreserved in his
conversation, and communicated the story of his former life and education. This
was great matter of diversion to all the other boys of the forge; who, whenever
they were inclined to be merry, would call him little Jack the beggar-boy, and
imitate the baaing of a goat. This was too much for his irascible temper, and
he never failed to resent it; by which means he was engaged in continual
quarrels and combats, to the great disturbance of the house; so that his
master, though in other respects perfectly satisfied with his behavior, began
to fear that he should at last be obliged to discharge him.

It happened one day, that a large company of gentlemen and ladies were
introduced to see the works. The master attended them, and explained, with
great politeness, every part of his manufacture. They viewed with astonishment
the different methods by which that useful and necessary ore of iron is
rendered fit for human use. They examined the furnaces where it is melted down,
to disengage it from the dress, with which it is mixed in the bowels of the
earth, and whence it runs down in liquid torrents like fire. They beheld with
equal pleasure the prodigious hammers which, moved by the force of water, mould
it into massy bars, for the service of man. While they were busy in examining
these different processes, they were alarmed by a sudden noise of discord,
which broke out on the other side of the building; and the master inquiring
into the cause, was told, that it was only little Jack, who was fighting with
Tom the collier. At this, the master cried out, in a passion, there is no peace
to be expected in the furnace, while that little rascal is employed; send him
to me, and I will instantly discharge him. At this moment Jack appeared, all
covered with blood and dirt, and stood before his angry judge in a modest, but
resolute posture. "Is this the reward, said his master, you little audacious
vagabond, of all my kindness? Can you never refrain a single instant from
broils and fighting? But I am determined to bear it no longer; and therefore
you shall never, from this hour, do a single stroke of work for me." "Sir,
replied Jack, with great humility, but yet with firmness, I am extremely sorry
to have disobliged you, nor have I ever done it willingly, since I have been
here; and if the other boys would only mind their business as well as I do, and
not molest me, you would not have been offended now; for I defy them all to
say, that since I have been in the house, I have ever given any one the least
provocation, or ever refused to the utmost of my strength, to do whatever I
have been ordered." "That Is true, in good faith, said the foreman; I must do
little Jack the justice to say that there is not a more honest, sober, and
industrious lad about the place. Set him to what you will, he never sculks,
never grumbles, never slights his work; and if it were not for a little passion
and fighting, I don't believe there would be his fellow in England." "Well,
said the master a little mollified, but what is the cause of all this sudden
disturbance?" "Sir, answered Jack, it is Tom that has been abusing me and
telling me that my father was a beggarman and my mother a nanny-goat; and when
I desired him to be quiet, he went baaing all about the house; and this I could
not bear; for as to my poor father he was an honest soldier, and if I did suck
a goat, she was the best creature in the world, and I will not hear her abused
while I have any strength in my body." At this harangue, the whole audience
were scarcely able to refrain from laughing, and the master, with more
composure, told Jack to mind his business, and threatened the other boys with
punishment, if they disturbed him.

But a lady who was in company seemed particularly interested about little
Jack, and when she had heard his story, said, this must certainly be the little
boy who opened a gate several years past for me upon Norcot Moor. I remember
being struck with his appearance, and hearing him lament the loss of the goat
that nursed him. I was very much affected with his history, and since he
deserves so good a character, if you will part with him, I will instantly take
him into my service. The master replied, that he should part with him with
great satisfaction to such an excellent mistress; that indeed the boy deserved
all the commend^tions which had been given; but since the other lads had such
an habit of plaguing, and Jack was of so impatient a temper, he despaired of
ever composing their animosities. Jack was then called, and informed of the
lady's offer, which he instantly accepted with the greatest readiness, and
received immediate directions to her house.

Jack was now in a new sphere of life. His face was washed, his hair combed, he
was clothed afresh, and appeared a very smart active lad. His business was, to
help in the stable, to water the horses, to clean shoes, to perform errands,
and to do all the jobs of the family; and in the discharge of these services,
he soon gave universal satisfaction. He was inde^atigable in doing what he was
ordered, never grumbled, or appeared out of temper, and seemed so quiet and
inoffensive in his manners, that every body wondered how he had acquired the
character of being quarrelsome. In a short time, he became both the favorite
and the drudge of the whole family; for, speak but kindly to him and call him a
little soldier, and Jack was at every one's disposal. This was Jack's
particular foible and vanity; at his leisure hours, he would divert himself by
the hour together, in poizing a dung fork, charging with a broom stick, and
standing centry at the stable door. Another propensity of Jack's, which now
discovered itself, was an immoderate love of horses. The instant he was
introduced into the stable, he attached himself so strongly to these animals,
that you would have taken him for one of the same species, or at least a near
relation. Jack was never tired with rubbing down and carrying them; the
coachman had scarcely any business but to sit upon his box; all the ^perations
of the stable were entrusted to little Jack, nor was it ever known that he
neglected a single particular. But what gave him more pleasure than all the
rest, was sometimes to accompany his mistress upon a little horse, which he
managed with infinite dexterit^*

Jack too discovered a great disp^ion for all the useful and mechanic arts. He
had served an apprenticeship already to the manufactory of iron, and of this he
was almost as vain as being a soldier. As he began to extend his knowledge of
the world, he saw that nothing could be done without iron. How would you plough
the ground, said Jack; how would you dig your garden; how would you even light
a fire, dress a dinner, shoe a horse, or do the least thing in the world, if we
workmen at the forge did not take the trouble of preparing it for you? Thus
Jack would sometimes expatiate upon the dignity and importance of his own
profession, to the great admiration of all the other servants.

These ideas naturally gave Jack a great esteem for the profession of a
blacksmith, and in his occasional visits to the forge with the horses, he
learnt to make and fix a shoe as neatly as any artist in the country.

Nor were Jack's talents confined to the manufactory of iron; his love of
horses was so great, and his interest in every thing that related to them, that
it was not long before he acquired a very competent knowledge in the ar^ of
saddlery.

Jack would also sometimes observe the carpenters when they were at work, and
sometime^ by stealth attempt the management of their tools; in which he
succeeded as well as in every thing else; so that he was looked upon by every
body as a very active, ingenious boy.

There was in the family, where he now lived, a young gentleman, the nephew of
his mistress, who had lost his parents, and was therefore brought up by his
aunt. As Master Willets was something younger than Jack, and a very
good-natured boy, he soon began to take notice of him, and be much diverted
with his company. Jack, indeed, was not undeserving this attention; for
although he could not boast any great advantages of education, his conduct was
entirely free from all the vices to which some (...) the lower class of people
are subject. ^span ^ever heard to swear, or express himself (...) any
indecency. He was civil and (...) his manners to all his superiors, and (...)
good-natured to his equals. In respect to the animals entrusted to his care, he
not only refrained from using them ill, but was never tired with doing them
good offices. Added to this, he was sober, temperate, hardy, active, and
ingenious, and despised a lie as much as any of his betters. Master Willets now
began to be much pleased with playing at cricket and trap-ball with Jack, who
excelled at both these games. Master Willets had a little horse which Jack
looked after; and not contented with looking after him in the best manner, he
used to ride him at his leisure hours with so much care and address, that in a
short time he made him the most gentle and docile little animal in the country.
Jack had acquired this knowledge partly from his own experience, and partly
from paying particular attention to an itinerant riding-master that had lately
exhibited various feats in that neighborhood. Jack attended him so closely,
and made so good an use of his time, that he learned to imitate almost every
thing he saw, and used to divert the servants and his young master with acting
the tailor's riding to Brentford.

The young gentleman had a master who used to come three times a week to teach
him accounts, and writing, and geography. Jack used to be sometimes in the room
while the lessons were given, and listened according to custom with so much
attention to all that passed, that he received very considerable advantage for
his own improvement. He had now a little money, and he laid some of it out to
purchase pens and paper and a slate, with which at night he used to imitate
every thing he had heard and seen in the day: and his little master, who began
to love him very sincerely, when he saw him so desirous of improvement,
contrived, under one pretense or another, to have him generally in the room
while he was receiving instruction himself.

In this manner Jack went on for some years, leading a life very agreeable to
himself, and discharging his duty very much to the satisfaction of his
mistress. An unlucky accident at length happened to interrupt his tranquillity.
A young gentleman came down to visit Master. Willets, who, having been educated
in France, and among genteel people in London, had a very great taste for
finery, and a supreme con^t for all the vulgar. His dress too was a (...)
particular, as well as his manners; for he ^ent half his time in adjusting his
head, wore a large black bag tied to his hair behind, and would ^ometimes strut
about for half an hour together with his hat under his arm, and a little sword
by his side. This young man had a supreme contempt for all the vulgar, which he
did not attempt to conceal; and when he had heard the story of Jack's birth and
education, he could scarcely bear to be in the same room with him. Jack soon
perceived the aversion which the stranger entertained for him, and at first
endeavored to remove it, by every civility in his power; but when he found
that he gained nothing by all his humility, his temper, naturally haughty, took
fire, and, as far as he dared, he plainly showed all the resentment he felt.

It happened one day, after Jack had received some very mortifying usage from
this (...) gentleman, that as he was walking along (...) road, he met with a
showman, who was retur^ing from a neighboring fair with some w^ beasts in a
cart. Among the rest was a middle sized monkey, who was not under cover like
the rest, and played so many antic tricks, and made so many grimaces, as
engaged all Jack's attention, and delighted him very much, for he always had a
propensity for every species of drollery. After a variety of questions and
conversation, the showman, who probably wanted to be rid of his monkey,
proposed to Jack to purchase him for half a crown. Jack could not resist the
temptation of being master of such a droll diverting animal, and therefore
agreed to the bargain. But when he was left alone with his purchase, whom he
led along by a chain, he soon began to repent his haste, and knew not how to
dispose of him. As there was however, no remedy, Jack brought him carefully
home, and confined him safe in an out-house, which was not applied to any use.
In this situation he kept him several days, without accident, and frequently
visited him at his leisure hours, with apples, nuts, and such other presents as
he could procure. Among the other tricks which the monkey had been taught to
perform, he would rise upon his hind legs at the word of command, and bow with
the greatest politeness to the company. Jack, who had found out these
accomplishments in his friend, could not resist the impulse of making them
subservient to his resentment. He, therefore, one day, procured some flour,
with which he ^wdered his monkey's head, fixed a large paper ^g to his neck,
put an old hat under his arm, (...) tied a large iron skewer to his side,
instead of a sword; and thus accoutred led him about with infinite
satisfaction, calling him Monsieur, and jabbering such broken French as he had
picked up from the conversation of the visitor. It happened very unluckily at
this very instant, that the young gentleman himself passed by, and instantly
saw at one glance the intended copy of himself, and all the malice of little
Jack; who was leading him along, and calling to him to hold up his head and
look like a person of fashion. Rage instantly took possession of his mind, and
drawing his sword, which he happened to have on, he ran the poor monkey through
with a sudden thrust, and laid him dead upon the ground. What more he might
have done is uncertain, for Jack, who was not of a temper to see calmly such an
outrage committed upon an animal whom he consider^ as his friend, flew upon him
like a fury, a^ wresting the sword out of his hand, broke (...) into twenty
pieces. The young gentleman himself received a fall in the scuffle, which,
though it did him no material damage, daubed all his clothes, and totally
spoiled the whole arrangement of his dress. At this instant, the lady herself,
who had heard the noise, came down, and the violence of poor Jack was too
apparent to be excused. Jack, indeed, was submissive to his mistress, whom he
was very sorry to have offended; but, when he was ordered to make concessions
to the young gentleman, as the only conditions upon which he could be kept in
the family, he absolutely refused. He owned, indeed, that he was much to blame
for resenting the provocations he had received, and endeavoring to make his
mistress's company ridiculous; but as to what he had done in defense of his
friend the monkey, there were no possible arguments which could convince him he
was in the least to blame; nor would he have made submissions to the king
himself. This unfortunate obstinacy of Jack's was the occasion of his being
discharged, very much to the regret of the lady herself, and still more to that
of Master Willets* Jack therefore packed up his clothes in a little bundle,
shook all his fellow servants by the hand, took an affectionate leave of his
kind master, and once more sallied out upon his travels.



He had not walked fa^ before he came to a town, where a party of soldiers were
beating up for volunteers. Jack mingled with the crowd that surrounded the
recruiting sergeant, and listened with great pleasure to the sound of the fifes
and drums; nor could he help mechanically holding up his head, and stepping
forward with an air that showed the trade was (...) entirely new to him. The
sergeant soon t^ notice of these gestures, and seeing him a strong likely lad,
came up to him, clapped him upon the back, and asked him if he would enlist?
"You are a brave boy, said he, I can see it in your looks -- come along with
us, and I don't doubt in a few weeks, you will be as complete a soldier as those
who have been in the army for years." Jack made no answer to this, but by
instantly poizing his stick, cocking his hat fiercely, and going through the
whole manuel exercise. -- "Prodigious, indeed, cried the sergeant, I see you
have been in the army already, and can eat fire as well as any of us. But come
with us, my brave lad, you shall live well, have little to do, but now and then
fight for your king and country, as every gentleman ought; and in a short time,
I don't doubt but I shall see you a captain, or some great man, rolling in
wealth, which you have got out of the spoils of your enemies." -- "No, said
Jack, captain, that will never do -- no tricks upon travelers -- I know better
what I have to expect if I enlist -- I must lie hard, live hard, expose my life
and limbs, every hour of the day, and be soundly cudgelled every now and then
into the bargain." -- "O'ons, cried the sergeant, where did the young dog pick
up all this? He is enough to make a whole company desert." -- "No, said Jack,
they shall never desert through me; for though I know this, as I am at present
out of employment, and have a great respect for the character of a gentleman
soldier, I will enlist directly in your regiment." "A brave fellow, indeed,
said the sergeant; here, my boy, here is your money and your cockade, both
which he directly presented, for fear his recruit should change his mind; and
thus in a moment little Jack became a soldier.

He had scarcely time to feel himself easy in his new accoutrements, before he
was embarked for India in the character of a marine. This kind of life was
entirely new to Jack; however, his usual activity and spirit of observation did
not desert him here, and he had not been embarked many weeks, before he was
perfectly acquainted with all the duty of a sailor, and in that respect equal
to most on board. It happened that the ship in which he sailed, touched a^ the
Cormo Islands, in order to take in wood and water; these are some little
islands near (...) coast of Africa, inhabited by blacks. Ja^^ often went on
shore with the officers, attendi^ them on their shooting parties to carry the
powder and shot, and the game they ki^^ All this country consists of very lofty
hills, covered with trees and shrubs of various kinds, which never lose their
leaves, from the perpetual warmth of the climate. Through these it is
frequently difficult to force a way, and the hills themselves abound in
precipices. It happened that one of the officers whom Jack was attending upon a
shooting party, took aim at some great bird and brought it down; but as it fell
into some deep valley, over some rocks which it was impossible to descend, they
despaired of gaining their prey. Jack, immediately, with officious haste, set
off and ran down the more level side of the hill, thinking to make a ^^^^t and
reach the valley into which the bird (...) fallen. He set off, therefore, but
as he (...) totally ignorant of the country, he, in a short time, buried
himself so deep in the wood, which grew continually thicker, that he knew not
which way to proceed. He then thought it most prudent to return; but this he
found as difficult to effect as the other. He therefore wandered about the
woods with inconceivable difficulty all day, but could never find his company
nor even reach the shore, or obtain the prospect of the sea. At length the
night approached, and Jack, who perceived it to be impossible to do that in the
dark, which he had not been able to effect in the light, lay down under a rock,
and composed himself to rest, as well as he was able. The next day he rose with
the light, and once more attempted to regain the shore: but unfortunately he
had totally lost all idea of the direction he ought to pursue, and saw nothing
around him but the dismal prospect of woods and hills and precipices, without a
guide or path. Jack now began to be very hungry, but as he had a fowling piece
with him, and powder and shot, he soon procured himself a dinner; and kindling
a fire with some dry leaves and sticks, he roasted his game upon the embers,
and dined as comfortably as he could be expected to do in so forlorn a
situation. Finding himself much refreshed, he pursued his journey, but with as
little success as ever. On the third day, he indeed came in sight of the sea,
but found that he was quite on a different side of the island from that where
he left the ship, and that neither ship nor boat was to be seen. Jack now lost
all hopes of rejoining his comrades, for he knew the ship was to sail at
farthest upon the third day, and would not wait for him. He, therefore, sat
down very pensively upon a rock, and cast his eyes upon the vast extent of
ocean which was stretched out before him. He found himself now abandoned upon a
strange country, without a single friend, acquaintance, or even any one who
spoke the same language. He at first thought of seeking out the natives, and
making known to them his deplorable state; but he began to fear the reception
he might meet with among them. They might not be pleased, he thought* with his
company, and might take the liberty of treating him as the white men generally
treat the blacks when they get them into their possession; that is, make him
work hard with very little victuals, and knock him on the head if he attempted
to run away. And therefore, says Jack, as he was meditating all alone, it may,
perhaps, be better for me to stay quiet where ^ am. It is true, indeed, I shall
not have (...) company to talk to, but then I shall have nobody to quarrel with
me, or baa, or laugh at my poor daddy and mammy. Neither do I at present see
how I shall get a livelihood, when my powder and shot are all expended; but
however I shall hardly be starved, for I saw several kinds of fruit in the
woods, and some roots which look very much like carrots. As to clothes* when
mine wear out, I shall not much want new ones; for the weather is charmingly
warm; and therefore, all things considered, I don't see why I should not be as
happy here as in any other place. -- When Jack had finished his speech, he set
himself to find a lodging for the night. He had not examined far before he
found a dry cavern in a rock, which he thought would prove a very comfortable
residence; he therefore went to work with an hatchet he had with him, and cut
some boughs of trees, which he spread upon the floor, and over those a long
silky kind of grass, which he found in plenty near the place, to make himself a
bed. His next care was, how to secure himself in case of any attack, for he did
not know whether the island contained any wild beasts or not. He therefore cut
down several branches of trees, and wove them into a kind of wicker work, as he
had seen the men do hurdles when he lived with the farmer; with this
contrivance he found he could very securely barricade the entrance of his cave.
And now* as the evening was again approaching, he began to feel himself hungry,
and seeking along t^^ seashore, he found some shellfish, which su^plied him
with a plentiful meal. The ne^^ day Jack arose, a little melancholy indeed,
(...) with a resolution to struggle manfully with the difficulties of his
situation. He walked into the woods and saw several kinds of fruit and berries,
some of which he ventured to eat, as the birds had pecked them, and found the
taste agreeable. He also dug up several species of roots, but feared to taste
them lest they should be poisonous. At length, he selected one that very much
resembled a potatoe, and determined to roast it in the embers, and taste a very
small bit. It can hardly, thought Jack, do me much hurt, in so very small a
quantity; and if that agrees with me I will increase the dose. The root was
fortunately extremely wholesome and nutritive, so that Jack was in a very short
time tolerably secure against the danger of wanting food. In this manner did
Jack lead a kind of savage, but tolerably contented life, for several months;
during which time he enjoyed perfect health, and was never discovered by any of
the natives. He used several times a day to visit the shore, in hopes that some
ship might pass that way and deliver him from his solitary imprisonment. This,
at length, happened, by the boat of an English ship, that was sailing to India,
happening to touch upon the coast; Jack instantly hailed the crew, and the
officer, upon hearing the story, agreed to receive him; the captain too, when
he found that Jack was by no means a contemptible sailor, very willingly gave
him his passage, and promised him a gratuity besides, if he behaved well.

Jack arrived in India without any accident, and relating his story, was
permitted to serve in another regiment as his own was no longer there. He soon
distinguished himself by his courage and good behavior on several occasions,
and before long was advanced to the rank of a sergeant. In this capacity, he
was ordered out upon an expedition into the remote parts of the country. The
little army in which he served now marched on for several weeks, through a
burning climate, and in want of all the necessaries of life. At length, they
entered upon some extensive plains, which bordered upon the celebrated country
of the Tartars. Jack was perfectly well acquainted with the history of this
people, and their method of fighting. He knew them to be some of the best
horsemen in the world; indefatigable in their attacks, though often repulsed
returning to the charge, and not to be invaded with impunity; he, therefore,
took the liberty of observing to some of the officers, that nothing could be
more dangerous than their rashly engaging themselves in those extensive plains,
where they were every moment exposed to the attacks of cavalry, without any
successful method of defense, or place of retreat, in case of any misfortune.
These remonstrances were not much attended to, and after a few hours farther
march, they were alarmed by the approach of a considerable body of Tartar
horsemen. They, however, drew up with all the order they were able, and firing
several successive vollies, endeavored to keep the enemy at a distance. But
the Tartars had no design of doing that with a considerable loss, which they
were sure of doing with ease and safety. Instead therefore of charging the
Europeans, they contented themselves with giving continual alarms, and menacing
them on every side, without exposing themselves to any considerable danger. The
army now attempted to retreat, hoping that they should be able to arrive at the
neighboring mountains, where they would be safe from the incursions of the
horse. But in this attempt they were equally disappointed; for another
considerable body of enemies appeared on that side, and blocked their passage.
The Europeans now found they were surrounded on all sides, and that resistance
was vain. The commanding officer, therefore, judged it expedient to try what
could be effected by negotiation, and sent one of his officers, who understood
something of the Tartar language, to treat with the general of the enemies. The
Tartar chief received the Europeans with great civility, and after having
gently reproached them with their ambition, in coming so far to invade a people
who had never injured them, he consented upon very moderate conditions to their
enlargement: but he insisted upon having their arms delivered up, except a very
few which he permitted them to keep for defense in their return, and upon
retaining a certain number of Europeans as hostages for the performance of the
stipulated articles. Among those who were thus left with the Tartars, Jack
happened to be included, and while all the rest seemed inconsolable at being
thus made prisoners by a barbarous nation, he alone, accustomed to all the
vicissitudes of life, retained his cheerfulness, and prepared to meet every
reverse of fortune with his usual firmness.

The Tartars, among whom Jack was now to reside, constitute several different
tribes or nations which inhabit an immense extent of country both in Europe and
Asia. Their country is in general open and uncultivated, with out cities or
towns, such as we see in England. The inhabitants themselves are a bold and
hardy race of men that live in small tents, and change their place of abode
with the different seasons of the year. All their property consists in herds of
cattle, which they drive along with them from place to place; and upon whose
milk and flesh they subsist. They are particularly fond of horses, of which
they have a small but excellent breed, hardy and indefatigable for the purposes
of war, and they excel in the management of them, beyond what is easy to
conceive. Immense herds of these animals wander loose about the deserts, but
marked with the particular mark of the person or tribe to which they belong.
When they want any of these animals for use, a certain number of their young
men jump upon their horses with nothing but an halter to guide them, each
carrying in his hand a pole with a noose or cord at the end. When they come in
sight of the herd, they pursue the horse they wish to take at full speed, come
up with him in spite of his swiftness, and never fail to throw the noose about
his neck as he runs. They are frequently known to jump upon young horses that
have passed their whole life in the desert, and with ^nly a girt around the
animal's body to hold (...), maintain their seat, in spite of all his vio^ent
exertions, until they have wearied him ^ut and reduced him into perfect
obedience. ^uch was the nation with whom the lot of Jack was now to reside, nor
was he long before he had an opportunity of showing his talents.

It happened that a favorite horse of the chief was taken with a violent
fever, and seemed to be in immediate danger of death. The khan, for so he is
called among the Tartars, seeing his horse grow hourly worse, at length applied
to the Europeans, to know if they could suggest any thing for his recovery. All
the officers were profoundly ignorant of farriery; but when the application was
made to Jack, he desired to see the horse, and with great gravity began to feel
his pulse, by passing his hand within the animal's fore-leg; which gave the
Tartars a very high idea of his ingenuity. Finding that the animal was in a
high fever, he proposed to the khan to let him blood, which he had learned to
do very dexterously in England. He obtained permission to do as he pleased, and
having by great good luck a lancet with him, he let him blood very dexterously
in the neck. After this operation he covered him up, and gave him a warm potion
made out of such ingredients as he could procure upon the spot, and left him
quiet. In a few hours the horse began to mend, and, to the great joy of the
khan, perfectly recovered in a few days. This cure, so opportunely performed,
raised the reputation of Jack so high, that every body came to consult him
about their horses, and in a short time he was the universal farrier of the
tribe. The khan himself conceived so great an affection for him, that he gave
him an excellent horse to ride upon and attend him in his hunting parties; and
Jack, who excelled in the art of horsemanship, managed him so well as to gain
the esteem of the whole nation.



The Tartars, though they are excellent horsemen, have no idea of managing
their horses, unless by violence; but Jack in a short time, by continual care
and attention, made his horse so docile and obedient to every motion of his
hand and leg, that the Tartars themselves would gaze upon him with admiration,
and allow themselves to be outdone. Not contented with this, he procured some
iron, and made his horse-shoes in the European taste; this also was matter of
astonishment to all the Tartars, who are accustomed to ride their horses
unshod. He next observed that the Tartar saddles are all prodigiously large and
cumbersome, raising the horsemen up to a great distance from the back of his
horse. Jack set himself to work, and was not long before he had completed
something like an English hunting saddle, on which he paraded before the khan.
All mankind seem to have a passion for novelty, and the khan was so delighted
with this effort of Jack's ingenuity, that, after paying him the highest
compliments, he intimated a desire of having such a saddle for himself. Jack
was the most obliging creature in the world, and spared no labor to serve his
friends; he went to work again, and in a short time completed a saddle still
more elegant for the khan. These exertions gained him the favor and esteem
both of the khan and all the tribe; s^ that Jack was an universal favorite and
loaded with presents, while all the rest of the officers, who had never learned
to make a saddle or an horse-shoe, were treated with contempt and indifference.
Jack, indeed, behaved with the greatest generosity to his countrymen, and
divided with them all the mutton and venison which were given him; but he could
not help sometimes observing, that it was great pity they had not learned to
make an horse-shoe instead of dancing and dressing hair.

And now an ambassador arrived from the English settlements, with an account
that all the conditions of the treaty had been performed, and demanding the
restitution of the prisoners. The Tartar chief was too much a man of honor to
delay an instant, and they were all restored; but before they set out, Jack
labored with indefatigable zeal to finish a couple of saddles and a dozen
horse-shoes, which he presented to the khan, with many expressions of
gratitude. The khan was charmed with this proof of his affection, and in return
made him a present of a couple of fine horses, and several valuable skins of
beasts. Jack arrived without any accident at the English settlements, and
selling his skins and horses, found himself in possession of a moderate sum of
money. He now began to have a desire to return to England, and one of the
officers, who had often been obliged to him during his captivity, procured him
a discharge. He embarked, therefore, with all his property, on board a ship,
which was returning home, and in a few months was safely landed at Plymouth.

But Jack was too active and too prudent to give himself up to idleness. After
considering various schemes of business, he determined to take up his old trade
of forging; and for that purpose made a journey into the North, and found his
old master alive, and as active as ever. His master, who had always entertained
an esteem for Jack, welcomed him with great affection, and being in want of a
foreman, he engaged him at a very handsome price, for that place. Jack was now
indefatigable in the execution of his new office; inflexibly honest where the
interests of his master were concerned, and at the same time humane and
obliging to the men who were under him, he gained the affection of all about
him. In a few years, his master was so thoroughly convinced of his merit, that
growing old himself, he took Jack into partnership, and committed the
management of the whole business to his ca^. He continued to exert the same
qualities now which he had done before, by which means h^ improved the business
so much, as to gain ^ considerable fortune, and become one of (...) most
respectable manufacturers in the country. -- But, with all this prosperity, he
never discovered the least pride or haughtiness; on the contrary, he employed
part of his fortune to purchase the moor where he formerly lived, and built
himself a small but convenient house, upon the very spot where his daddy's hut
had formerly stood. Hither he would sometimes retire from business, and
cultivate his garden with his own hands, for he hated idleness.



To all his poor neighbors he was kind and ^iberal, relieving them in their
distress, and ^en entertaining them at his house, where he (...) to dine with
them, with the greatest affability, and frequently relate his own story; in
order to prove that it is of very little consequence how a man comes into the
world, provided he behaves well, and discharges his duty when he is in it.

THE LITTLE QUEEN.
THERE reigned once upon a time, in a distant island, a good prince who was
passionately beloved by all his subjects. It could not happen otherwise, for he
was their common father. He provided for all their reasonable wants, he
rewarded those who deserved well of their country, and he let none of the
wicked, nor even of the idle, escape without punishment. This amiable monarch
had but one cause of anxiety; Myra, his only child, by no means requited the
attention which had been given to her education. At twelve years of age she was
shamefully ignorant. Her thoughtlessness made her forget every lesson which she
had been taught, and her presumption kept pace with her want of knowledge; of
cons^quence as she thought herself perfectly accomplished, she despised all
instruction. One d^ she was indulging her absurd vanity by hinting, that were
she to govern the island, things would be better managed than they were now.
The King, having been informed of his daughter's sentiments, sent for her
immediately. On her coming, he told her, without the least discomposure, That
as she was destined to reign, one day or other, over his kingdoms, he should
wish to know how far her talents were proper for so important a charge. We may,
if you please, added this good prince, make the experiment without any delay.
Careless as you always were about the lessons which have been given you in
geography, you cannot but know that The Fortunate Island makes a part of my
dominions; it is a small, but well inhabited district; its people are active,
industrious, good tempered, and thoroughly attached to their sovereigns. Go,
child! reign over them, I shall order a yacht to be instantly fitted up to
convey you to your capital. Then making a most profound reverence to the little
sovereign, Adieu, madam, said he, with difficulty concealing a smile.

Myra, for some time, thought that the king meant only to divert himself, but
soon found her mistake, and that every thing was preparing for her voyage. She
was even permitted to form a court to her mind, and accordingly she ^icked out
a dozen of her playfellows to ac^ompany her. "These young people," said ^e to
her father, "are so very rational and se^ date, that there can be no need of
their being (...) attended by governesses or tutors." The king, however,
thought otherwise, and ordered the teachers to embark with their pupils. The
young sovereign, on her part, took care there should be abundance of musicians
for her balls, and that a company of players should be provided for the
amusement of herself and her court. On the morn of her departure, she took an
affectionate leave of her father, but the few tears which she shed, were soon
dried up by the consideration of her being going to a place where she should do
"just what she pleased." "The only advice that I shall give you," said the king
at parting, is, that you would follow the advice of Aristus (the governor of
the island over which you are to reign) in every thing of importance. He is a
man for whom I have a high esteem, and with reason, as he is discreet, honest,
and humane. I could wish that you would make him your first minister; I mean,
that you should consult him in every thing, and entrust him with the execution
of all your orders.

This direction no way suited the taste of our young Queen, who wished to have
given that important charge to one of her favorites, Philintus, a tall,
genteel lad, not indeed many years older than herself, but one who, to
tolerable skill in dancing and singing, added the very agreeable talent of
elegant flattery. He was himself as averse to study, and of consequence as
ignorant as his royal mistress; but he had knowledge enough of his own interest
to excite him never to omit assuring her that every one looked on her as a
model of a perfect princess, although he was cons^ious that, out of her
hearing, she was universally blamed for being so totally unlike her excellent
father, and for spending her whole time in trifling amusements.

As soon as the little sovereign reached her island, she beheld with pleasure
troops of shepherds and shepherdesses, in elegant fancy dresses of rose color
and white, who sung carols in praise of their new Queen, strewed sweet scented
flowers in her path, and presented her with odoriferous nosegays. Myra, charmed
with this specimen of her subjects gallantry, ordered money to be distributed
amongst them; and, under the conduct of Aristus, repaired to a lovely, though
small palace, fitted up for her reception. Fatigued with the voyage, the Queen
and her young court hastened to their repose; but her Majesty forgot not to
order, for the next day, a comedy to be acted, followed by a ball and a
splendid entertainment. On the next morn, Myra and her court amused themselves
by walking into the capital town, which lay not far from the palace. "Observe,"
said Aristus to his sovereign, the air of content which reigns in every face we
meet. "That," said Philintus, we should attribute to the presence of our lovely
Queen. "Without doubt," replied Aristus, they are sensible of that honor; but
I ought to inform you, that their gaiety is chiefly owing to their being
conscious of the excellent government under which they live, and of the wisdom
of those laws by which their King, whom they look upon as their father, governs
the country. "Let us now," said Myra, "extend our walks into the country." They
did so. An orchard, in full bloom, now tempted her to take a nearer view of its
beauty, "What," said she to Aristus, occasions the buzzing sounds which I hear?
"The bees," replied he; a useful tribe of your Majesty's subjects. At that
instant, most unfortunately, one of these animals, not perfectly acquainted
with the respect due to royalty, and disgusted at the Queen's approaching too
near to his hive, settled on her hand, and made her feel his sting! -- Shocking
creatures, these bees! exclaimed Myra; one of them has half killed me! The
presumptuous, ungrateful wretches ought, said Philintus, "to be utterly
extirpated." "You are right," said the Queen; I will have them destroyed, not
on my own account, but to preserve my poor people from receiving such cruel
wounds, when they are pursuing their occupations in the country. "Permit me,"
said Aristus, to observe, that these accidents happen but very seldom, and that
the pain which the bees occasion by their stings, is trifling, when compared
with the vast advantage which accrues from their labors; your subjects, madam,
will suffer severely indeed, if they are deprived of that useful creature. --
Here he was interrupted by Philintus, who bursting with laughter, cried out, A
pretty tale you tell us, Aristus! why sure you take us al^ for children! Suffer
indeed! what! because that nasty insect is kept from stinging them* Make us
believe that, if you can. I will have every be in my kingdom put to death,
said the young Queen with an air of dignity. "Possibly," said Aristus, your
Majesty may see cause hereafter to repent of this hasty command.
"Nevertheless," repeated Myra, "it shall be executed." Aristus retired with a
sigh, and Philintus loudly applauded the mingled humanity and firmness of his
infant sovereign. That evening the Queen entertained herself at the play, and
afterward was present at a ball, which, with a magnificent supper, lasted
until two o'clock in the morning.

Unluckily among the ladies of the bed chamber were two, who, not having
reached their eleventh year, had been used to eat little or no suppers, to take
moderate exercise, and to go to bed early. But the royal banquet had been so
tempting, the ball so charming, and the whole so perfectly new to them, that
they had despised the admonitions of their governesses, who had very naturally
remonstrated against their launching at once into this new system. In
consequence, they were both extremely ill the next morning. The physician
attended, and ordered proper medicines, which they refused to take. They were
permitted by the Queen, they said, to do what they liked best, and they hated
nasty physic. Their complaints, however, increased; they could neither eat,
drink, or sleep, and one of the two felt the attack of a fever. On this the
governesses were obliged to have recourse to the royal authority, and the Queen
having commanded the young ladies to submit to discipline, they took what was
ordered and all went right again.

One day that the young Queen was walking in the garden of her palace, she was
disgusted at the devastation which had been made by caterpillars on the leaves
of the trees. What vile creatures are these! said she to Philintus: Did you
ever see such a piece of work as they have made here? "I think," replied the
courtier, that it would be a good deed to root them out of the island, and to
proclaim rewards for those who would undertake to destroy them. What say you to
that, Aristus, said Myra, can my subjects exist without caterpillars? Your
Majesty, replied Aristus, has not forgot the bees, I find, but here the case is
widely different. The caterpillars which have stripped those trees do much
mischief, and are of no one use to society. "I am heartily glad," said the
Queen, that we coincide in opinion, for I am determined to have all the
caterpillars in my dominions destroyed; I hate them, nasty creatures! "Your
Majesty" said Aristus, certainly means to except from this general massacre,
that kind of caterpillar which produces the silkworm. Do but hear him, said
Philintus, in the Queen's ear; that fellow makes a point of contradicting your
Majesty in every thing. Let every caterpillar in my realm be put to death,
exclaimed the piqued sovereign.

"I am tired to death," said Myra, one day, of this eternal verdure. These
walks of turf, and these clumps of laurel, though I like them well enough on
the whole, yet being repeated so often, they fatigue my eyes; -- green, and
green, and nothing but green -- Why can I not have a rose-colour bower?
Philintus now turned all his thoughts toward the accomplishment of his
sovereign's rational wish. He had observed in a distant part of the garden an
arbor where a honey suckle overspread the green frame work. He ordered the
leaves to be stripped off, the wood to be painted rose color, and he covered
the whole with artificial roses hanging by crimson ribbands. The Queen was
enchanted with this gaudy retreat, and as soon as she saw it, ordered her
dinner to be set out upon that very spot. The sun shone out with great power,
and scarce had the company sat ten minutes at their meal, before some
complained of aching heads, some of dazzled eyes; all lost their appetites, and
the whole was a confusion of heat and glare. Aristus advised the whole party to
abandon the flaring scene, and to refresh their eyes by gazing on the turf in
some shady place. They did so, and all went well again. In consequence, it was
settled by her Majesty in council, that, during the summer, it were better for
the leaves of the trees to be green, than to be rose color.

Myra was so enchanted with the pleasures of her palace, that she gave herself
little trouble as to what passed in the island at large. Her whole time was
employed in schemes for increasing and varying her amusements: sometimes,
indeed, she walked into the country: but her presence no longer appeared to
give any pleasure to her subjects -- there were no more songs in her praise --
no more cries of "Long live our Queen!" "What," said Myra, can occasion this
strange alteration in the behavior of my people? Are they displeased with any
part of my government? "If," said Philintus, they are out of humor with such
an amiable sovereign, they do not deserve the honor of her inquiries. This
answer was not entirely satisfactory to the Queen; she was even for some time,
buried in thought; but the efforts of Philintus, (who had observed the gloom on
her countenance,) and the gay turn of his conversation, together with the
novelty of an entertainment which he proposed for the next evening, drove away
all serious thoughts, and sprightliness resumed its reign again. The plan was,
that all the court should appear in pastoral dresses, and that the company
should dance on one of those elegant lawns with which the palace garden
abounded. Myra approved of this plan, only desiring that the habits might be as
elegant as the plan would allow. They can only be made of linen, madam, said
one of the bedchamber-women. "How so,?" said the Queen.

There is not, in your Majesty's dominions, silk enough for one dress.

You must be mistaken. On my taking the government into my hands, I observed
shops without end, well furnished with silk.

It is true, Madam, there were such; but they are now all shut up, and the
owner^ have left the island.

"And why so, pray?"

Since your Majesty's orders for the destruction of all caterpillars, the silk
manufacture is entirely stopped.

Aye! why, what have those nasty vermin to do with the manufacture of silk?

There is one species of those caterpillars which produces the materials,
without which silk cannot be made; and as the sellers of silk in the towns are
in general connected, by marriage or relationship, with the breeders of the
silkworms, they have determined all together to quit a country where they are
deprived of the means of subsisting.

That very evening the Queen observed with a surprise, which almost equalled
horror, that the apartments of the palace were lighted with tallow candles.
"Heavens!" exclaimed the affronted Sovereign, what means this filthy sight? She
was told that there were no waxen tapers to be found in the isle. "'It Is
impossible!" she cried; "let Aristus be sent for." He appeared. Have you not
told me, Sir, that my island abounded with wax? Madam, it did so, when I gave
you that information. And how happens it that it is not so now? Because since
your Majesty ordered the bees to be extirpated, no more wax is to be found.
Philintus sneered at this reply, and Myra asked with astonishment, What was the
connection between bees and tapers? "Without them," said Aristus, the tapers can
not exist, since the bees supply the materials of which the tapers are
composed. And what is become of those who used to get their living by making
those tapers? "Poor souls!" replied Aristus, they are on the point of quitting
a place, where they cannot earn their bread. Alas! added he, were your Majesty
to make, at this time, the tour of your dominions, you would find the face of
the whole country deplorably altered. Philintus would have turned this account
into ridicule, but Myra, by a look, stopped his buffoonery, and retired to her
chamber with a heavy heart.

The next morning she took Aristus with her, and drove into the environs of her
capital. "You were too much in the right," she said, when you bade me expect a
deplorable alteration among my people. I hear no more acclamations! no more
songs! but I see the painfullest of sights; crowds of people in rags, begging
their bread, "Formerly," said Aristus, no beggars were to be found here; there
was a large building erected for the poor, where the old were maintained, the
sick cured, and all the young folks set to work; but since your Majesty has
allowed twelve to be the age of discretion, many of these children have refused
to be employed, and choosing to wander about the country, without knowing how
to g^ ^^eir bread, they are of course reduced to rags and misery.

The Queen, having given some relief to these wretched objects, proceeded to
ask Aristus, what was become of the crowds of busy people who were used to
throng in the streets of the capital? "for," said she, half the houses seem to
be shut up, and the whole town appears deserted, in comparison of its sta^^
when I first saw it. The minister told her* that there was a mutual dependence
of one trade upon another, and that, in consequence of the departure of the
silk and wax merchants and manufacturers, those who were used to supply that
large body of men with clothes, shoes and stockings, provisions, and every
other accommodation, having now no market for their goods, had shut up their
shops, and were preparing, one and all, for their departure. He added, that it
was much to be feared, that the farmers, who used to bring to the town corn,
hay, butter, eggs, poultry, etc. together with their families, laborers, etc.
would soon follow this example.

Struck with this painful detail, the young Queen, whose goodness of heart was
equal to the thoughtlessness of her head, exclaimed in an agony of distress, Oh
heavens! why did I leave my father's court? why take upon me a task of which I
was so incapable? I suffer severely for my presumption, but at least I will do
no more mischief here. Then turning to Aristus, she begged him to hasten the
preparations for her return to the kingdom of her father. Her orders were
instantly obeyed, and she with her whole court, took leave of the Fortunate
Island, and soon reached the port they wished for. As soon as Myra saw the
King, she threw herself at his feet, bathed in tears. "How is this," said he,
my daughter, are you returned already? are you so soon weary of sovereign
power? "Alas! Sire!" replied the weeping Myra, never was any being more
wretched than your daughter! I have childishly thrown away my own happiness,
and that of those whom you entrusted to my care. The island which I have
governed, no longer deserves the name of Fortunate. I have, by my own
mismanagement, reduced an industrious people to beggary and ruin! but I conjure
you, Sire, to order all my jewels to be instantly sold, that I may, by their
means, in some sort relieve the miseries which my infantine folly has brought
upon them. Make yourself easy, said the good King, soothing his afflicted
daughter, the mischiefs which your want of consideration has caused, are by no
means irreparable. I foresaw that you would make great mistakes in government,
and managed affairs so as to prevent those mistakes from having any very bad
consequences. Those of your subjects, who have by your errors been forced to
quit your isle, have, by the direction of Aristus, found a comfortable retreat
in this kingdom, have been supplied with all necessaries, and will now return
to their own country, with proper materials, to reassume their several trades
and occupations. You have, my beloved Myra, an excellent heart, and in all the
mischief which you have done, you have had the best intention in the world.
This ought to teach you, that princes ought not to trust to their good
dispositions alone, but that they should take counsel with the most intelligent
of their subjects, concerning the measures of their government, and above all,
that they should guard against forming too high an opinion of their own wisdom.
The errors of private persons can only affect a small number of individuals,
but those of sovereigns may ruin nations.

Myra profited by this lesson, ^^d by her own experience. She dedicated, for
the future, a considerable part of her time to study, and forbade Philantus
ever to appear in her presence again.

The NATURAL HISTORY of the BE.
TO give a complete history of this insect in a few pages, which some have
exhausted volumes in describing, and whose nature and properties still continue
in dispute, is impossible. It will be sufficient to give a general idea of the
animal's operations; which, though they have been studied for more than two
thousand years, are still but incompletely known. The account given us by
Reaumur is sufficiently minute; and, if true, sufficiently wonderful: but I
find many of the facts which he relates, doubted by those who are most
conversant with bees; and some of them actually declared not to have a real
existence in nature.

It is unhappy, therefore, for those whose method demands an history of bees,
that they are unfurnished with those materials which have induced so many
observers to contradict so great a naturalist. His life was spent in the
contemplation; and it requires an equal share of attention to prove the error
of his discoveries. Without entering, therefore, into the dispute, I will take
him for my guide; and just mention, as I go along, those particulars in which
succeeding observers have begun to think him erroneous. Which of the two are
right, time only can discover; for my part I have only heard one side, for as
yet none have been so bold as openly to oppose Reaumur's delightful researches.

There are three different kinds of bees in every hive. First, the laboring
bees, which make up the far greatest number, and are thought to be neither male
or female, but merely born for the purposes of labor, and continuing the
breed, by supplying the young with provision, while yet in their helpless
state. The second sort are the d^ones; they are of a darker color, longer, and
more thick by one third than the former: they are supposed to be the males; and
there is not above a hundred of them, in a hive of seven or eight thousand
bees. The third sort is much larger than either of the former, and still fewer
in number: some assert, that there is not above one in every swarm; but this
later observers affirm not to be true, there being sometimes five or six in the
same hive. These are called queen-bees, and are said to lay all the eggs from
which the whole swarm is hatched in a season.

In examining the structure of the common working be, the first remarkable
part that offers is the trunk, which serves to extract the honey from flowers.
It is not formed, like that of the other flies, in the manner of a tube, by
which the fluid is to be sucked up; but like a a besom, to sweep, or a tongue,
to lick it away. The animal is furnished also with teeth. which serve it in
making wax. This substance is gathered from flowers, like honey; it consists of
that dust or farina which contributes to the fecundation of plants, and is
molded into wax by the little animal, at le^sure. Every be, when it leaves
the hive to collect this precious store, enters into the cup of the flower,
particularly such as seem charged with the greatest quantities of this yellow
farina. As the animal's body is covered over with hair, it rolls itself within
the flower, and soon becomes quite covered with the dust, which it soon after
brushes off with its own hind legs, and kneads into two little balls. In the
thighs of the hind legs there are to cavities, edged with hair; and into these,
as into a basket, the animal sticks its pellets. Thus employed, the be flies
from flower to flower, increasing its store, and adding to its stock of wax;
until the ball, upon each thigh, becomes as big as a grain of pepper: by this
time, having got a sufficient load, it returns, the best of its way to the hive.

The belly of the be is divided into six rings, which sometimes shorten the
body, by slipping one over the other. It contains within it, beside the
intestines, the honey-bag, the venom-bag, and the sting. The honey-bag is as
transparent as crystal, containing the honey that the be has brushed from the
flowers; of which the greater part is carried to the hive, and poured into the
cells of the honeycomb; while the remainder serves for the bee's own
nourishment: for, during summer, it never touches what has been laid up for the
winter. The sting, which serves to defend this little animal from its enemies,
is composed of three parts; the sheath, and two darts, which are extremely
small and penetrating. Both the darts have several small points or barbs, like
those of a fish-hook, which render the sting more painful, and make the darts
rankle in the wound. Still, however, this instrument would be very slight, did
not the be poison the wound. The sheath, which has a sharp point, makes the
first impression; which is followed by that of the darts, and then the venomous
liquor is poured in. The sheath sometimes sticks so fast in the wound, that the
animal is obliged to leave it behind; by which the be soon after dies, and the
wound is considerably enflamed. It might at first appear well for mankind, if
the be were without its sting: but, upon recollection, it will be found, that
the little animal would then have too many rivals in sharing its labors. An
hundred other lazy animals, fond of honey, and hating labor, would intrude
upon the sweets of the hive; and the treasure would be carried off, for want of
armed guardians to protect it.

From examining the be singly, we now come to consider it in society, as an
animal not only subject to laws, but active, vigilant, laborious, and
disinterested. All its provisions are laid up for the community; and all its
arts in building a cell, designed for the benefit of posterity. The substance
with which bees build their cells is wax: which is fashioned into convenient
apartments for themselves and their young. When they begin to work in their
hives, they divide themselves into four companies: one of which roves in the
fields in search of materials; another employs itself in laying out the bottom
and partitions of their cells; a third is employed in making the inside smooth
from the corners and angles; and the fourth company bring food for the rest, or
relieve those who return with their respective burdens. But they are not kept
constant to one employment; they often change the tasks assigned them: those
that have been at work, being permitted to go abroad; and those that have been
in the fields already, take their places. They seem even to have signs, by
which they understand each other; for when any of them want food, it bends down
its trunk to the be from whom it is expected, which then opens its honey-bag,
and lets some drops fall into the other's mouth, which is at that time opened
to receive it. Their diligence and labor is so great, that, in a day's time,
they are able to make cells, which lie upon each other, numerous enough to
contain three thousand bees.

If we examine their cells, they will be found formed in the exactest
proportion. It was said by Pappus, an ancient geometrician, that, of all other
figures, hexagons were the most convenient; for, when placed touching each
other the most convenient room would be given, and the smallest lost. The cells
of the bees are perfect hexagons: these, in every honeycomb, are double,
opening on either side, and closed at the bottom. The bottoms are composed of
little triangular panes, which, when united together, terminate in a point, and
lie exactly upon the extremities of other panes of the same shape, in opposite
cells. These lodgings have spaces, like streets, between them, large enough to
give the bees a free passage in and out; and yet narrow enough to preserve the
necessary heat. The mouth of every cell is defended by a border, which makes
the door a little less than the inside of the cell, which serves to strengthen
the whole. These cells serve for different purposes: for laying up their young;
for their wax, which in winter becomes a part of their food; and for their
honey, which makes their principal subsistence.

It is well known that the habitation of bees ought to be very close; and what
their hives want, from the negligence and unskilfulness of man, these animals
supply by their own industry: so that it is their principal care, when first
hived, to stop up all the crannies. For this purpose they make use of a
resinous gum, which is more tenacious than wax, and differs greatly from it.
This the ancients called Propolis: it will grow considerably hard in June;
though it will in some measure soften by heat; and is often found different in
consistence, color and smell. It has generally an agreeable aromatic odor
when it is warmed; and by some it is considered as a most grateful perfume.
When the bees begin to work with it, it is soft, but it acquires a firmer
consistence every day; till at length it assumes a brown color, and becomes
much harder than wax. The bees carry it on their hinder legs; and some think it
is met with on the birch, the willow, and poplar. However it is procured, it is
certain that they plaster the inside of their hives with this composition.

If examined through a glass hive, from the hurry the whole swarm is in, the
whole at first appears like anarchy and confusion; but the spectator soon finds
every animal diligently employed, and following one pursuit, with a settled
purpose. Their teeth are the instruments by which they model and fashion their
various buildings, and give them such symmetry and perfection. They begin at
the top of the hive; and several of them work at a time, at the cells which
have two faces. If they are stinted with regard to time, they give the new
cells but half the depth which they ought to have; leaving them imperfect, till
they have sketched out the number of cells necessary for the present occasion.
The construction of their combs, costs them a great deal of labor: they are
made by insensible additions; and not cast at once in a mold, as some are apt
to imagine. There seems no end of their shaping, finishing, and turning them
neatly up. The cells for their young are most carefully formed; those designed
for lodging the drones, are larger than the rest; and that for the queen-bee,
the largest of all. The cells in which the young brood are lodged, serve at
different times for containing honey; and this proceeds from an obvious cause:
every worm, before it is transformed into an aurelia, hangs its old skin on the
partitions of its cell; and thus, while it strengthens the wall, diminishes the
capacity of its late apartment. The same cell, in a single summer, is often
tenanted by three or four worms in succession; and the next season, by three or
four more. Each worm takes particular care to fortify the pannels of its cell,
by hanging up its spoils there: thus, the partitions being lined, six or eight
deep, become at last too narrow for a new brood, and are converted into
storehouses, for honey.

Those cells where nothing but honey is deposited, are much deeper than the
rest. When the harvest of honey is so plentiful that they have not sufficient
room for it, they either lengthen their combs, or build more; which are much
longer than the former. Sometimes they work at three combs at a time; sor, when
there are three workhouses, more bees may be thus employed, without
embarrassment.

But honey, as was before observed, is not the only food upon which these
animals subsist. The meal of flowers, of which their wax is formed, is one of
their most favorite repasts. This is a diet which they live upon during the
summer; and of which they lay up a large winter provision. The wax of which
their comb^ are made, is no more than this meal digested, and wrought into a
paste. When the flowers upon which bees generally feed, are not fully blown,
and this meal or dust is not offered in sufficient quantities, the bees pinch
the tops of the stamina in which it is contained, with their teeth; and thus
anticipate the progress of vegetation. In April and May, the bees are busy,
from morning to evening, in gathering this meal; but when the weather becomes
too hot in the midst of summer, they work only in the morning.

The be is furnished with a stomach for its wax, as well as its honey. In the
former of the two, their powder is altered, digested and concocted into real
wax; and is thus ejected by the same passage by which it was swallowed. Every
comb, newly made, is white: but it becomes yellow as it grows old, and almost
black when kept too long in the hive. Beside the wax thus digested, there is a
large portion of the powder kneaded up for food in every hive, and kept in
separate cells, for winter provision. This is called, by the country people,
bee-bread; and contributes to the health and strength of the animal during
winter. Those who rear bees, may ^ob them of their honey, and feed them, during
the winter, with treacle; but no proper substitute has yet been found for the
bee-bread; and, without it, the animals become consumptive and die.

As for the honey, it is extracted from that part of the flower called the
nectareum. From the mouth this delicious sluid passes into the gullet: and then
into the first stomach, or honey-bag, which, when filled, appears like an
oblong bladder. Children, that live in country places, are well acquainted with
this bladder; and destroy many bees to come at their store of honey. When a be
has sufficiently filled its first stomach, it returns back to the hive, where
it disgorges the honey into one of the cells. It often happens that the be
delivers its store to some other, at the mouth of the hive, and flies off for a
fresh supply. Some honey-combs are always left open for common use; but many
others are stopped up, till there is a necessity of opening them. Each of these
are covered carefully with wax; so close, that the covers seem to be made at
the very instant the fluid is deposited within them.

Having thus given a curfory description of the insect, individually
considered, and of the habitation it forms, we next come to its social habits
and institutions: and, in considering this little animal attentively, after the
necessary precautions for the immediate preservation of the community, its
second care is turned to the continuance of posterity. How numerous soever the
multitude of bees may appear in one swarm, yet they all owe their original to a
single parent, which is called the queen-bee. It is indeed surprising that a
single insect shall, in one summer, give birth to above twenty thousand young:
but, upon opening her body, the wonder will cease; as the number of eggs
appearing, at one time, amounts to five thousand. This animal, whose existence
is of such importance to her subjects, may easily be distinguished from the
rest, by her size, and the shape of her body. On her safety depends the whole
welfare of the commonwealth; and the attentions paid her by all the rest of the
swarm, evidently show the dependence her subjects have upon her security. If
this insect be carefully observed, she will be seen at times attended with a
numerous retinue, marching from cell to cell, plunging the extremity of her
body into many of them, and leaving a small egg in each. When the queen-bee has
deposited the number of eggs necessary in the cells, the working bees undertake
the care of the rising posterity. They are seen to leave off their usual
employments; to construct proper receptacles for eggs; or to complete those
that are already formed. They purposely build little cells, extremely solid,
for the young; in which they employ a great deal of wax: those designed for
lodging the males, as was already observe^^ are larger than the rest; and those
for the queen-bees the largest of all. There is usually but one egg deposited
in every cell. A day or two after it is deposited, the worm is excluded from
the shell of the egg, having the appearance of a maggot rolled up in a ring,
and lying softly on a bed of a whitish colored jelly; upon which also the
little animal begins to feed. In the mean time, the instant it appears, the
working bees attend it with the most anxious and parental tenderness; they
furnish it every hour with a supply of this whitish substance, on which it
feeds and lies; and watch the cell with unremitting care. They are nurses that
have a greater affection for the offspring of others, than many parents have
for their own children. They are constant in visiting each cell, and seeing
that nothing is wanting; preparing the white mixture, which is nothing but a
composition of honey and wax, in their own bowels, with which they feed them.
Thus attended, and plentifully fed, the worm, in less than six days time, comes
to its full growth, and no longer accepts the food offered it. When the bees
perceive that it has no further occasion for feeding, they perform the last
offices of tenderness, and shut the little animal up in its cell; walling up
the mouth of its apartment with wax: there they leave the worm to itself;
having secured it from every external injury.

The worm is no sooner left enclosed, but, from a state of inaction, it begins
to labor, extending and shortening its body; and by this means lining the
walls of its apartment with a silken tapestry, which it spins in the manner of
caterpillars, before they undergo their last transformation. When their cell is
thus prepared, the animal is soon after transformed into an aurelia; but
differing from that of the common caterpillar, as it exhibits not only the
legs, but the wings of the future be, in its present state of inactivity.
Thus, in about twenty, or one and twenty days after the egg was laid, the be
is completely formed, and fitted to undergo the fatigues of its state. When all
its parts have acquired their proper strength and consistence, the young animal
opens its prison, by piercing with its teeth the waxen door that confines it.
When just freed from its cell, it is as yet moist, and incommoded with the
spoils of its former situation; but the officious bees are soon seen to flo^
round it, and to lick it clean on all sides with their trunks; while another
band, with equal assiduity, are observed to feed it with ^ey: others again
begin immediately to (...) the cell that has been just left; to carry the
ordures out of the hive, and to fit the place for a new inhabitant. The young
be soon repays their care, by its industry; for as soon as ever its external
parts become dry, it discovers its natural appetites for labor, and
industriously begins the task, which it pursues unremittingly through life. The
toil of man is irksome to him, and he earns his subsistence with pain; but this
little animal seems happy in its pursuits, and finds delight in all its
employments.

When bees first begin to break their prisons, there are generally above a
hundred excluded in one day. Thus, in the space of a few weeks, the number of
the inhabitants in one hive, of moderate size, becomes so great, that there is
no place to contain the new comers; and they are scarcely excluded from the
cell, when they are obliged, by the old bees, to sally forth in quest of new
habitations. In other words, the hive begins to swarm, and the new progeny
prepares for exile.

While there is room enough in the hive, the bees remain quietly together; it
is necessity alone that compels the separation. Sometimes indeed, the young
brood, with graceless obstinacy, refuse to depart, and even venture to resist
their progenitors. The young ones are known by being browner than the old, with
whiter hair; the old ones are of a lighter color, with red hair. The two
armies are therefore easily distinguishable, and dreadful battles are often
seen to ensue. But the victory almost ever termina^ with strict political
justice, in favor of the v^terans, and the rebellious offspring are driven
off, not without loss and mutilation.

In different countries, the swarms make their appearance at different times of
the year, and there are several signs previous to this intended migration. The
night before, an unusual buzing is heard in the hive; in the morning, though
the weather be soft and inviting, they seem not to obey the call, being intent
on more important meditations within. All labor is discontinued in the hive,
every be is either employed in forcing, or reluctantly yielding a submission;
at length, after some noise and tumult, a queen-bee is chosen, to guard, rather
than conduct, the young colony to other habitations, and then they are
marshalled without any apparent conductor. In less than a minute, they leave
their native abode, and forming a cloud round their protectress, they set off,
without seeming to know the place of their destination; The world before them,
where to choose their place of rest. The usual time of swarming, is from ten in
the morning, to three in the afternoon, when the sun (...) bright, and invites
them to seek their fortunes. They flutter for a while, in the air, like flakes
of snow, and sometimes undertake a distant journey, but more frequently are
contented with some neighboring asylum; the branch of a tree, a chimney top,
or some other exposed situation. It is, indeed, remarkable, that all those
animals, of whatever kind, that have long been under the protection of man,
seem to lose a part of their natural sagacity, in providing for themselves. The
rabbit, when domesticated, forgets to dig holes, the hen to build a nest, and
the be to seek a shelter, that shall protect it from the inclemencies of
winter. In those countries, where the bees are wild, and unprotected by man,
they are always sure to build their waxen cells in the hollow of a tree; but
with us, they seem improvident in their choice, and the first green branch that
stops their flight, seems to be thought sufficient for their abode through
winter. However, it does not appear, that the queen chooses the place where
they are to alight, for many of the stragglers, who seem to be pleased with a
particular branch, go and settle upon it; others are seen to succeed, and at
last, the queen herself, when she finds a sufficient number there before her,
goes to make it the place of her head quarters. When the queen is settled, the
rest of the swarm soon follow; and, in about a quarter of an hour, the whole
body seem to be at ease. It sometimes is found, that there are two or three
queens to a swarm, and the colony is divided into parties; but it most usually
happens, that one of these is more considerable than the other, and the bees by
degrees, desert the weakest, to take shelter under the most powerful protector.
The deserted queen does not long survive this defeat; she takes refuge under
the new monarch, and is soon destroyed by her jealous rival. Till this cruel
execution is performed, the bees never go out to work; and if there should be a
queen-bee, belonging to the new colony, left in the old hive, she always
undergoes the fate of the former. However, it must be observed, that the bees
never sacrifice any of their queens, when the hive is full of wax and honey;
for there is at that time, no danger in maintaining a plurality of breeders.

When the swarm is thus conducted to a place of rest, and the policy of
government is settled, the bees soon resume their former labors.

When a hive sends out several swarms in the year, the first is always the
best, and the most numerous. These, having the whole summer before them, have
the more time for making wax and honey, and consequently their labors are the
most valuable to the proprietor. Although the swarm chiefly consists of the
youngest bees, yet it is often found, that bees of all ages compose the
multitude of emigrants, and it often happens, that bees of all ages are seen
remaining behind. The number of them is always more considerable than that of
some populous cities, for sometimes upwards of forty thousand are found in a
single hive. So large a body may well be supposed to work with great
expedition; and in fact, in less than twent^ four hours, they will make combs
above twenty inches long, and seven or eight broad. Sometimes they will half
fill their hives with wax, in less than five days. In the first fifteen days,
they are always found to make more wax than they do afterward during the rest
of the year.

Having mentioned the industry of these admirable insects, it will be proper to
say something of the effects of their labor, of that wax and honey, which are
turned by man to such various uses. Bees gather together two kinds of wax, one
coarse and the other fine. The coarser sort is bitter, and with this, which is
called propolis, they stop up all the holes and crevices of their hives. It is
of a more resinous nature than the fine wax, and is consequently better
qualified to resist the moisture of the season, and preserve the works warm and
dry within. The fine wax is as necessary to the animals preservation as the
honey itself. With this they make their lodgings, with this they cover the
cells of their young, and in this they lay up their magazines of honey. This is
made, as has been already observed, from the dust of flowers, which is
carefully kneaded by the little insect, then swallowed, and having undergone a
kind of digestion, is formed into the cells, which answers such a variety of
purposes. To collect this, the animal rolls itself in the flower it would rob,
and thus takes up the vegetable dust with the hair of its body. Then carefully
brushing it into a lump, with its forepaws it thrusts the composition into two
cavities behind the thighs, which are made like spoons to receive the wax, and
the hair that lines them, serves to keep it from falling.

As of wax, there are also two kinds of honey. The white and the yellow. The
white is taken without fire from the honey-combs. The yellow is extracted by
heat, and squeezed through bags, in a press. The best honey is new, thick and
granulated, of a clear transparent white color, of a soft and aromatic smell,
and of a sweet lively taste. Honey made in mountainous countries, is preferable
to that of the valley. The honey made in the spring, is more highly esteemed,
than that gathered in summer, which last is still more valuable, than that of
autumn, when the flowers begin to fade and lose their fragrance.

Of the SILKWORM.
THIS little creature, which only works for itself, has been made of the utmost
service to man; and furnishes him with a covering more beautiful than any other
animal can supply. We may declaim indeed against the luxuries of the times,
when silk is so generally worn; but were such garments to fail, what other arts
could supply their deficiency?

Though silk was anciently brought in small quantities to Rome, yet it was so
scarce as to be sold for its weight in gold; and was considered as such a
luxurious refinement in dress, that it was infamous for a man to appear in
habits of which silk formed but half the composition. It was most probably
brought among them from the remotest parts of the east; since it was, at that
time of which I am speaking, scarcely known even in Persia.

Nothing can be more remote from the truth, than the manner in which their
historians describe the animal by which silk is produced. Pausanius informs us,
that silk came from the country of the Seres, a people of Asiatic Scythia; in
which place an insect, as large as the beetle, but in every other respect
resembling a spider, was bred up for that purpose. They take great care, as he
assures us, to feed and defend it from the weather; as well during the summer's
heat, as the rigours of winter. This insect, he observes, makes its web with
its feet, of which it has eight in number. It is fed, for the space of four
years, upon a kind of paste, prepared for it; and at the beginning of the
fifth, it is supplied with leaves of the green willow, of which it is
particularly fond; it then feeds till it bursts with fat: after which they take
out its bowels, which are spun into the beautiful manufacture so scarce and
costly.

The real history of this animal was unknown among the Romans till the times of
Justinian; and it is supposed, that silkworms were not brought into Europe till
the beginning of the twelfth century; when Roger of Sicily, brought workmen in
this manufacture from Asia Minor, after his return from his expedition to the
Holy Land, and settled them in Sicily and Calabria. From these the other
kingdoms of Europe learned this manufacture; and it is now one of the most
lucrative carried on among the southern provinces of Europe.

The silkworm is now very well known to be a large caterpillar, of a whitish
color, with ^welve feet, and producing a butterfly of the ^oth kind. The cone
on which it spins, is ^^med for covering it while it continues in the ^^relia
state; and several of these properly wound ^ff, and united together, form those
strong ^^d beautiful threads, which are woven into silk. The feeding these
worms, the gathering, the winding, the twisting, and the weaving their silk, is
one of the principal manufactures of Europe; and, as their luxuries increase,
seems every day to become more and more necessary to human happiness.

There are two methods of breeding silkworms; for they may be left to grow, and
remain at liberty upon the trees where they are hatched; or they may be kept in
a place built for that purpose, and fed every day with fresh leaves. The first
method is used in China, Tonquin, and other hot countries; the other is used in
other places where the animal has been artificially propagated, and still
continues ^ stranger. In the warm climate, the silkworm proceeds from an egg,
which has been glued by the parent moth upon proper parts of the mulberry-tree,
and which remains in that situation during the winter. The manner in which they
are situated and fixed to the tree, keeps them unaffected by the influence of
the weather; so that those frosts which are severe enough to kill the tree,
have no power to injure the silkworm.

The insect never proceeds from the egg till Nature has provided it a
sufficient supply; and till the budding leav^ are furnished, in sufficient
abundance, for its support. When the leaves are put forth, the worms seem to
feel the genial summons, and bursting from their little eggs, crawl upon the
leaves, where they feed with a most voracious appetite. Thus they become larger
by degrees; and after some months feeding, they lay, upon every leaf, small
bundles, or cones of silk, which appear like so many golden apples, painted on
a fine green ground. Such is the method of breeding them in the East; and
without doubt it is best for the worms, and least troublesome for the feeder of
them. But it is otherwise in the colder European climates; the frequent changes
of the weather, and the heavy dews of the evenings render the keeping them all
night exposed, subject to so many inconveniences, as to admit of no remedy. It
is true, that by the assistance of ^ets, they may be preserved from the insults
of birds; but the severe cold weather, which often succeeds the first heats of
summer, as well as the rain and high winds, will destroy them all: and
therefore, to breed them in Europe, they must be sheltered and protected from
every external injury.

For this purpose, a room is chosen, with a south aspect; and the windows are
so well glazed, as not to admit the least air: the walls are well built, and
the planks of the floor exceeding close so as to admit neither birds nor mice,
not even so much as an infect. In the middle there should be four pillars
erected, or four wooden posts, so placed as to form a pretty large square.
Between these are different stories made with ozier hurdles; and under each
hurdle there should be a floor, with an upright border all round. These hurdles
and ^loors must hang upon pullies, so as to be placed or taken down at pleasure.

When the worms are hatched, some tender mulberry leaves are provided, and
placed in the cloth or paper box in which the eggs were laid, and which are
large enough to hold a great number. When they have acquired some strength,
they must be distributed on beds of mulberry leaves, in the different stories
of the square in the middle of the room, round which a person may freely pass
on every side. They will fix themselves to the leaves, and afterward to the
sticks of the hurdles, when the leaves are devoured. They have then a thread,
by which they can suspend themselves on occasion, to prevent any shock by a
fall; but this is by no means to be considered as the silk which they spin
afterward in such abundance. Care must be taken that fresh leaves be brought
every morning, which must be strewed very gently and equally over them; upon
which the silkworms will forsake the remainder of the old leaves, which must be
carefully taken away, and every thing kept very clean; for nothing hurts these
infects so much as moisture and uncleanliness. For this reason their leaves
must be gathered when the weather is dry, and kept in a dry place, if it be
necessary to lay in a store. As these animals have but a short time to live,
they make use of every moment, and almost continually are spinning except at
those intervals when they change their skins. If mulberry leaves be difficult
to be obtained, the leaves of lettuce or holy oak will sustain them: but they
do not thrive so well upon their new diet; and their silk will neither be so
copious, nor of so good a quality.

Though the judicious choice, and careful management of their diet, is
absolutely necessary, yet there is another precaution of equal importance,
which is to give them air, and open their chamber windows, at such times as the
sun shines warmest. The place also must be kept as clean as possible; not only
the several floors that are laid to receive their ordure, but the whole
apartments in general. These things well observed, contribute greatly to their
health and increase.

The worm, at the time it bursts the shell, is extremely small, and of a black
color; but the head is of a more shining black than the rest of the body: some
days after, they begin to turn whitish, or of an ash-colored gray. After the
skin begins to grow too rigid, or the animal is stinted within it, the insect
throws it off, and appears clothed anew: it then becomes larger and much
whiter, though it has a greenish cast: after some days, which are more or less,
according to the different heat of the climate, or to the quality of the food
it leaves off eating, and seems to sleep for two days together: then it begins
to stir, and put itself into violent motions, till the skin falls off the
second time, and is thrown aside by the animal's feet. All these changes are
made in three weeks or a month's time; after which it begins to feed once more,
still in its caterpillar form, but a good deal differing from itself before its
change. In a few days time it seems to sleep again; and, when it awakes, it
again changes its clothing, and continues feeding ^s before. When it has thus
taken a sufficiency of food, and its parts are disposed for assuming the
aurelia form, the animal forsakes, ^or the last time, all food and society, and
prepares itself a retreat to defend it from external injuries, while it is
seemingly deprived of life and motion.

This retreat is no other than its cone, or ball of silk, which Nature has
taught it to compose with great art; and within which it buries itself, till it
assumes its winged form. This cone or ball is spun from two little longish
kinds of bags that lie above the intestines, and are filled with a gummy fluid,
of a marigold color. This is the substance of which the threads are formed;
and the little animal is furnished with a surprising apparatus for spinning it
to the degree of fineness which its occasions may require. This instrument in
some measure resembles a wire-drawer's machine, in which gold or silver threads
are drawn to any degree of minuteness; and through this the animal draws its
thread with great assiduity. As every thread proceeds from two gum-bags, it is
probable that each supplies its own; which, however, are united, as they
proceed from the animal's body. If we examine the thread with a microscope, it
will be found that it is flatted on one side, and grooved along its length;
from hence we may infer, that it is doubled just upon leaving the body; and
that the two threads stick to each other by that gummy quality of which they
are possessed. Previous to spinning its web, the silkworm seeks out some
convenient place to erect its cel^, without any obstruction. When it has found
a leaf, or a chink fitted to its purpose, it be^ to wreathe its head in every
direction, and fastens its thread on every side to the sides of its retreat.
Though all its first essays seem perfectly confused, yet they are not
altogether without design: there appears indeed, no order or contrivance in the
disposal of its first threads; they are by no means laid artfully over each
other, but are thrown out at random, to serve as an external shelter against
rain; for nature having appointed the animal to work upon trees in the open
air, its habits remain, though it is brought up in a warm apartment.

Malpighi pretends to have observed six different layers in a single cone of
silk: but what may easily be observed is, that it is composed externally of a
kind of rough cotton-like substance, which is called floss; within the thread
it is more distinct and even; and next the body of the aurelia, the apartment
seems lined with a substance of the hardness of paper, but of a much stronger
consistence. It must not be supposed, that the thread which goes to compose the
cone, is rolled round, as we roll a bottom; on the contrary, it lies upon it in
a very irregular manner, and winds off from one side of the cone, and then from
the other. This whole thread, if measured, will be found about three hundred
yards long; and so very fine, that eight or ten of them are generally rolled
off into one by the manufacturers. The cone, when completed, is in form like a
pigeon's egg, and more pointed at one end than the other; at the smaller end,
the head of the aurelia is generally found; and this is the pla^e that the
insect, when converted into a moth, is generally seen to burst through.

It is generally a fortnight or three weeks before the aurelia is changed into
a moth; but no sooner is the winged insect completely formed, than having
divested itself of its aurelia skin, it p^^pares to burst through its cone, or
outward prison: for this purpose it extends its head towa^ds the point of the
cone, butts with its eyes, which are rough, against the lining of its cell,
wears it away, and at last pushes forward, through a passage which is small at
first, but which enlarges as the anim^^ increases its efforts for emancipation;
while (...) t^^tered remnants of its aurelia skin lie in confusion within the
cone, like a bundle of dirty linen.

The animal, when thus set free from its double confinement, appears exhausted
with fatigue, and seems produced for no other purpose but to transmit a future
brood. It neither flies nor eats; the male only seeking the female, whose eggs
he impregnates; and their union continues for four days, without interruption.
The male dies immediately after separation from his mate; and she survives him
only till she has laid her eggs, which are not hatched into worms till the
ensuing spring.

However, there are few of these animals suffered to come to a state of
maturity; for as their bursting through the cone destroys the silk, the
manufacturers take care to kill the aurelia, by exposing it to the sun, before
the moth comes to perfection. This done, they (...) off the floss, and throw
the cones into (...) water, stirring them till the first thread offe^^ them a
clue for winding all off. They generally take eight of the silken threads
together* the cones still keep under water, till a proper quantity of the silk
is wound off: however, they do not take all; for the latter parts grow weak,
and are of a bad color. As to the paper-like substance which remains, some
stain it with a variety of colors, to make artificial flowers; others let it
lie in the water, till the glutinous matter which cements it is all dissolved:
it is then carded like wool, spun with a wheel, and converted into silk stuffs
of an inferior kind.

EPISTLE to a FRIEND, ON HIS RETURN FROM THE ARMY
AT length, war's bloody banner's furled,
Peace spreads her influence over the world;
You from the martial field retreat,
To seek your old paternal seat,
And, after five years absence, come
Loaded with debts and glory home.
Of tender parents favorite son,
Behold their happiness begun:
No more the Gazette's glorious tale
Now makes their anxious features pale,
Lest on the verdant laurel's stem
The cypress dark should grow for them.
Joyful they hail the morning ray,
And hope expectant gilds the day;
For sure, they cry, ere close of light,
Our absent son will bless our sight.
Till eve they watch with aching eyes,
And the next morn new hopes supplies.
And now the wished for hour draws near,
That drowns in transport every fear;
Blessed comfort of their waning lives,
Their son, their much-loved son arrives! --
On either side your bosoms glow,
And mutual tears of rapture flow;
I see, I see your generous breast
With filial love and joy possessed:
I feel, my friend! that joy impart
Fire to my sympathizing heart,
And bid my artless pen portray
The scenes that fancy's dreams display.
While yet still night, in sable robe,
Broods over our quarter of the globe;
While slumber wraps each laboring breast,
And care herself is soothed to rest,
Alone impatient of delay,
Your thoughts anticipate the day:
You rouse at once from Morpheu's reign
The landlord and his menial train;
The drowsy ostler cries in vain,
"'It Is dark, you cannot see your hand:"
Booted and spurrd you ready stand,
And mounting swift your eager steed,
Fearless through night and cold proceed.
Soon as Aurora's ruddy ray
Beams forth to cheer you on your way,
I see you sweep, with loosened rein,
Over hill and dale, through wood and plain;
Now gallop down the steep, and now,
Climbing the mountain's loftiest brow,
Bend over the landscape wide your eye,
Anxious your sire's abode to spy:
The fleeting spot eludes your view,
And seems to fly as you pursue. --
Faint on the horizon's farthest mound,
What hill is that with pine-trees crowned?
The well-known landmark strikes your sight;
Your bosom swells with fond delight;
Fancy's vain hope no longer yields:
"Ye much-loved shades! ye blooming fields!
"My eager steps," you cry, "once more
"Your green recesses shall explore."
And now, as with redoubled speed,
Forward you urge your bounding steed,
You see the well-known spire arise,
And point its summit to the skies;
And now, each envious barrier past,
With heartfelt bliss you view at last
The turrets of the your natal dome,
Your parent's venerable home.
Here memory's fond powers dispense
Their influence over each raptured sense.
'Twas here, to pay a mother's care,
You first imbibed the vital air;
Here each paternal art expressed,
To soothe and charm your infant breast,
Taught you in opening youth to prove
The bliss sincere of filial love.
Think how your parents' bosoms burn
To welcome your long-wish'd return;
Torn from their arms by glory's power,
How have they told each tedious hour!
Already to your eyes appear
The faultering voice, the joyful tear.
Beside the road the peasants throng
To see you swiftly pass along;
And bowing as you gallop by,
"'It Is the young captain, sure," they cry:
On you their greetings are all lost,
Forward with eager zeal you post;
Tomorrow you will return each bow,
But warmer duties call you now,
Arrived, at length, you touch once more
Your father's hospitable door.
The cheerful family surround
The hearth with crackling faggots crowned;
Some friends partake the genial ray,
Nor is the parish priest away.
Of taxes, hay, and war, they chat,
Of news and weather, this and that;
Of the young soldier too they spoke,
When a loud knock the converse broke.
Astonished by a sound so loud,
Around the window quick they crowd.
When screams of joy their bliss declare,
"'It Is he, it is Belville come, I swear!"
Your parents, sisters, round you throng,
And transport loosens every tongue:
Your sire exclaims, "Five years are past
"Since I beheld my Belville last:
"Your country called you to the field,
"And I no more her sword could wield:
"Well have thou filled thy father's place,
"Brave scyon of a warlike race:
"Nor shall my arms your steps detain,
"When ever your country calls again."
Over the brave vet'ran's furrowed cheek
The beams of martial ardor break;
And from the eye where courage glows,
The tear of fond affection flows.
With silent joy your mother stands,
And grasps with trembling bliss your hands:
Her present hopes, her future fears,
Call forth alternate smiles and tears;
And in her face those thoughts are shown,
Which anxious mothers feel alone.
Your sisters, too, the transport share,
And, with soft friendship's mildest air,
Demand if still your bosom prove
The fondness of fraternal love.
"How tedious passed," they cry, "the day,
"When our loved brother was away:
"You promised you would often write;
"But the old proverb -- Out of sight" --
Now ardent friendship's kindling joy,
And filial love, your thoughts employ;
And all the feelings of your breast
Are on your blooming cheek expressed:
A thousand questions, fondly made,
By fond caresses are delayed;
Transport forbids your words to flow,
Nor can you answer yes, or no.
And see the ancient dame appears,
The fosterer of your infant years:
"Lord bless me! how young master's grown?
"I scarce should have the Captain known
"Elsewhere, unless I had been told:
"How well he looks in blue and gold!
"Thank Heaven, he has neither maim nor "wound,
"But comes again quite safe and sound:
"For war's at best a dangerous choice;
"Good Sirs! how Madam must rejoice!" --
What social bliss! what charming ties!
From parents, country, friends, arise!
May they who scorn their rights to know,
Never feel the transports they bestow;
And far from me and those I love,
That stubborn breast, kind Heaven, rem^^e,
Who meets unmoved a mother's face,
Who tearless feels a friend's embrace;
Nor smiles to see those scenes revered,
Which infant pastimes have endeared.
THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER.
FATHER of all! in every age,
In every clime adored,
By saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.
Thou Great First Cause, least understood,
Who all my sense confined
To know but this, that thou art good,
And that myself am blind.
Yet gave me in this dark estate
To see the good from ill;
And binding nature fast in fate,
Left free the human will.
What conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not to do,
This teach me more than hell to shun,
That, more than heaven pursue.
What blessings thy free bounty gives,
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid when man receives,
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to earth's contracted span
Thy goodness let me bound,
Or think thee Lord alone of man,
When thousand worlds are round.
Let not this weak unknowing hand
Presume thy bolts to throw,
Or deal damnation round* the land,
On each I judge thy foe.
If I am right, O teach my heart
Still in the right to stay!
If I am wrong, thy grace impart,
To find the better way.
Save me alike from foolish pride,
Or impious discontent;
At aught thy wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy goodness lent.
Teach me to feel another's woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mean though I am, not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy breath;
O lead me wheresoe'er I go,
Through this day's life or death.
This day be bread and peace my lot;
All else beneath the sun
Thou know if best bestowed, or not,
And let thy will be done.
To thee whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth, sea, skies;
One chorus let all beings raise!
All nature's incense rise!

