THE NATURE AND SUBJECTS OF CHRISTIAN BAPTISM CONSIDERED. In two Discourses.

Delivered at the Baptist Society, in North-Yarmouth: and published at the
desire of the Hearers.

BY ABRAHAM CUMMINGS, A. B.

"In your concord and agreeing in charity, Jesus Christ is sung, and every one
of you all makes up the concert."

Ignatius. "Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children.

Paul. PRINTED AT PORTLAND, BY B. TITCOMB, JUN. MDCCXCV.

DISCOURSE I.
Acts ii. 41. Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized.


DOUBTLESS the design of this text now appears to the greater part of this
assembly. It is easy work to oppose enemies, but to oppose friends -- to oppose
brethren and sisters, disciples of our glorious Lord, is one of the most
difficult employments in the world: but every bible truth is precious, and
plead for it we must, though opposed by a Calvin, a Flavel, an Edwards, or by
all the saints on the earth. Let us then attend to the passage in view, and
consider what baptism is, and who are the subjects of it.

The enquiry may be, 1. What is baptism? It is a sacrament wherein our
immersion in water represents our being buried with Christ to the world, and
rising to newness of life; and also the burial of our bodies, and their
resurrection at the last day. Chambers' dictionary explains the word baptism,
which the English reader may peruse at his leisure. When baptism was performed
in the apostolic age, we read of their repairing to places where there was much
water. Philip and the Eunuch first came unto a certain water, and then we read,
not that they went back and came to it again; but, that they went down into The
Greek word EIS sometimes means to, but most naturally into; baptized often
means washed, but most naturally immersed; and the most natural sense of a
word, must always be preferred to one less natural, other things being equal.
the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Hence believers
are said to be buried with Christ in baptism, and to be baptized for the dead.
If the dead rise not, why are they then baptized for the dead? Why do they
embrace an ordinance, the very design of which is to represent the resurrection
when christians are buried in and rise out of the water. What a lively emblem
it is of our being buried with Christ, and rising at the last day! This canons
be said of sprinkling -- and accordingly not sprinkling, but baptism was almost
the universal practice of the christian church for many centuries, and has bee^
continued in the Greek church, down to the pre^ent moment. Baptism is a Greek
word and if the Greek ^ation do'nt know the meaning of their own words we may
well enquire who does? But after all, it may be said, it is a needless,
burdensome, foolish practice: We answer, perhaps this was one great reason, why
it was ^^^^^^sated. Every follower of Christ must become a fool for his sake,
and deny himself. Are you my disciple, says Christ, if so, do you submit to
this ordinance -- this image of self-denial, which shall render you foolish in
the view of the world. Further information respecting baptism may be obtained
from Mr. Foster's divine right of immersion, and Mr. Baldwin's answer to Mr.
Worcester.
Must not that ordinance be wisely contrived, which serves to keep out of the
church the proud, and those who are loath to expose themselves for the cause of
Christ. To some eyes this may appear like a censorious intimation: but the
sentence need not be viewed in such a light. Our paedobaptist brethren fee not
as we do; but it is not because they are more proud or selfish than we are.
But,

2. Who are the subjects of baptism? The text is the answer -- Then they that
gladly received his word, were baptized -- "and their infants too" faith the
word of man; but what says the word of the Lord? Where is the chapter, or
verse, or sentence, or member of a sentence, which commands such a practice, or
affords an example of it? To say it is not expressly forbidden will by no means
excuse the practice. Beads, crosses, and a thousand other popish fooleries, are
no where expressly forbidden in scripture; but the question is are they
commanded? Ancient Israel was reproved no^ only for doing what was forbidden,
but for doing what was not commanded. They did that which I commanded them not,
says the Lord, neither came it into my mind. 'But though there be no express
command for the practice, you say, yet we have consequential evidence in its
savor.' Let us then inquire for it. If there be such consequential evidence, it
must depend on the truth of three propositions. Infants are visibly in the new
covenant -- baptism is in the room of circumcision -- there were three families
in the apostolic age, one of which at least had an infant or some other person
baptized on the ground of the faith of the head of the family. All the
arguments which are esteemed conclusive by more than thirty authors who have
written on the subject in Europe and America, depend on the truth of these
three propositions: all that is said respecting the covenants, the olive tree,
the kingdom of heaven, the discipleship of infants and their interest in the
promise, etc. rests on the truth of one or other of these three propositions If
infants are not visibly in the new covenant, they are not visible disciples,
not visible subjects of the kingdom of heaven, nor visibly grafted into the
olive, nor visibly interested in the promise, Acts ii. 39. nor visibly holy in
the new covenant sense. This will doubtless be granted.
so that if these fail, all fails and the point must be surrendered. More might
be said to manifest this, but probably it will not be denied. All we have to do
then is to enquire whether these three propositions are true.

1. Are infants visibly in the new covenant? No! for this plain reason -- they
cannot appear to be in it, and they are not visibly such as they cannot appear
to be. I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, (says the Lord)
not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day when
I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt: for this is the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, faith the Lord, I
will put my laws in their mind, and write them in their hearts: and -- they
shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying know
the Lord: for all shall know me, i. e. all with whom I make this new covenant
shall know me, from the least to the greatest: for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
How plainly this shows that none can be really in the new covenant but really
gracious persons. All shall know me, (spiritually) for I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
And as none can be really in the new covenant but really gracious persons, so
none can appear to be in the new covenant, but those who appear to be gracious,
and, as appearance and visibility are of the same import, whatever appears is
visible, and whatever is visible can appear. There cannot be a visible object,
which cannot appear; and no person can be visibly in any condition, while he
cannot appear to be in that condition. Therefore if the infants of believers,
as such, are visibly in the new covenant, then they appear to be really in it.
If infants are really in the new covenant, they are really born again; and
consequently if they are visibly in the new covenant, they are visibly born
again; and if they are visibly born again, then they can appear to be born
again, certainly. There may be visibility of that of which there is no
existence, but there cannot be visibility of that which there can be no
appearance. The terms visibility and appearance, with their variations, are
here used in a sense which Dr. Hemmenway's late ingenious Discourse concerning
the church, calls improper and less proper, and which doubtless is so ^ith
relation to his proper sense, or the natural force of the words; but not with
relation to this subject, as well as many others, unless it is Improper to use
such terms in writing as men commonly use, learned or unlearned. 'Propriety or
congruity of language (says Dr. Edwards) depends wholly on use.' The natural
force of the above terms, was doubtless no more unknown to president Edwards,
than to Dr. Hemmenway, and yet with an eye to the common use of them, the
president says, 'visible and real are words which stand related to one another,
as the words real and seeming, true and apparent.' Among the learned and
unlearned it is certainly a common, intelligible, and consequently on the
whole, a very proper way of speaking, to say that a person may appear to be
what he is not -- that a person may appear to be a sincere friend, and may
appear to be a good man: That there may be such an appearance both of persons
and things as admits of doubtful reality. -- But though in this Discourse
concerning the church, the doctor says that all visibility is certainty -- that
'if we have not light enough to ascertain the reality of a supposed object,
there is not enough to make it visible. Yet in his book on the nature and
subjects of baptism, on which the late performance is prof-ssedly constructed,
^e seamed to think that possibility would answer for visibility. That we may
have light enough to render a supposed object visible without ascertaining the
reality or even the probability of it. For in page 34 he says "if we suppose
the character of believers is given to little ones themselves, it will make no
difficulty: for as it cannot be denied that young children may have the seeds
of grace and faith in them so being members of the church, they are in the
account and acceptance of the church, believers according to their capacity,
and may be so termed even as we term them rational creatures before the proper
exercise of their rational fa^ulties plainly appears." Surely the doctor must
mean that they are in some degree visible believers in the account of the
chur^^, for how can infants be such in their account and acceptance as they do
not appear to them to be in the least degree. Here then is visible grace and
faith in those who only may have grace and faith; here is a visible object.
without our having light enough to ascertain its reality, or even probability.
-- Accordingly (in page 51) he says expressly that believers' children are
visibly heirs of salvation. If possibility of faith is the visibility of it,
then the possibility of unbelief is the visibility of that also. If infants are
visible believers, because they may have the seed of grace, -- then they are
visible unbelievers because they may have the contrary. So here is a visible
believer, and a visible unbeliever in the same person at the same time -- the
possibility of which the doctor in his late answer to Mr. Emmon^ (page 30)
considers very absurd for any one to suppose. That there is not one to an
hundred of the infants of believers sanctified from the womb, will doubtless be
granted; allowing then a fifth part of them to die in infancy, there must be a
probability of eighty to one that any particular infant of a believer is in a
graceless state; but there is not one in five hundred of them born without
rational faculties. Therefore when the doctor says that infants may be termed
believers, even as we term them rational creatures; -- he might as well say
they may be termed believers, while we have a probability of eighty to one that
they are not believers, even as we term them rational creatures, while we have
a probability of five hundred to one that they are rational creatures.
According to the doctor's representation here, infants are believers and heirs
of salvation, not certainly, nor probably; but very improbably and visibly. But
to mention all the opposites of these books in professed union, would be
uncomfortable, and perhaps u^^^ess. They are easily perceived by any discerning
and unprejudiced reader.
'There cannot be a more harsh catachresis, than to say that any creature is
visibly such as he cannot appear to be. When the almanac predicts a visible
eclipse, it does not mean an eclipse which cannot appear. Therefore if the
infants of believers as such, are visibly in the new covenant, visibly in the
kingdom of heaven, visibly holy in the new covenant sense, and visible
disciples, then they can appear to be such really: And so we are come to this
plain question; do infants appear to be really in the new covenant? or in other
words do they appear to be really born again -- do they appear to be born and
new born at the same time? Does that which is born of the flesh appear to be
spirit in the eye of christians, judging according to the rules of the gospel?
-- no; says the scripture; "That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and
that which is born of the spirit, is spirit." That which is born of the flesh,
even of believers, is flesh; for, "neither because they are the seed of
Abraham, are they all children, (says Paul) but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called -- that is, they which are the children of the flesh these are not the
children of God. True, the child of a believer is in a sense holy to him, and
so is the unbelieving consort. The unbelieving wife is sanctified to the
husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. i. e. The
believer has a lawful and sanctified enjoyment of his wife and child. They are
holy to him as all things are which he has occasion to enjoy: for to the pure,
all things are pure; and nothing to be refused, if it be rereceived with
thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The gospel
has removed the ceremonial uncleanness of Ezra's time. But neither the
unbelieving wife, nor child of a believer is holy in the new covenant sense: if
they were, their hearts would be holy; or if they were visibly holy in this
sense, their hearts would be visibly holy in the sense already explained -- and
to confirm this sense, hear president Edwards: "Visibility is a relative thing,
and has relation to an eye that beholds.' Real saints are those who are so in
the eye of God, visible saints are those who are so in the eye of man -- that
is, in the eye of man's mind, which is his judgment or esteem; and nothing
short of apparent probability or probable exhibition can amount to visibility
in the eye of man's reason or judgment. God has given to man the eye of reason
and the eye of a christian, which is reason sanctified and enlightened by a
principle of love. -- But it implies a contradiction to say that that is
visible to the eye of reason, which does not appear probable to reason. And if
there be a person who is in this sense a visible saint, he is in the eye of a
rational judgment a real saint. Without dispute some infants are real saints;
but it is visible saintship which the church is concerned with, and of this it
is shown no infant is capable. The sum of the reasoning is this: -- The new
covenant really contains none but gracious persons -- therefore, none but those
who appear to be gracious, appear to be in it. The infants of believers, From
this text the doctor (page 39) professes to deduce a proof in his favor,
unanswerable. If the reader examines his exposition of it with the closest
attention, he must find that all the strength of this unanswerable proof lies
in the great difference between the words sanctify and holy. The unbelieving
consort, he says, is only said to be sanctified or made holy, and therefore
does not belong to the church; but the child is HOLY -- a title never given to
any, he says, but those who are of the church. He himself allows that the child
is holy in the sense of the holiness of the unbelieving consort -- who is
sanctified to the believer, he says, as every creature of God is which he has
occasion to (enjoy) and consequently as the child is, but still the child has a
higher kind of holiness, because it is HOLY: whereas the unbelieving consort is
only made holy. This argument he says is unanswerable. -- Cyrus king of Persia
belonged to the church, he is called the Lord's anointed, a title never given
to any but those who are of the church.
as such, cannot appear to be gracious in the eye of a church, judging by
proper rules -- and therefore cannot appear to be in the new covenant; that is,
they are not visibly in it, which is the same thing. The ancient nation of
Israel really attended that ceremonial (...) which gendered to bondage. They
really received peculiar favors from God as children from a father. They in
general made a profession of heart religion from time to time, and were really
in covenant with God. And when viewed collectively, and in comparison of other
nations, they appeared sometimes to be really a pious nation; that is, there
was mo^^ appearance of real piety with them than with other nations. On these
accounts they might properly be termed God's children, God's servants, a
hypocritical nation, a holy nation, etc. without the absurd supposition that
they had among them the visibility of that which had no appearance, or that
their infants, singly taken, were visibly in the new covenant, or visibly such
as they probably were not. The holy seed and the holy nation were doubtless
really such in a ceremonial sense.
Some inferences must close this part of the subject.

1. To what purpose then are all the mighty arguments from the covenant of
Abraham and other scriptures, but eventually to cast a mist before the eyes of
the mind, and keep the truth always out of view. Whatever the covenant of
Abraham is, and whatever those other scriptures mean which are used in favor of
infant membership, they cannot mean that infants or any other creatures are
visibly such as they cannot appear to be; they cannot prove a proposition which
is a contradiction in itself. -- If they can, the bible is no more, and Hume
and Voltaire may be our guides in future. Dr. Hopkins, in his system of Div. p.
334. and onward say^, That when the parent properly offers the child, Christ
does in this transaction receive the child into the same visible standing and
character with the parent, as a visible saint [But if it had not the same
visible standing and character before, why was it presented for baptism?] and
orders the church to consider and look upon it in this light, as being one in
their view, and so far as they are to judge, really holy and among the number
of the saved -- By the command of Christ, they are to be considered and
received by the church as such: That is, to appearance, to their view, really
holy: that is, Christ orders the church to look upon the children of the flesh
to be the children of God. For two reasons -- 1. Because he has ordered that
those who are made really holy and are saved, should be chiefly taken from and
found among visible believers and their children. He has directed us to look
there for really holy persons that shall be saved, and no where else.' But,
premising proper deference, if any one appears to be peculiarly faithful as a
master, or another as a minister, why are we not as much directed by scripture
promises to look among the servants of the former, and the society of the
latter, for persons who shall be saved as among the infants of visible
believers in whom very peculiar, (...) has not yet appeared. 2. Another reason,
and which is the foundation of the former, is this -- "That real holiness and
salvation are secured to children of believers, by the covenant into which the
parents enter with God, as it respects their children if the parents faithfully
keep covenant and fulfill what they profess and promise respecting their
children, when they ofter them in baptism. The parent in this transaction
professes to devote his child to Christ, and promises, that if be and his child
shall live, to bring it up for Christ. And Christ as the other party in this
covenant transaction, visibly receives the child, as belonging to him, and on
the condition which the parent professes and promises to perform, he promises
to bless the child, and bestow salvation upon it. Therefore such children are
visibly saints, and numbered among the saved: for the profession and
engagements of the parents are to be relied on by the church -- and that they
will fulfill their promises respecting their children. But in this transaction,
if the parent makes any promise at all, what must be promise short of perfect
faithfulness? -- and if this must be the pro^^^^, how can it be relied upon by
the church, so as to view the infant among 'the number of the saved.' But
suppose some great degree of faithfulness to be the condition, for the
fulfillment of which, the promise of the parent might be relied upon by the
church; would not the promise of Christ annexed to this degree of faithfulness
be completely fulfilled, if the children of such parents were converted at 20,
40, or 60 year. of age. Of several things the church are quite uncertain: they
know not whether the parent will live; or if he does, whether he will be
faithful to his child; or if he is, whether he will be faithful enough to
secure the child's salvation; or if he should arrive to such a degree of
faithfulness, they are still wholly in doubt of the time when the promise shall
be fulfilled, whether next month, the next year, or the next age. Therefore,
allowing there be such a connection as the doctor supposes, what a poor reason
it affords to the church to view the child as really holy, and among the number
of the saved. Whenever a visible believer offers his child in baptism, the
language of Christ to the church, according to the doctor's representation is
this. -- " To one of these two sorts of persons from whom those are chiefly
taken, who are to be saved O my people, this child belongs. This parent is a
believer in your view, you know not, by (...) will live to be faithful to the
child, yea you know not but his faithfulness will equal that saving condition
of the covenant which is unknown to you. If it should equal it, I promise to
renew and sanctify this child in some future time. Therefore I command you to
look upon this infant as really renewed and made (...) this moment, and to
treat it and love it accordingly. Train up a child (whether it be a son or
servant) in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from
it. Those who are made really holy, and are to be saved, are chief^^^ ^^ken
from among visible believers, their children and servants." Among (...) ^^ese
three sorts we are to look for really holy persons that shall be (...): --
therefore when a servant boy is taken into a family, and thereupon baptized,
(by Gen, xvii. 13.) the church by the command of Christ, are to view and
receive him as one really holy in heart, and to love him accordingly. When a
bishop is ordained over a people, he, as a party in the new covenant, professes
and promises to be faithful to the people. 'Christ as the other party in this
covenant on condition' that the minister continues faithful to a certain
degree, 'promises to bless' the people (by 1 Timothy iv. 16.) and bestow salvation
upon them. And now since president Edwards' idea of visibility is entirely
rejected, and that is allowed to be visible which is utterly improbable, it is
no matter if we descend one degree lower into the dark. There are (...) sorts
of people from whom 'those who are (...) really holy and are to be saved' are
chiesly taken; visible believers, their children, their servants, and a people
not professing religion but statedly hearing a pious minister. Such a minister
may find gracious promises of salvation in the new covenant for himself, his
children, his servants, and his people. When a minister is ordained, his
profession and engagements are to be relied on by the church, and therefore,
though the people may be very wicked, and have none of that visibility of
holi^^^^ which president speaks of, yet, the promises of the covenant being
(...), the people are to be considered by the church as visible saints, or as
appearing to be really holy and numbered among the saved; though in a very low
degree -- lower than that of the servant, as that of the servant is lower than
that of the child, and that of the child lower than that of the parent. 'But
the character or title of holy. (it will be objected) is not now given to a
religious society which is not the church; but it is given to infants.' To
which it may be answered, if every creature of God is made holy to the
believing minister, then his society is; and if Christ has declared the infants
of believers, as such, to be holy in heart, then they are so either in the eye
of God, or in the eye of man judging by the rules of that word, which expresely
assures us that 'the children of the flesh are not the children of God.' After
all, it is matter of abundant thankfulness, that the promises of the bible
annexed to faithfulness in parents, as well as ministers, are great and
precious, though perhaps indefinite. And it must by no means be de^^ed, that the
duty of parents to educate their children and that of the church to watch over
the parents for this purpose, must be attended to with great assiduity and
circumspection.
The covenant of Abraham promised a land to a particular family, as such, but
in the new covenant we find no such promise. Therefore the covenant of Abraham,
in this respect, is really different from the new, -- and if it differs in one
respect it may in another, it may differ with respect to the temporal seed, as
well as the temporal land.

The Jewish infants seem to have been really in covenant in some sense or
other; or else how could the uncircumcised man child be said to break it. And
Deuteronomy. xxix. 11. the little ones are expressly mentioned as entering into
covenant. But the new testament speaks (...) such matters of the new covenant.
Infants being once in covenant, say some, when were they ever cut off? This
question must be answered by another. Infants being once in the covenant of
Sinai, when were they ever cut off? Infants were as really in the covenant of
Sinai, as in that of Abraham, but no scripture has expressly cancelled that
article of the Sinai covenant which admitted them. But 'the Sinai covenant was
abolished' you may say, -- so it was, as far as it respected the temporal seed,
the temporal land, and temporal rights, and so was the covenant of Abraham, and
neither of them was abolished or disannulled by the law or gospel, as far as
they had reference to Christ and spiritual blessings. The spirituality of both
these covenants, is everlasting. The Abrahamic covenant, was included in the
covenant of Sinai; as the learned Grotius has justly observed. Every promise,
every command, every blessing of the covenant of Abraham, is found in the
covenant of Sinai. Circumcision in particular, was considered by Christ as
appertaining to the law of Moses -- 'Ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man
that the law of Moses might not be broken.' And the covenant of Sinai was no
more confined to the native Hebrews than the covenant of Abraham. Therefore the
latter being included in the former, both waxed old and vanished away together;
while the spiritual blessings which they both promised, were more clearly
exhibited than ever by the new covenant. The atonement of Jewish priests
typified and promised the atonement of Christ and spiritual blessings: and the
covenant of Abraham typified and promised the new covenant and its spiritual
blessings. -- Yet the atonement of Jewish priests was one thing, and the
atonement of Christ was another -- and the covenant of Abraham was one thing,
and the new covenant was another. The covenant of Abraham had a twofold
aspect; to the natural seed promising temporal blessings, and to the spiritual
feed promising spiritual blessings. When the Lord says to Abraham, 'I will be a
God to thee and to thy feed,' etc. the meaning is I will be a God to thee and
to thy natural seed in a temporal sense, and a God to thee and thy spiritual
seed in a spiritual sense -- giving canaan to the former, and heaven to the
latter. Of the same nature are the covenants of Levi and David. Therefore all
these covenants are so many different covenants of promise, to which no doubt
the apostle refers, when he tells the Ephesians that they had been aliens from
this commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise. But
the new covenant has no such double aspect -- and here again is a wide
difference between the latter and the former.

2. Hence it appears that an infant may belong to Christ's kingdom on the
earth, and yet not belong to his visible kingdom. Christ in reality, has but
one gospel kingdom, into which none enter but they who are born again; and this
real kingdom is partly in heaven, and partly on the earth -- 'of whom the whole
family in heaven and earth is named.' Christ's real church does not really
consist of two sorts of persons, the one his friends and the other his enemies.
His real church is really one bread and one body, and so his visible church is
visibly one bread and one body: -- consequently no one can be properly of his
visible kingdom, who is not visibly of his real kingdom. But of this visibility
infants are incapable, as already shown, and therefore cannot properly belong
to Christ's visible kingdom: -- yet some of them doubtless belong to his real
kingdom. -- For 'of such is the kingdom of heaven' says our Lord. q. d. There
are some infants who belong to my real kingdom; they are born again, which
shows that all infants are capable of receiving my blessing. Therefore suffer
the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.' The text is plain
enough, if we do not make difficulties where there are none.

3. Hence learn the inconsistency occasioned by infant membership. If infants
are members of the church, they should be treated as such. They must receive
the Lord's supper, as once they really did, from the third to the twelfth
century. But it is supposed this passage, 'let a man examine himself,' etc.
plainly excludes infants from this sacrament. But doctor Hemmen way tells us,
that when Christ declares "no one can be his disciple, unless he deny himself
and take up the cross," he speaks to adults, not to infants; and hence infers
(page 37) that infants may be disciples without taking up the cross. So here!
will make the same evasion. Paul speaks to adults, not to infants, and, 'do
this in remembrance of me,' was spoken to adults, not to infants. Infants may
thee partake without self-examination.
When they arrive to years of discretion they have a right to a suffrage in the
church, in short, to all the privileges of church members. When they offend,
they must suffer the discipline and censure of the church; all these things are
necessary to render our practice conformable to infant membership. But, as the
state of mankind is and has been, who cannot foresee the invincible
difficulties which this consistency would introduce. Many excommunications must
take place yearly, or else the church would be very soon corrupted; yea, the
best of discipline would not prevent this corruption. Mere moralists are not
christians, and the children of the flesh being more numerous, would naturally
prevail and carry the suffrage against the children of the spirit. Ishmael and
Isaac lived together in the same family, through all the ages of the Jewish
dispensation, but not very peaceably. The child of the flesh mocked and
persecuted the child of the spirit, 'till wrath came on him to the uttermost.
But what says the scripture 'cast out the bondwoman and her son;" and keep
them out too; if not, if we re-admit them, a quarrel in the family or the
corruption of it, will be the certain consequence. Therefore infant membership.
Instead of being a great privilege, as many would have us believe, is a great
disadvantage to the church -- consequently to these infants themselves, when
they come to years: and one great reason why this disadvantage don't now appear
plainly, is because they who practice infant membership, proceed in a constant
course of inconsistency. Infants are received into the church, and as they grow
in years, they grow out of it again. One part of their practice contradicts the
other, and so all goes on in peace and quietness.

4. Hence it appears that the Jewish church was not in all respects the same
with the gospel church. There seems to have been a sort of persons in the
Jewish church, which must not be received into the gospel church -- Such are
infants, who were in covenant and were an holy seed, but they must not be
received into the gospel church, as already has been shown. And there is a sort
of persons admitted by the gospel church, which were not admitted by the Jewish
church, such are eunuchs, who were never circumcised, nor allowed to enter into
the congregation of the Lord. The olive tree (Romans xi.) so often opposed to
what is now advanced, is thus naturally explained by Mr. Glass -- 'seeing
Israel after the flesh became a people by virtue of the promise of Christ to
their fathers, as their seed, Christ that seed, as he stood in that promise,
was the root from whence they grew; and so they became a holy people, according
to their natural and fleshly connection with that root. This, the same root
into which the Gentiles are grafted. The Jews could no more have place in the
root, but by faith now the promised seed was come to bless the nation, through
faith.' Therefore all, who now really stand in the root, stand there by real
faith; and all who are visibly in it, are there by visible faith; of which, as
now proved, infants are incapable. We have further confirmation of this
inference from a passage in the genuine epistle of St. Barnabas, written in the
apostolic age. 'But let us go yet further (says he) and inquire whether this
people (the gospel church) be the heir, or the ^^rmer (the Jews); and whether
the covenant be made with us or with them:' and then he proceeds to show how
Esau and Jacob, Manasseh and Ephraim, typified two sorts of people, with
respect to a covenant relation to God, and covenant blessings.

DISCOURSE II.
Acts ii. 41. Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized.


WE are now come to the second proposition. Baptism is in the room of
circumcision. How does this appear? The text commonly made use of to prove it,
is that in Col. ii. 11. "In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ." The circumcision of Christ, some say, means here the
water baptism of Christians; but why so? Is there no other way to explain it?
-- Yes, there is, and without tautology too. The circumcision of Christ
rendered him a debtor to keep the whole law. By it he freely obligated himself
to become the end of the law for righteousness to very one who believes.
Therefore it may be properly said that we receive the spiritual circumcision,
by the circumcision of Christ. Paul here first tells us what the christian
circumcision is, made without hands; then he describes it more fully, "in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh'; and then he tells us by whose
means it is, "by the circumcision of Christ." Now we find no tautology in all
this. The verse is plain enough, quite easy to understand. It speaks of
circumcision, not of water baptism; and we had better let it stand as it is,
and speak for itself. The Bible don't so often speak one thing and mean
another, as our errors naturally lead us to imagine. But it is said that
christians are called 'the circumcision'. Go then and offer sacrifice or
something in the room of it, for christians are called the priesthood too. If
it could be only proved that baptism succeeds circumcision in all respects the
inference would be undeniable that baptism should be applied to some infants.
But how far is this from being the case. Circumcision rendered them debtors to
keep the whole ceremonial law; it was not performed till the eigth day: it was
not applied to female children, nor to eunuch children, if their parents were
ever so pious. It was the token of a different covenant from that of baptism,
as already has been shown. Circumcision was the seal of Abraham's faith -- a
sure testimony from God that his faith was counted for righteousness; that he
was a fit person to be a father of the faithful, circumcised or uncircumcised.
But baptism is not thus the seal of Abraham's faith, nor of any other man's
faith. Now what shall we think of circumcision and baptism -- do they look
alike? do they resemble one another very much? Suppose for a minute that
baptism does succeed circumcision in some respects, what warrant have you to
baptize infants till the eighth day? What warrant have you to baptize female
children? What warrant have you to baptize eunuch children? If baptism be in
the room of circumcision, why did the apostles never make use of it as an
argument for the abolition of circumcision? At the council of Jerusalem,
mentioned Acts xv. in which the question was so particularly examined, whe^^r
circumcision must not continue under the gospel, why did they not angue and
say, there is no n^ed of circumcision now, for baptism has come in the room of
it. But they don't appear even to have thought of this argument. S^rely our
divines would have thought of it had the^ been members of that council. The
same argument is wholly omitted by Paul, in all his reasoning against
circumcision. He don't say that circumcision is abolished because baptism is
come in the room of it. No (...) he treats circumcision as he does other Jewish
institutions, the continuance of which he opposed. In reasoning upon them, he
don't lead us from one external ceremony to another -- from Jewish ceremonies
to christian ceremonies answering in their room, as so many teachers have done
since, to give Judaism a new vamp to destroy its name and retain its nature
(which has been one great source of superstition in the church of Rome) -- but
he leads us from the shadow to the substance -- from the priesthood to Christ,
from sacrifice to sincere prayer, and from the circumcision of the flesh to the
circumcision of the heart: We are the circumcision who worship God in the
spirit'; circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter
whose p^^ise is not of men, but of God. It may be proper (...) to examine the
third proposition. There were three families in the apostolic age, one of
which, at least, had an infant or some other person baptized on the ground of
the faith of the head of the family. The frequent mention of these th^^^
families, on that side of the question, proves nothing so much as the want of
better arguments. Suppose it were demonstrated that there were ^^^aned in all
these families of Lydia, the jailo^ and Stephanus, complete, evidence that
these infants were baptized would be still wanting; for by a common figure of
speech, the prevailing part of a family is called the family, and what is done
to them is said to be done to the family The same may be observed of nations
'which none can deny (say doctor Hemmenway) include persons of every age,' and
every character too.
; but what is worse, there is not the least solid evidence that there was an
infant in all these families. Lydia was ^^^a^ried for any thing which appears
to the contrary, and the brethren in her house were comforted. The house of the
jailor believed, but infants cannot believe -- for faith comes by hearing; and
the house of Stephanus addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints, but
infants cannot addict themselves to the ministry of the saints. In short their
argument amounts to this; -- there were three famities baptized, and there were
infants among them: -- Why? because infants are apt to be in-houses. Also the
characters of these families now mentioned, admit that no person in them was
baptized, but on the ground of his own faith. And after all, the argument from
these families proves too much, and therefore not enough -- It proves that,
when the head of a family believes, the whole house must be baptized, old or
young virtuous or profane.

Thus it is manifest, that neither of the three propositions appears to be
true. -- Infants are not visibly in the new covenant: baptism is not in room of
circumcision: and there appears not to have been one family in the apostolic
age, which had an infant or any other person baptized on the ground of the
faith of the head of the family. Some inferences must now finish the subject.

1. Hence it appears that infant baptism must have been the invention of man,
some time o^ other, having no command, no example, nor the (...) conclusive
implication, in its favor. There is one argument presumptive, and by some
esteemed conclusive, which must be noticed. "Why did not the Jews find fault
with the apostles for rejecting infant membership and baptism?" but the answer
is, "why did they not find fault with them for rejecting the seventh day
sabbath? Besides, in the apprehension of the Jews, Christ was an impostor, and
baptism in his name a profane rite. Why then should the Jews be so very u^ensy,
for its not being applied to infants? what (...) good purpose could be answered
in their view for christians to dedicate their infants to an impostor, in such
a profane manner? According to the represen^^tion of our opponents, when the
christians rejected the holy ordinance (...) circumcision, the Jews were about
to make great disturbance; but when they perceived that the christians
dedicated their infants to an impostor, by a profane rite, which he had
invented for them, they were quite content and satisfied.
But I hear a question, " When was it the invention of man? who was the
inventer; and who his opponents? Austin says that the baptism of infants is
what the church has always had, has always held. Pelagius his opponent did not
deny it; being very fond of this practice himself, and declares 'that he never
heard of the most impious heretic who denied infant baptism.' Strange! did he
never hear of Ternillian? did he never hear of the Manichees? And as for
Austin, we hear he maintained it to be lawful to tell lies for the good of the
church. But granting he meant the truth, he might take it only from Origin,
who, nearly in the middle of the third century, says, 'the church received a
tradition from the apostles to administer baptism to infants.' But exorcism,
sufflation, trine, immersion, bowing to the east, and the observation of
easter, all existed in that day, and some of them by tradition from the
apostles, as evidently, if not more so, than infant baptism. It may be well
known how exceedingly inclined superstition was in that day to shelter itself
under the wing of apostolic tradition. Therefore, if that early account of
tradition in favor of infant baptism will warrant the practice of it, the same
will warrant other superstitions also. Easter stands in history ^^^f a century
higher than infant baptism, and supported by apostolic tradition, but what
spoiled all was this -- The eastern churches said they were ordered by the
apostle John to keep it on the 14th, of the moon of March -- the western
churches said they were ordered by Peter and Paul to keep it the Lord's day
after. The contention was furious, and the effect was the excommunication of
the eastern churches. Now if it was so difficult within twenty years from the
apostles to determine what tradition was truly received from them, how are we
to find out at this day what tradition was truly apostolical? Ireneus, in the
second century says, 'Christ came to save all who by him a^^ regenerated unto
God: infants, little children, and women,' etc. regenerated they say, means
baptized; but why so? did Ireneus always use the word in this sense? No; not
even in the passage produced by our opponents to prove that he so used it. The
passage is this, 'When Christ gave his disciples the command of regenerating
unto God, he said 'go and teach all nations.' etc. But it do'nt appear that the
word regenerating here means baptizing any more than turning from darkness to
light means baptizing, when Paul was sent to the Gentiles 'to open their eyes,'
etc.
Did Ireneus believe that Christ came to save Simon Magus, the Nicolai^^^^^,
the Marcionites, and all those who baptized heretics, against whom he so
earnestly cont^^ded? No, says his treatise on heresies. Justin Martyr about
forty years after the apostles, says 'several persons among us sixty or seventy
years of age, who were made disciples to Christ from children have continued
incorrupt.' Children, it is said means infants The original is EK PAIDOON, from
children -- Dr. Hemmenway translates it in or from their infancy. Whether this
be a just and most natural translation, is left to the Greek reader to judge.
; but every child is not an infant, and Timothy from a child knew the holy
scriptures. Thus it appears that not a word of infant baptism is ^^und in these
two last testimonies. And, as these two are the only testimonies which can even
with the appearance of reason favor the cause of our opponents, in the two
first centuries, the inference is, that we have no account of infant baptism
till the third century, and then we own that this practice and godfathers both
appeared together; and, as if they were bargaining with their maker they
employed these sponsors and bondsmen, to be bound for them. It seems they knew
that some previous profession was necessary in the person baptized, -- infants
could not speak for themselves, therefore godfathers were employed to speak for
them. The very image of this now appears in the English and Romish church: for
it is asked of the infant, 'wilt thou be baptized? for whom the godfathers
answer, I will. Two friends once in company had the following dispute. Infant
baptism, if erroneous, said The^^^^, must have been a great innovation when it
was introduced -- who began this practice, and who opposed it? Infant
communion, answered Bruis, was a great innovation, who began it, who opposed
it? Theo. It is more easy to conceive how infant communion should arise from
infant baptism without disturbance in the church, that to conceive how infant
baptism should ^rise from nothing without disturbance. Bruis. When we arst hear
of infant baptism in history, we hear also the opirion that water baptism is
necessary to salvation. It is therefore no more difficult to conceive how
infant baptism should arise from this erroneous opinion without disturbance,
than how infant communion should arise from infant baptism, without
disturbance; and after all, the latter (...) opposed by Tertullian, the very
first person in history who spoke of it. And now sir, if you please, I would
propose to you a question. If infant baptism before Tertullian had ever been
the universal practice, his opposition to (...) must have been a great
innovation, and ne^ himself was an em^ent character, why was there no
disturbance excited against him at that time? Theo. The answer is not at all
difficult. Teriullian's innovation was only partial, he allowed the baptism of
infants when they were in danger of death. Bru^s. And my answer is no more
difficult -- When the practice of baptising infa^^ flist began, it was only
partial. Infants were then baptized only when they were in danger of death --
and who could be so cruel as to oppose ^^e means used to prevent their
damnation?
Now if infant baptism had all along been universally practiced before the
third century, why all this continual, universal silence about the matter, for
so many years both in history and scripture? Why was the scripture so silent?
Why don't we find in all the epistles one exhortation, at least, to children to
remember their baptismal vows, their covenant obligations. Several years after
the apostolic churches were erected, we find all their members addressed by the
apostles, from time to time, as children of the light; children of God by faith
in Jesus Christ; as beholding in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc. Surely
these addresses, made without slatt^ry, are very difficult to be reconciled
with the membership of a great number of young moralists admitted in the
infantile state, though their discipline were over ever so strict and pure.
Such excellent advice is common among us. Why did the apostles neglect it? why
did Ignatins neglect it, in all his seven devout epistles? why was this useful
exhortation, and every thing else which can even imply infant baptism, wholly
omitted by Polycarp, Clement, Barnabas Hermas, Justin, and in all that large
volume of Ireneus against heresies. In short, by every christian writer of the
two first centuries. They mention the baptism of adults very frequently, but of
the other there is not a word, not a whisper in any author of those times
Jewish, christian, heathen, sacred or profane: all is silence profound, not
only in the bible, but every where else (except now and then something which
strongly intimates the contrary) till the third century; and then it was a long
time before the practice can be proved to have been universal, if it ever
became so at all. Constantine, son of Helena, a zealous christian, was not
baptized till he was thirty years old; and Gregory Nazianzen, son of a
christian minister and educated by him, was not baptized till he came to years.
He himself once entirely opposed the practice, asserting expressly that
children should not be baptized till they are three years old.' And, as both he
and his father were influential characters in the church, it is utterly
improbable that they should be alone in this affair; the presumption is violent
that there were whole societies in that day of the same opinion. The council of
Carthage however decreed the practice (it existed before, but was never decreed
by a council till that time) as well as the time of it, as appears from the
testimony of Strabo, confirmed by their own result.

Such was the state of this matter in the earliest times And now approaches
that long and dark night of popery. Few, very few of the baptist persuasion are
any more heard of for several stupid ages, as our opponents have so frequently
and very justly observed. All the world practiced infant baptism, and (in other
respects not at all resembling our present poedobaptist brethren) wondered
after the beast. A little before the middle of the twelfth century, our
poedobaptist historians inform us, that some small degree of light appeared,
but they say it was soon extinguished by the barbarous crusades, which
destroyed or dispersed the bearers of it all over Europe. About the year 1130
Dr. Hemmenway says 'that a small sect of anabaptists appeared; but it soon
dwindled to nothing." And then all the world baptized infants again, as our
opponents have justly observed, and wondered till the 15th. century; and then
again appeared the light and the Lollards, and knowledge and the brabe
defenders of pure worship in Bohemia. But the reformation which should be
remembered with gratitude forever, was enjoyed about a century after, and
spread far and wide by the instrumentality of Felix Man's, Conrad Grebel, Mennon
Simonis, Calvin, Luther and others. Yet some of those reformers, in opposition
to the tyranny of that age, seem to have transgressed the limits of order in
Munfter and Amsterdam -- 'Oppression will make a wife man mad.' Question: 'Was
it not cruel in the poedobaptists of that time, to treat the leader of that
unhappy people so uncomfortably, and grieve so many faints in the Netherlands?"
Ans. What a c^^el question this is! Innuendo how unbecoming our polite age! our
poedobaptist brethren are not accountable for what was done in Munster or the
Netherlands. There were poedobaptists in the world long before the cruel death
of John of Leyden. And no deno nination of christians since the third century
(if the appearance of adulation may be pardoned) have excelled them in the
production of characters conspicuous for humanity, benevolence and piety.
and accordingly a number of learned and pious poedobaptists have ingenuously
owned what is now advanced Dr. Tailor says, 'that there is a tradition to
baptize infants, depends but on two witnesses, Origin and Austin, and the
latter having received it from the former, it relies solely on a single
testimony, which is but a pitiful argument to prove a tradition apostolieal.'
Mr. Baxter, a warm advocate for the cause against M^ Tombs, after the closest
examination o^ antiquity, was forced to this generous acknowledgment, 'I will
confess (said he) that it was long before all were agreed, either as to the
time or necessity of baptizing infants." Vives, one of the most learned men of
his time, in his commentary on St. Austin's City of God, says 'None were
baptized of old but those who not only knew what the mystical water meant, but
desired the same.' Mr. Daille tells us, 'that in ancient times, they often
deferred the baptism of infants, as appears (says he) from the history of
Constantine, of Constantius, of Theodosius, and Valentinian, in Gratian, and
also from the orations and homilies of Gregory Nazianzen and St. Basil on this
subject, and some of the fathers too, have been of opinion that it is fit it
should be deferred; whence it is that they (the papists) cannot endure the
mention of it at this day, and would abhor the man who should attempt to lay
aside the practice.' Walifrid Strabo, who flourished about the year 750, and
made the history of the church his study, and who doubtless read ancient
manuscripts, which are now lost, says 'In the first times the grace of baptism
was wont to be given only to those who had arrived to that matority of mind and
body, that they could know what were the benefits of baptism, but afterward,
christians understanding original sin, and least their children should perish
without the means of grace, had them baptized by the decree of the council of
Africa, for which purpose godfathers and godmothers were invented." The same is
owned by Bohemeus, Ribera, Grotius, and several others. What could tempt all
these le^rned and virtuous paedobaptists to till these falsehoods, if they were
such? And how plain is the inference, that history affords no such confirming
evidence in favor of the practice now opposed, as so many have imagined.

2. Hence learn the necessity of gratitude to God, and charity to our fellow
christians. If what has been opposed be an error, it is certainly an error of
the most learned and pious, if we may judge the tree by its fruit. Behold the
infinite kindness of him who gives to all liberally who are upright in heart,
and upbraideth us not with our follies. Let us beware then that we upbraid not
each other: bear one another's burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ. Close
communion with (...), and the refusal of the desk with our opponents, may be
accounted for without attributing either of them to the want of true charity.
Charity is love; and the more love any christian has, the more precious in his
view with be every apparent gospel truth. Hence he is grieved to see that which
his charity has tendered so precious to him trampled in the dust, especially by
a friend and brother -- Consequently the more charity he has, the more he is
grieved, and the expression of his grief, proper or improper, will naturally
follow. Therefore we sometimes see that greatest christians oppo^ing each
other, not because they have so little charity, but because they have so much.
Hence appears the difference, great as that of heaven and earth, between the
charity of God's people, and the catholicism of our age of reason, which
discovers no spiritual truths in our glorious gospel, and looks down on every
christian profession, on the Bible, and on the heavens with equal composure and
contempt.
Labor to find out the very important distinction between sentimental
difference, and personal enmity. Take care how you open your lips (...) the
terms hireling, priestcraft, scribes and pharisees, etc to please the
charitable deists, and reproach the true servants of Jesus Christ. Beware of
ridiculing or speaking contemptuously of the practice, which has now been
opposed, or of any thing else which any of our fellow christians esteem sacred.
Considering our own frailty of mind, and how very common it is for men
wandering in the wilderness of error to be full of vain confidence that the
path of truth is before them. There is a wide difference between this vain
confidence of the proud hypocrite, and that full, but humble persuasion of the
truth, which disposes the true christian to contend earnestly for it. Therefore
while we contend, let us study the things which make for peace, earnestly
praying for that glorious day, when the bright beams of Immanuel's glory shall
illuminate and harmonize the whole Israel of God, and there shall be no more a
prickling brier or grieving ^^orn in his holy mountain forever.

AMEN.

