THE CAVERN OF DEATH, A MORAL TALE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by and for WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, Green Sign of Franklin's
Head, No. 16, Chestnut Street. 1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE little Tale which fills the following sheets, has, in part, already
appeared in the Newspaper entitled THE TRUE BRITON. The attention which it
excited, has induced the EDITOR of that Paper to offer it complete to the
Public, the publication of the latter part of it in the paper having been
prevented by the constant succession of great and important events which it was
more peculiarly the business of a Newspaper to record.

If, in the detached and imperfect manner in which it appeared, curiosity was
excited in no common degree, the EDITOR flatters himself that in its present
form it will meet with the attention and approbation of the Public.

True Briton Office, No. 5, Catharine-Street, Strand, February 12, 1795.
THE CAVERN OF DEATH.
HOW awful is the approach of night amid these dreary shades! cried the brave
Sir Albert, as he traversed the most desolate part of the Black Forest. These
were the first words that escaped his lips, since, about midday, he had
entered that wild desert: and they were heard with satisfaction by Maurice, his
Esquire and only attendant, whom respect had for some time with difficulty
restrained from breaking the silence, which, interrupted only at intervals by
the shrieks of the owl, or the flutter of the bat, seemed to deepen the horrors
of that gloomy scene, and impressed on his mind a superstitious dread, which
had no visible object, yet rose to the most agonizing height.

"Ah, Sir!" cried he, what courage less intrepid than yours, would at this hour
of darkness thus rashly penetrate the recesses of this Forest?

I have seen thee bold in battle, Maurice, said Sir Albert: what mighty danger
do thou apprehend in this solitude, which thou can deem it rashness in me
to encounter?

"Such scenes as these," returned the Esquire, bring every deed of horror to
one's thought: in gloom like this, the Demons of the Air, and Spirits of the
Dead, have power.

My conscience is clear from every deed, said Sir Albert: which should make me
dread the vengeance of departed Spirits; and I trust that Heaven and good
Angels will defend me from the malice of the Powers of Darkness. For any mortal
foes I am armed, and fear not to encounter them.

Would to heaven I had turned my back, cried Maurice, before I had reached this
dismal place!

"And how could we have avoided it?" demanded the knight. Thou have thyself
been my guide toward the Castle of Dornheim.

I expected you would have reached it ere sunset, Sir, returned the Esquire:
"but you have rode so slowly" --

"It is true," said Sir Albert: my mind has been too much occupied with the
thoughts of her on whose account, as to thee only I have confided, I have
traveled hither, to leave me any leisure to recollect the tardy pace of my
wearied horse.

He was then beginning to relapse into his former musing; but Maurice, who, in
the sound of a human voice, had found some relief from the terrific phantasms
which haunted his imagination, was eager to engage him in further discourse;
and though already acquainted with the story of his love, yet, since he knew
the satisfaction with which on that subject his master would always enlarge, he
would not miss the opportunity of introducing it.

"Did you not tell me, Sir," said he, that it was three years since last you
saw the Lady Constance?

"It is more," replied Sir Albert. My heart would persuade me I had been
separated from her during countless ages. -- Ah! could I but know with what
aspect she would review me!

"It is impossible, Sir," said Maurice, that to merit and constancy like yours,
she can be insensible.

"While I was at a distance from her," said Sir Albert, I was pleased at being
thus flattered; my own heart flattered me. I knew indeed, that for me she had
never acknowledged any affection; but I knew that toward all others she had
shown the most marked indifference; and even from the solicitude with which she
would often shun me, I could then draw a favorable inference, since, had she
not been conscious that I adored her, she could have had no cause to treat me
with less courtesy than others; and love so carefully concealed as mine, what
but reciprocal love could have discovered? What other motive, have I vainly
fancied, could have so frequently suffused her check with blushes, if I gazed
on her, perhaps too eagerly? What else could have occasioned her emotion when
we parted? Had I been indifferent to her, would she not -- after so long an
acquaintance with me, would she not have bidden me adieu? But the unfinished
sentence died upon her lips; and, though she hasted from my presence, I had
seen the tear that was starting from her eye. -- Sir Albert paused, and was for
some moments lost in the tender recollection; but presently recovering himself
-- "Such," said he, have been the ideas which have enabled me to live, while I
have been exiled from her presence; but, now that I approach her dwelling, now
that my heart once more beats with the expectation to review her, I dare no
longer cherish these flattering illusions. If I have deceived myself, how cruel
will be my disappointment! And though my fondest hopes should have been just,
should she have returned my tenderest affection* yet, after so long a
separation, dare I believe that I still retain a place in her remembrance? May
not some Lover, more worthy to possess her, have long ere this effaced every
trace of me from her heart?

"I have often wondered, Sir," said Maurice, how, with so strong an attachment
to the Lady Constance, you could resolve to quit Prague, where she resided,
without declaring to her your sentiments and endeavoring to obtain the avowal
of hers.

"I have told thee, Maurice," returned Sir Albert, that I had rather have died
than have engaged her whose happiness I prized above my own, to share the
fortunes of a man who had so little prospect of being able to place her in a
rank worthy of her merit. -- I not now entertain any such presumptuous views: I
wish but to see her: of what further I desire, my own heart is unconscious.
Perhaps, since my Sword has purchased me some portion of renown; since I have
received the honor of Knighthood from the imperial Frederick Barbarossa, and
have acquired several noble friends who have promised me their services --
perhaps, at some future period, I may find myself in a situation -- But I have
already said I will not indulge these thoughts. How far distant, Maurice, is
the Castle of Hertzwald, where she now resides, from that of the Baron of
Dornheim?

"It is little more than a league," replied the Esquire. I was frequently there
while I dwelt at the Castle of Dornheim. It was then occupied by her Uncle; at
whose death, a few months since, it devolved to her Father.

Another interval of silence now ensued; but Maurice, again solicitous to break
it -- Did you never, Sir, acquaint Lord Frederic with your love? said he.

"No, never," replied Sir Albert; for though, from the time when it was my
fortune to save his life in battle he always professed for me the warmest
friendship, yet his own insensibility to the softer passions, deterred me from
placing in him the same confidence on that subject as I readily should on any
other. It was by accident that he mentioned to me the arrival of the Father of
Constance to settle so near the Castle of Dornheim, whither he had before so
frequently invited me. Had he ever experienced a passion like mine. I have
often since reflected, that the eager emotion with which I then accepted his
invitation might sufficiently have discovered to him the secret of my soul.

"From his childhood," said Maurice, Lord Frederic was ever of a haughty and
violent temper -- a stranger to tenderness and pity; and, though I had received
from him many favors and was yet more secure of the protection of the Baron
his Father, I account myself fortunate in my removal from -- But whence this
sudden stream of light upon our paths?

"Is it not the moon emerging from behind a cloud?" said Sir Albert.

"The moon is already set," returned the Esquire, trembling with renewed fears.

Sir Albert looked up -- the thick interwoven branches of the trees in that
spot obstructed his view; but, advancing a few paces to a more open place, he
perceived a small black cloud, which seemed to hang lower than the rest, and
hovered over his head with a tremulous motion, from the broken edges of which
darted forth flashes of light sufficiently strong to dissipate the darkness,
which by this time completely overspread the earth. Sir Albert gazed on it with
wonder, and with that awe which any supernatural appearance necessarily
impresses on the mind. The terrified Maurice dropped the reins, and in
speechless agony expected some event of horror. -- Presently they heard in the
air a loud shriek, which seemed uttered by no mortal voice; and at the same
moment the clouds burst asunder; and while the darker parts faded away, and
mixed with the surrounding air, all the rays of light which had streamed from
it, seemed to unite in one large ball of fire, and, descending toward the
earth with a rapid course, sunk amid a thick cluster of trees, and still
continued to gleam behind their branches. Sir Albert instantly spurred forward
his horse, and hastened toward the spot. Maurice, with a trembling voice,
urged him to forbear; but regardless of his fears the Knight advanced, and,
forcing a passage through the trees, saw that the Meteor still appeared
suspended over the entrance of a deep dark Cavern, which was illuminated by its
splendor: but ere he could come quite up, it sunk into the abyss, and every
object was enveloped in a thicker darkness than before.

Sir Albert, for some moments, hesitated how to act: his mighty courage, which
always impelled him to attempt every perilous adventure, strongly urged him to
enter the Cavern, and explore the mystery which some inward and inexplicable
prepossession concurred with the appearance of the Meteor to persuade him he
should discover within its recesses; yet the darkness of the night, which
seemed to preclude the possibility of such a discovery, and the probability
that the Cavern might be the abode of savage beasts or venomous serpents, to
whose fury should he, in that dismal place, expose himself, he might perish
ingloriously, the victim of an unjustifiable temerity, at last determined him
to defer the attempt till the morrow, when he purposed to return with lights;
and for the present to pursue his journey to the Castle of Dornheim, where he
was already apprehensive he should arrive too late for admittance. On returning
to Maurice, he found him so overcome with terror, that he seemed scarcely to
retain his senses: he talked wildly of a Spirit who pursued him, and of voices
issuing from the Cavern. Sir Albert, though seldom moved to anger by any
trivial cause, was at last impatient of fears he deemed so groundless, and
reproved his folly with a harshness which seemed in some degree to recall him
to himself.

They had not proceeded far, before they discovered a light through the trees;
Maurice started, and would have turned back; for the Meteor still haunted his
imagination, and left him no recollection of the vicinity of the Castle of
Dornheim, whence Sir Albert concluded the light to proceed, and he soon found
that his conjecture was just. On approaching nearer, he perceived that the
whole front of the Castle was illuminated; and, amid many voices which he heard
within its walls, he could distinguish the strains of mirthful music. Though
the soul of Sir Albert was little disposed to share in this apparent festivity,
he was pleased to find that the drawbridge was not yet raised, nor the porter
retired to rest; which had he found to be the case, it had been his intention
rather to take up his lodging for that night in the Forest, than to disturb the
family at an unseasonable hour. On sounding a horn which was suspended by the
gate, it was instantly unbarred, and a Seneschal came forth, and invited him to
enter, telling him, that on that day admittance was free to all. Sir Albert
could not but demand what prosperous event was the occasion of the rejoicing
which he perceived in the Castle. The Seneschal replied, that it was to
celebrate the approaching nuptials of the Baron with a Lady whom he had for
some time courted, and which, it had been that morning settled, should take
place in three days time. The Knight then demanded to speak with Lord Frederic;
he was conducted into a spacious apartment, where he had not waited long before
Lord Frederic came.

Sir Albert, having raised the vizor of his casque, advanced to accost him; but
he no sooner recognized the Knight, than, not allowing him time to speak, he
embraced him with an eagerness sufficiently expressive of his joy. "Is it
possible, my friend!" cried he, that I behold thee here? Thy arrival at this
juncture was the object of my most ardent wishes; it was an happiness to which
my hope durst scarce aspire.

I consider so kind a welcome, my Lord! replied Sir Albert, as an additional
proof of your friendship toward me; and it enhances the pleasure this meeting
has afforded me.

Ascribe not my joy to friendship only, replied Lord Frederic: my own interest
has too principal a share in it. -- To see thee at any time I should rejoice;
but now, when to valor like thine I may owe the felicity of my life, thy
fortunate arrival has recalled me from desperation.

"What mean you, my Lord?" said the Knight; what cause can have reduced you to
despair? and in what manner can I be so happy as to serve you?

It is not now a season to explain myself more fully, said Lord Frederic: among
the crowds who now enter promiscuously every apartment in the Castle, I know
not who may over-hear me. Tomorrow morning we will walk together in the Forest.
Meanwhile I will lead thee to the feast: after thy journey hither, refreshment
may be welcome to thee; but, amid the sports and folly of my Father's servile
train, let the recollection of our mutual amity possess thy mind; and let me
find thee tomorrow, as thou have ever hitherto appeared to me, a friend on
whom I may rely.

The words of Lord Frederic, and still more the agitation of his manner,
surprised and alarmed Sir Albert: he renewed his assurances of his readiness to
serve him, and they walked together to the Great Hall of the Castle. Lord
Frederic there presented his newly arrived friend to his father, who was
encircled by a crowd of the guests who were come to partake of his festival.
The Baron on hearing his name announced, turned hastily round; but, instead of
bidding him welcome, he for some moments regarded him and continued silent.

Sir Albert, who had expected a different reception, was in some degree
confused at this; and Lord Frederic, visibly offended at his father's coldness
toward friend to whom he owed so much -- "I thought, my Lord," said he, I had
already informed you, that it was this valiant Cavalier who exposed his own
life to the most imminent danger, to rescue me from the enemies against whom,
wearied, and fainting with loss of blood, I was no longer able to defend myself.

And I will eagerly embrace every opportunity, my Son! returned the Baron,
starting as if from a deep musing, to prove to him and to the world, how dearly
I prize that life which he then preserved. -- Most valiant Sir! continued he,
addressing himself to Sir Albert, I must entreat your forgiveness, if, at the
moment of your approach, my thoughts were so far engrossed by other matters,
that I did not, immediately on the mention of your name, recollect the vast
obligation I was under to you. It is with unfeigned joy that I embrace the
deliverer of my Son, and personally express to him the gratitude and esteem
which I long have borne him. You are most welcome to my Castle; and I flatter
myself that you will show, by the length of your abode in it, your persuasion
of the satisfaction your presence affords me.

Sir Albert made a suitable reply to this compliment; and, after a few more
expressions of courtesy, the Baron entreated him to disarm. The Knight at first
refused; but on being further pressed, he complied; and retiring to a private
chamber, he was attended by his own Esquire, and by one of the domestics of the
Castle, who, by the Baron's command, brought him a rich robe to put on, after
he should have quitted his arms.

As Maurice was unbuckling his corslet. Sir Albert perceived that his hand
trembled -- "Thou have not yet," said he, recovered from the terror which
seized thee in the Forest.

The Esquire acknowledged he had not.

Did you meet with any alarming adventure there, Sir? said the Baron's domestic.

We passed near the mouth of a Cavern, returned Sir Albert: what terrific
visions Maurice might behold there, himself can best inform you.

"The mouth of a cavern?" exclaimed the domestic; "and near this Castle?"

"Scarce a furlong distant," replied the Knight.

And did you then see nothing there, Sir? rejoined, the other.

What should you suppose me to have seen? demanded Sir Albert, with some
emotion.

So many sights of terror have been seen in that spot, returned the domestic,
that it is long since any of us have dared to approach it. That Cavern is
assuredly the habitation of the Infernal Spirits. Sometimes there have been
heard in it hollow groans, or shrieks of anguish; sometimes, noises resembling
the rushing of torrents, or the rumbling of pent-up vapors. There is a report,
that some murder was formerly perpetrated there, and that it is the avenging
Spirit of the Dead who still haunts the place where he was disunited from his
body.

Were these opinions current, Maurice, said Sir Albert, during the time of thy
abode at this Castle?

I have heard some mention of them, Sir, returned the Esquire, paler than
before.

And how long is it since these strange noises and appearances were first
noticed in the Cavern? said the Knight.

"I have been told, Sir," returned the Baron's domestic, that the first
portentous circumstance observed there, was a light which shone round the mouth
of it, some four or five and twenty years ago, nearly about the time when the
Castle came into the possession of the present Lord. But I can aver nothing on
the subject with any certainty, as it is scarcely three months since I came
hither myself; and all the events of that distant period have been variously
related to me by different persons belonging to the Castle.

Thou, Maurice, came hither with the present Baron, said Sir Albert -- Do
not thou remember any further particulars? Did no tradition point out who this
murdered person was supposed to have been?

Some Traveller, wandering in the Forest, Sir, replied Maurice; but indeed the
murder was only a vague report; and the Cavern had been dreaded equally by the
neighboring people, from a period far earlier than that of the accession of
the Baron.

"Has this Cave any particular name?" demanded the Knight.

"It is called the Die Hole des Todes, is the name which it still retains; and
the neighboring Peasantry at this day dread to approach it, and entertain many
wild and superstitious ideas respecting it.
Cavern of Death?" returned the domestic.

Sir Albert made an end of attiring himself in silence; for this account of a
place where he had himself witnessed a circumstance which he believed to be
supernatural, had made a deep impression on his mind. -- His desire to
penetrate the innermost recesses of the Cavern was now stronger than ever: he
judged it, however, expeent to forbear mentioning the design he had conceived,
since he knew not who might have an interest in preventing the dire discoveries
to which he was inwardly persuaded it would lead.

As soon as he was ready, he returned to the Great Hall, where the Baron and
his Son received him with new demonstrations of joy. A magnificent banquet was
now spread. The Baron placed Sir Albert in the most honorable seat, nearest
himself, and treated him as a guest of the highest distinction. Sir Albert,
however, could not but observe, that from time to time he fixed his eyes on him
with a remarkable intentness, but they were instantly averted if his
encountered them. For Lord Frederic, his stern and frowning brow sufficiently
expressed the disturbance of his mind; he joined in no discourse with any of
the guests; and if ever a momentary smile dispelled the gloom of his
countenance, it was when he looked toward his newly arrived friend. As Sir
Albert extended his hand across the table the luster of a ring he wore on his
finger caught the Baron's eye. He praised its richness, and requested
permission to view it more closely. Sir Albert immediately took it off, and
presented it to him. It was a large ruby, encircled with brilliants. The Baron
examined it with great attention, and declared the ruby to be the most valuable
he had ever seen.

"I am myself, Sir Knight," added he, well skilled in jewels; and you have
shown yourself to be equally so, by the purchase of so fine a stone.

"I assure you my Lord," returned Sir Albert, I am totally unqualified to judge
of its value: it bears, indeed, an high one to me -- not on account of its own
richness, but because it is the only relic I retain of my deceased Father.

The Baron again praised the beauty of the ring, and returned it to its owner.

The banquet was not ended till a very late hour. At last, when it was almost
morning, the guests departed, well satisfied with the hospitality they had
experienced; and the Baron himself conducted Sir Albert to the chamber he had
caused to be prepared for him, where, after many expressions of courtesy, he
left him. In his way thence he met Maurice, who was going to attend upon his
master. He immediately knew him, and expressed his satisfaction at his return
to the Castle.

"I was sorry," added he, that you should receive any cause for displeasure in
the service of my Son: but though you chose to quit him, you may remain assured
of my friendship and protection.

The Esquire thanked him for this assurance; and the Baron, telling him he
would gladly speak further with him, desired him to repair to his apartment in
the morning, as early as he should rise.

Maurice then attended his master, who soon dismissed him, and retired to rest;
but it was long before sleep closed his eyes. Lord Frederic's mysterious
expressions and visible melancholy, rendered him anxious for further discourse
with him; but he was yet more impatient to enter the Cavern, of which such
strange accounts had been given him. He lost himself in vain conjectures
respecting the cause of the noises and extraordinary appearances reported to
proceed from it, and was persuaded that some deed of horror had been
perpetrated there; though, had it not been for what he had himself observed, he
might probably have treated the whole as the vision of the idle superstition of
the peasants. At last his thoughts, seldom so long diverted from the object of
his dearest affections, returned into their usual channel: the idea of his
vicinity to the dwelling of the Lady Constance possessed itself of his soul,
and left him no recollection of any thing beside. His imagination seemed
already to have exhausted every possible circumstance which might attend their
meeting; yet he continued retracing each fond idea, till, overcome by weariness
and watching, he at last fell into a slumber.

His dreams did not correspond with this latest subject of his meditations:
they were dismal, mysterious and terrific. -- He imagined himself again seated
at the Baron's festive board; the strains of music again sounded in his ears;
mirth sparkled in the eyes of every guest, and the light of innumerable
tourches diffused an artificial day: when suddenly their brightness was
eclipsed by the interposition of a dark shadow, which skimmed along the table,
and sometimes seemed to rest hovering over the center of it. Sir Albert and all
the guests looked up, and beheld a most hideous Spectre, of a gigantic size,
traversing the air above their heads with a slow and melancholy flight; his
stern and threatening aspect appalled every heart. As they regarded him, an
hollow voice proclaimed,

-- "The fated hour is come!
"And the fell powers of vengeance are abroad!"
The Castle shook from its foundations: tht Spectre waved his wings, and
immediately a thick mist arose, which in a few moments enveloped all who were
present. Sir Albert could no longer distinguish any object; but, amid the
general darkness, his ears were thrice assailed with skrieks of horror. On a
sudden, a vivid ray of light streamed from the East upon the spot on which he
stood; he turned his eyes, and beheld a cloud resembling that which the
preceding evening had directed his steps to the Cavern of Death; and by degrees
he discerned, seated in the midst, a warrior, clad in refulgent arms, and
bearing on his breast the ensign of the cross. The radiance which surrounded
him dispersed the mist and Sir Albert found, that of all the company who had
been assembled at the feast, himself alone remained. The horrible Spectre had
also disappeared at the approach of this less terrific phantom, who, descending
from the cloud, and regarding Sir Albert with a look of celestial benignity,
extended his arms to embrace him. Sir Albert with an emotion which he had never
before experienced, hastened toward him; but no sooner did the Phantom meet
his touch, than its substance seemed to fade away; its shining arms dropped
off, and the Knight perceived that he had folded a skeleton to his breast. --
He started, and unclosed his arms with horror! yet it fell not to the ground;
but, waving in the air a bloody sword, which at first it had not weilded, it
distinctly uttered, in a thin faint voice these words:

"From this cold hand thou must receive this sword,
"Ere I can be avenged, or thou restored!"
And immediately vanished.

The horror it had inspired awoke Sir Albert. A dewy chill had invaded his
limbs; -- for some moments he scarce durst raise his eyes, left they should
meet some shape of terror; and the fear which now possessed his soul, was
perhaps the more painful to him, because it was the first time he had ever
experienced its power. By degrees, he became sensible that it had no other
object than a dream; but though he then soon shook it off, yet still the
impression continued which that dream had made on his mind; and he was
persuaded that it was some vision of mysterious import, and not any common
creation of fancy, which had thus deeply moved him. -- The morning was now far
advanced. Sir Albert rose, seated himself by the window, and mused. The words
of the apparition, who had so suddenly assumed a form so ghastly, still
resounded in his ears; and he felt a strong conviction that some event of
futurity would unfold to him their oracular meaning. He was unable to guess who
the person should be whose spirit thus seemed to call for vengeance; yet he was
sometimes inclined to suppose it might be the same whom popular report averred
to have been murdered in the Cavern of Death.

His thoughts were still wholly occupied by conjectures on this subject, when a
message was brought to him from the Baron, inviting him to breakfast with him
in his apartment. He complied, and found the Baron alone, and was received by
him with the warmest expressions which courtesy could dictate. The compliments
he paid to his character, and former heroic actions, were indeed such as gave
pain rather than pleasure to Sir Albert, whose modesty was such as rendered all
praises of himself extremely irksome to him. He therefore availed himself of
the earliest opportunity to turn the discourse on other subjects, and readily
answered such questions as the Baron put to him, relative to the countries he
had visited in his travels. He asked him, at last, of what place he was a
native?

I was born in the city of Prague, my Lord, returned the Knight.

"Was your Father, then a Bohemian?" demanded the Baron.

"It may seem strange, my Lord," replied Sir Albert, to say, that I know not
with any certainty what was my Father's country: my Mother, Isabella Von
Glatzdorff, was of one of the most ancient families in Bohemia; but I lost both
my parents too early to retain any recollection of them. I am only acquainted
with their misfortunes, and my own share in them, from the report of an Uncle,
to whom I owed my education.

"Your words excite my curiosity," said the Baron: may I enquire what those
misfortunes were, in which you were so early involved?

I can relate the story but imperfectly, My Lord, returned the Knight. My
Uncle, in his youth, assumed the cross, and engaged in the service of Baldwin
the Second of Jerusalem, at that time much straitened by his enemies; and in
the battle in which that Prince was unfortunately taken prisoner by the Turkish
Emir Balac, he was generally reported to have been slain; but fate had reserved
him for severer sufferings: he also had fallen alive into the power of the
Infidels, among whom he remained in a rigorous captivity during eleven years.
At last he contrived means to escape; but on his return to Prague, when he
expected to have been received with joy by his family, he experienced the most
cruel disappointment. His parents, and his elder Brother, were dead: the
latter, believing him no more, had bequeathed all his estates to a distant
relation, omitting to make any reservation in his favor, in the event of his
return. His sister alone survived; but it was many days before he could
discover the miserable place of her abode; and, when his search was at last
successful, what were the feelings of his generous heart, when he found her
bereft of reason, and supported by the charity of strangers? From them he
learned, that after the death of her parents, she had disobliged the Brother on
whom she was left dependent, by her marriage with Rodolph Von Fahrenbach, a
young stranger, of whom they could give no further account than that he had
distinguished his valor in a contest with a Bohemian Nobleman, who also
courted her favor; and that shortly after their marriage, he had quitted her,
to engage in a crusade, in compliance with a vow he had made previous to his
acquaintance with her: that he had been absent two years: at the end of which
time certain intelligence of his death was brought to her, the shock proved
greater than she was able to support; it threw her into a delirious fever, from
which, for many days, the utmost danger was apprehended; her life was however
preserved, but her senses never returned to her. She had been for some months
in this deplorable situation, when she was visited by her brother, who
immediately took her and me (who had not been born till after my Father's
departure) to his own house, when he employed every means for her recovery
which the advice of the ablest physicians could suggest; but his cares were
unavailing; the deep melancholy which continually preyed upon her mind, soon
threw her into a decline; and within a year after his return, she died, the
unhappy victim of despair. From that time, all the affection which my Uncle had
borne her, seemed transferred to me. He made many inquiries after my Father's
family, wishing to obtain their protection for me; but he could not discover in
what part of Germany they were settled. My mother, in a moment of phrenzy, had
destroyed all the letters she had received from my father, and indeed every
memorial of him, except this ring, which you, my Lord, last night observed: it
had been his first gift to her; and, till the latest moment of her life, she
would never suffer it to be taken from her finger. But, if my uncle failed in
discovering my other relations, he never permitted me to feel their loss. His
income was small; but he abridged his own expenses, that he might be enabled to
defray those of my education; and, as soon as I was at an age to bear arms, he
led me himself into the paths of glory. Unacquainted with my real father, I
always venerated this generous kinsman as such: he has now been dead some
years; but I shall ever respect and love his memory, and the sense of the
gratitude I owe him will remain with me to the last hour of my existence.

The Baron heard this narrative with much attention; and the various changes of
his countenance expressed how deeply he interested himself in the misfortunes
of the unhappy Isabella. Sir Albert observed his concern, and felt himself
under an obligation to him for it. They continued in discourse for some time
longer; when the Knight, recollecting the desire Lord Frederic had expressed to
see him, thought it time to go in quest of him: he rose, and bade the baron
adieu for the present; and with mutual courtesy they parted.

In a long gallery which he passed through in his way from the Baron's
apartment, he found Lord Frederic, walking to and fro with hasty steps.

What interesting discourses can have detained you so long with my Father? said
that impetuous youth: I have been here almost an hour, waiting till you should
quit him.

"I staid the longer with him," replied Sir Albert, because I expected you
would meet me in his apartment: as you came not thither, I concluded you were
otherwise engaged. I was now about to seek you; but I did not imagine I should
find you here awaiting me.

I could not just now appear before my Father, said Lord Frederic; my mind is
too much agitated to allow me to dissemble. But this is not a place for private
conference; let us go where we may discourse without danger of being overheard.
-- And, as he spoke, he took the arm of Sir Albert, and led him out of the
gallery.

They passed onwards to the castle gate: Lord Frederic threw it open, and went
forth into the Forest. -- Sir Albert still accompanied him; and neither broke
silence till they reached a deep glade, entirely excluded from all view of the
Castle. Here they stopped -- Lord Frederic quitted Sir Albert's arm, and
regarding him earnestly, "I would know," said he, whether I might indeed accost
thee by the title of my friend?

Can you think so meanly of me, my Lord, returned the Knight, as to suppose I
should ever afford him for whom I had professed a regard, any cause to question
its sincerity? I shall certainly never be unmindful of the many courtesies I
have received from you; and I trust I may appeal to more than words, to prove
the reality of the friendship I have borne you.

"It is true, dear Albert!" cried Lord Frederic; I have not forgotten that to
thy friendship I have owed my life, while mine toward thee has hitherto had no
opportunities of showing itself but in words and vain professions: hereafter, I
trust, I may be able to give thee more solid proofs of gratitude. But first, I
must again have recourse to the valor to which I am already so much indebted,
for a service, which, if it refuse to render me, it were better it had never
been exerted in my cause -- Life is only a blessing to the happy!

And what unexpected calamity, my Lord, said Sir Albert, can have rendered you
otherwise? Your perturbed looks, and many expression which have fallen from
you, lead me to apprehend some dreadful evil.

"But for thee," said Lord Frederic, and I must endure the greatest; I must
behold the mistress whom I love to distraction, in another's arms.

And have you then felt the power of love, my Lord? cried the Knight; -- but
who is your fair Mistress? and how can I preserve her to you?

"Before I disclose further, Sir Albert," said the youth, you must solemnly
promise me that you will assist my views.

It were unnecessary to bind myself by any promise, returned he, since, without
that additional tie, I shall undoubtedly act on this, and on every future
occasion, as friendship and the laws of honor shall require of me.

Lord Frederic pressed him further; but Sir Albert liked it not. His intimacy
with that young Nobleman had arisen, not from any similarity of sentiment or of
temper, but solely from their having been companions in war; and it had assumed
the name of friendship, since Lord Frederic, preserved by Sir Albert from the
most imminent danger, and therefore considering him as the bravest of men, had
eagerly courted his society, and had, on every occasion, professed for him the
highest regard. But though his unremitted courtesies had gained him a
considerable share of the affection of Sir Albert, they had not so far blinded
his judgment, as to induce him to concur implicitly, and without further
information, in the projects of a youth, whose impetuous passions, but for his
own more prudent counsels, would, he knew on many former occasions, have
involved him in the greatest indiscretions. When Lord Frederic found that he
persisted in his refusal to engage himself by the promises he required, he at
last ceased to insist on it, and, telling him that he would evince to him how
great a dependence he placed on his friendship, he proceeded to relate the
circumstances which had induced him to demand his aid.

"Thou may remember," said he that I was sent for by my Father from the
Camp, in a manner which led me to conclude that he had some motive of
importance for requiring my return. -- I came hither by hasty journeys; and, on
my arrival, was informed of his intended marriage, which I found he was
desirous of communicating to me in person, left, hearing of it from others, I
might be induced to suppose my own interests endangered, and to attempt some
opposition to his designs. I was the less surprised at this intelligence,
because I knew, that, since the death of his other Sons, it had been a constant
subject of uneasiness to him to behold in me the last of his race: I have heard
that he suffered himself to be alarmed by some prophecy or dream, I know not
particularly what, which had denounced some dreadful fate to his family,
whenever one male should be the only survivor of it. He never clearly explained
himself to me on this point; but he had often pressed my marriage with a degree
of earnestness which was very irksome to me, and had always appeared displeased
at the invincible reluctance I had discovered. When, therefore, he acquainted
me with his wish to present me to the Lady to whom he expected me to pay the
duties of a son, I attended him to her abode, not without some satisfaction
that he had rather chosen to offer her his own hand, than to attempt to compel
me to give her mine. But how can I express to you, Sir Albert! the sudden
change which, the sight of this peerless beauty effected in my heart? That
heart hitherto so insensible, in a moment confessed the power of her
irresistible charms. I had been too little interested in her to make any
previous inquiries respecting her; I had not been even told she was fair: --
judge, therefore -- if ever your temper, softer than my own, has felt the
influence of beauty -- judge what were my emotions, when in her to whom I was
introduced as to my future Stepmother, I beheld the most lovely creature that
the world certainly ever saw! With the idea of my Father's wife, I had
connected that of proportionable age; but here is appeared not to exceed my own.
Her form -- her eyes -- I cannot describe them, Sir Albert! -- If my hopes in
you deceive me not, I trust you will ere long behold her; and believe me, I do
not mean to under-rake your services, when I tell you that the sight of such
charms were laone a recompense worthy of them. The only embellishment of which
her beauty was capable, it received when I was presented to her; she was
desired to consider me as the Son of him to whom her hand was destined; she
sighed as she regarded me; and her cheek, before almost colorless, was
suffused with a blush, as she permitted me to take her hand, which, with an
eagerness which banished from my remembrance every idea of the character in
which the salute was permitted me; I pressed to my enraptured lips. She sighed
more deeply than before, and drew her hand suddenly from me; her eyes filled
with tears, and she turned away. -- I do not surely flatter myself, Sir Albert,
when I impute these marks of sorrow to the impulse of sentiments with which my
appearance had inspired her: she regretted that it was to my Father, and not to
myself, that she was promised, and it was her apprehension left this emotion
should be remarked by those in whose eyes it would be deemed a crime, which
made her so hastily quit a situation in which, if I may judge from my own
feelings, she would have found it so difficult to dissemble hers. It was
probably fortunate for me that her discretion, or perhaps her timidity exceeded
mine: I should questionless have otherwise betrayed to her Father and my own
the newborn passion, which, as soon as I had recovered from that kind of
trance into which the first view of her charms had thrown me, every motive so
strongly urged me to conceal. Yet I think some infatuation, rather than my
dissimulation, must have so far blinded their eyes as to prevent their
discovering it -- I have reason to be persuaded it has entirely escaped their
observation. The deep melancholy to which I have resigned myself, has indeed
attracted my Father's notice; but he ascribes it to my apprehensions lest my
interest should be endangered by this projected alliance. Nor indeed, where my
mind free from other cares, would it perhaps be easy on that head; for, were he
to have other sons, it were by no means improbable but that so young and
beautiful a wife might have sufficient influence over him, to induce him to
make such dispositions in their favor as would materially diminish the
inheritance I have been long taught to expect. But such considerations are too
mean to engage at present my attention. -- To attain the possession of this
incomparable Fair, I would joyfully resign any riches, any honors; but the
thought of beholding her in the arms of another, of seeing her sacrificed to
one whose age and gray hairs ought to have forbidden him to aspire to the
possession of so lovely a maid -- Sir Albert! it drives me to distraction!
madness will seize my brain, if thou deny me thy compassion. -- Do thou
hesitate? Can thou refuse to succor me?

I most sincerely compassionate you, my Lord! returned the Knight; and I must
grieve that you have resigned your soul to a passion which involves you in so
many difficulties.

"It involves me in no difficulties," cried Lord Frederic eagerly, from which
thou can not extricate me.

Is it in any plan for carrying off this Lady, said Sir Albert, that you
require my assistance? Let me entreat you my Lord, to consider coolly the
peculiar circumstances in which --

"I have considered," interrupted Lord Frederic; and I know that there is but
one possible means by which, without ruining my fortune, I can attain the
secure possession of my Love. -- It is to the Baron of Dornheim that her hand
is promissed by her ambitious parent. -- Could it be possible for me to elude
his vigilance, and to steal her from his Castle, I might be well assured that
the estates of my incensed Father never would be mine, but were that title,
were those estates now mine -- Sir Albert! can thou term thyself my friend,
and not recollect that thy hand might render them such?

Sir Albert started! he regarded Lord Frederic with a look of surprise and
apprehension, and read on his gloomy brow the confirmation of the fears his
words had suggested.

I would myself be Baron of Dornheim, said Lord Frederic, after a pause: Do
thou not understand me?

"I dare not imagine I do," replied the Knight, turning from him with horror.

"Had thou ever loved, Sir Albert!" resumed Lord Frederic, thou would have
felt, that to know in any man a rival, suffices to obliterate from the mind
every former sentiment with which he may have been regarded. -- I see thou have
understood me; that thou know I wish my rival removed, and that thou art
skocked at the idea of the relationship he bears me: but he is not thy Father!
-- I mean not to lift my own arm against him; but thou -- thou, who art my
friend, and who art bound to him by no tie of kindred or of duty -- when thou
considerest that the whole future happiness of my life depends on this short
anticipation of the fate which his years announce cannot be far distant --

What have you ever observed in my character, my Lord, said Sir Albert, looking
sternly round, which can authorize you to offer me this insult? Am I an
assassin?

Do not suppose me capable of insulting you, my friend! returned Lord Frederic;
I know your high sense of honor; and trust me, I would employ your valor in
no enterprise unworthy of it. Could the Baron be surprised at any disadvantage,
I should never have had recourse to your arm; among my own followers, I could
have found those who would faithfully have executed my purpose. But that were
impossible -- he never, even for a moment, is alone. I know not what is his
motive; I have not heard that he has any enemy of whose designs he is
apprehensive; yet his conduct is such as might induce such a supposition.
Throughout the day, some of his attendants are always with him; and at night, a
priest and two domestics constantly sleep in his chamber. This circumstance, as
you will perceive, must render vain every hope of surprising him; and, if he
has leisure to defend himself, your prowess only were a match for his. In his
youth, you may have heard he was a warrior of the first renown; nor has age yet
unnerved his arm. I know you would scorn to contend with an enemy of inferior
might; but be assured, my friend --

"Call me no longer such?" cried Sir Albert; I disclaim the friendship of a
parricide!

Lord Frederic was provoked at the reproach; but, having already so far put
himself in Sir Albert's power, he durst not express his indignation, but rather
fought, by new entreaties, to bend him to his purpose. Were my love less
ardent, said he, my schemes would be less desperate; but who, under the
dominion of so irresistible a passion, could forbear the only means of
attaining that felicity, which otherwise, within three short days, must be
forever placed beyond his reach? If I loved a meaner beauty, it might perhaps
be possible I should resign her; but who that adored the Lady Constance --

"Constance!" exclaimed Sir Albert, starting wildly: "Is it Constance?"

Constance of Hertzwald, is the Lady destined to my Father's arms, returned
Lord Frederic, if thou refuse, in pity to her and to thy friend, to rescue her
youthful charms from such a sacrifice, and to give her to a lover more worthy
to enjoy them!

And does the Lady Constance return thy love? said Sir Albert, trembling, and
scarcely able to pronounce the question.

"I cannot doubt it," replied Lord Frederic: I have never indeed received from
her lips the transporting assurance, since I have never been able to obtain an
interview with her but in my Father's presence; but one of her women, who is my
only confident, assures me that she is very averse to the marriage proposed,
and that many circumstances have rendered it very evident that she secretly
loves another. That I was the man so blessed, I durst not positively assure
myself till the last time I visited her Father's Castle; but then, her looks,
her whole demeanor, were such as it were impossible to misinterpret. She
seemed unable to avert her eyes from my person; yet if I, or any other,
appeared to notice the earnestness with which she regarded me, she was covered
with confusion; and many times a sigh escaped her, which still more strongly
spoke the tender sentiments which occupied her soul.

While Lord Frederic was thus speaking, the countenance of Sir Albert was
flushed with a thousand conflicting passions. Twice he laid his hand upon his
sword; and twice, even amid the transports of jealous fury, he recollected that
he was the guest of him on whom he would have drawn it; that he was himself
armed, and that his rival was not -- he recollected, and he was master of the
emotion.

"We may meet again, Lord Frederic!" cried he -- if we do, remember that we
meet no more as friends! And, as he spoke, he turned from him, and walked with
hasty strides toward the thickest shades of the forest.

Lord Frederic, astonished at his demeanor, for which, ignorant that he had
ever seen the Lady Constance, he could assign no adequate cause, stood for a
moment surprised. He would then have called him back; but Sir Albert only
quickened his pace. -- Fired with rage, he would then have followed him, to
demand an explanation of his words, and still more of the menacing air with
which they had been uttered; but he was now lost among the trees, and Lord
Frederic sought him in vain.

Sir Albert, mean-time, careless whither he went, walked on. He had fancied his
own passion hopeless; but, at the moment in which he had heard that Constance
loved his rival, he became conscious that he had hitherto flattered himself
with the persuasion that her heart was his own. When he had reached a part of
the Forest considerably distant from the spot where he had left Lord Frederic,
he threw himself heavily on the grass. and abandoned his soul to the desponding
thoughts which the discourse he had heard suggested to him.

Lord Frederic is then beloved by Constance! said he to himself: the modest
maid, whose eyes were cast down if mine too fondly gazed upon her, has looked
on him with tenderness! False changeful Constance! yet why do I accuse her?
what right had I to her affection? what encouragement did she ever afford to my
hopes? To the love which I never avowed to her, what return could I expect? --
Ah! why did I quit her without declaring myself? What idea could she form of
the strength of a passion, of which, even in her presence, I was sufficiently
master to bury it in silence? During the years that have elapsed since I parted
from her, perhaps she has never heard my name pronounced; and, if she has
afforded it any place in her remembrance, she has perhaps thought of me as of
one from whose heart the impression of her charms was already effaced; she has
fancied herself more assured of the affection of every casual admirer who has
told her she is fair, than of him to whom she is dearer than his life! -- Ah?
why did I quit her without declaring myself?

Sir Albert continued to dwell on this idea with infinite anguish, and would
gladly have given years of his future life to recall but a few of the moments
which he had formerly passed in the presence of Constance, when certain of her
indifference to every other, his heart had secretly flattered him she was not
without some prepossession, in his favor, and had not his generosity forbidden
him every attempt to improve that prepossession, he might possibly have gained
the love, of which one whose black and murderous designs rendered him so
unworthy of her, now boasted that he was the object. By degrees, as Sir Albert
repeated to himself Lord Frederic's words, a faint hope arose in his breast,
that the confidence with which that fierce youth had spoken of the favor of
Constance, might have little other foundation than his own vanity; but the
satisfaction which this idea afforded him, was almost instantly lost in the
recollection, that, whatever might be the state of her affections, the Baron of
Dornheim was within three days to receive her hand. He started from the ground,
and stood for some moments almost bereft of thought and reason. A wish
presently rushed upon his mind, to see her once more ere that fatal event for
ever tore her from his hopes. He had not power to deny himself that last
gratification; but determined immediately to seek admission to her presence, to
tell her that his latest breath should wish her happiness; and then, bidding an
eternal adieu, to his country, to join the armies of the Crusaders, and seek,
amid the swords of the Infidels, that death which would then be the only object
of his desires.

Animated by this design, he walked on; but he knew not which path would lead
him to the Castle of Hertzwald, and in that wild Forest he had little chance of
meeting with any one from whom he could obtain directions. He was provoked, to
think that he might possibly have taken a road which would lead him a contrary
way from that which he intended; yet he still walked on. At last he descried
some turrets through the trees: but much was he disappointed, when, on a nearer
approach, he knew them for those of Dornheim. He turned away with horror from
the abode of his rivals, and struck into another path; in which fortunately he
had not proceeded far, when he perceived a peasant before him. He hastened to
overtake him, and inquired the road to the Castle of Hertzwald. The man was
himself going part of the way thither, and offered to be his guide. As they
walked together, the peasant asked Sir Albert many questions; but his answers
were short, and often foreign to the purpose: yet when his conductor demanded
of him where he meant to lodge that night, it suddenly occurred to him, that in
the event of his not being so fortunate that day as to obtain an interview with
the Lady Constance, it would be his wish to remain in the Forest till the next;
and he asked the peasant whether he dwelt near, and would afford him a lodging
in his cottage? The peasant replied, that he dwelt not far from the spot where
they first had met; and readily agreed to give him such accommodation as he was
able. They soon came within sight of the Castle of Hertzwald: Sir Albert parted
from his guide, and proceeded toward it.

He knew but little of the Father of the Lady Constance, who during the time of
his former acquaintance with her, had been absent on a journey, and her Mother,
with whom she had then resided at Prague, was since dead. He was hesitating
what motive he should assign for his visit, when he observed a domestic at the
gate: of him he asked some questions, and learned from his answers, that the
Baron of Dornheim was at that time at the Castle, and was to dine there. This
intelligence was sufficient to deter Sir Albert from seeking admittance till
after his departure; for he felt that it would be impossible for him to command
his emotions in the presence of his rival. He therefore quitted the gate, and
determined to wait in the vicinity of the Castle till the evening. He began to
walk to and fro, often looking wistfully up at the windows, wishing he could
know which were those of the apartment of Constance. He meant to keep at some
distance from the walls; yet often some accidental shade on one of the
casements was magnified by his imagination into an human figure; and he hastily
approached, almost expecting he should find that it was the Lady Constance
herself.

At last, the reflection that he might be observed by the domestics, and
incursuspicion, induced him to quit the front of the Castle, and turn into a
path which wound behind it. The Castle of Hertzwald was much inferior in size
and strength to that of Dornheim: pleasure, rather than defense appeared to
have been the object of its founder. A magnificent garden lay behind it, fenced
from the Forest by a high wall, surrounded with battlements. Sir Albert walked
on under this wall, with no other view than to pass away the time till the
departure of his rival, whose happiness mean while, in enjoying the presence of
the Lady Constance, distracted his soul with jealous pangs. -- At an angle, of
the wall was erected a square turret, of which the windows looked out upon the
Forest. Sir Albert was passing by it, when a voice caught his ear. He looked
up; and a window being open, he could distinguish two female figures in the
chamber within; but their faces were not turned toward him. With an
involuntary curiosity he approached nearer; and could then hear, that she who
spoke was endeavoring to comfort the other, who was weeping violently, and
with many of the arguments so unavailing to those whose affliction is real, was
urging her to restrain her tears.

"Suffer me to weep!" returned at last a gentle voice -- it was the voice of
Constance; and the heart of Sir Albert instantly acknowledged the sound. -- It
was but to weep at liberty, pursued she, that I so earnestly sued for
permission to retire hither.

"You have never yet, Madam," rejoined the other, so totally resigned yourself
to grief as you do this day.

"This is perhaps the last time," replied Constance, when I may be permitted to
indulge my sorrows. Hitherto, indeed, they have been mitigated by a faint hope
that I might be able to move my Father's heart, and to obtain at least a little
longer respite from this dreaded marriage; but now that hope is lost!

But, if this marriage be indeed so hateful to you, Madam, said the other, "why
will you submit to it?"

"Alas! Elinor," cried Constance, how can thou ask me such an idle question?
Have I not already done all that maiden modesty would permit me, to avoid it?
Have I left any means untried to gain my Father from his purpose? Have not my
unwearied supplications repeatedly awakened his fiercest anger, and provoked
him to treat me with a harshness, which, but a few months since, I could not
have supposed I should have survived? Thou know how little he regards my
tears; and if today I have obtained this small indulgence to withdraw myself
from the Baron's presence, I have owed it rather to the fear lest he should too
plainly perceive, by my demeanor, my reluctance to the marriage, than to any
pity for my sufferings: but the Baron does know my reluctance to the marriage.
I one day collected sufficient boldness to avow it to him, in the hope, that,
if his soul were capable of any generous feelings, he would of his own accord
reject the hand of a maiden whose heart was averse to him; but I soon found
that I have judged too highly of him; and that the only effect of my avowal
was, that he pressed the marriage with greater eagerness than before, lest
delay should afford me time to devise some means of escaping it.

"And I still think, Madam," said Elinor, that those means might be found. You
are not watched -- why should you not fly from the Castle?

"And whither should I fly?" returned Constance. Were any place of refuge open
to me, thou may assure thyself I should he watched. What friend have I, in
whose protection I could trust? In what Convent should I find a secure asylum,
should the Baron of Dornheim require me to be given up? -- Thou know how far
his power extends. -- And what dangers more dreaded than death might I not
apprehend, should I, an helpless maiden, encounter singly the terrors of this
wild forest?

"I must entreat you, Madam," said Elinor, to forgive me for what I am about to
say: the interest I feel in your concerns could alone urge me to a question,
which I trust you will be too well assured of my attachment, to ascribe to
impertinence or curiosity. The Baron of Dornheim is not indeed a man who could
ever have been very likely to gain your love; but yet, pardon me if I imagine,
that, so submissive as you have ever hitherto been to the will of your Father,
you would not in this only instance, have expressed so much reluctance to obey
him, had not your aversion to the alliance proposed, originated in some
stronger motive than any personal dislike to your suitor. Though he is older
than yourself, his person is still handsome and his air noble; his conversation
I have heard yourself allow to be agreeable; of his character you have had
indeed reason to think unfavourably, since the instance you have mentioned of
his ungenerous conduct: but you were equally anxious to avoid the marriage
while he was only known to you by the report of your Father, who so earnestly
sought to prepossess you in his favor. -- May I then avow to you the suspicion
which I have long entertained, that, had your affections not been otherwise
engaged, the Baron of Dornheim would more easily have obtained your hand? And
may I presume to solicit you to repose in me a confidence, of which you might
be assured my fidelity were worthy, which would certainly greatly ease your
mind, and might possibly enable me to render you some service? --

Elinor paused -- and the Lady Constance did not immediately return an answer.
-- At last, If I had hitherto confined such a secret within my breast, said
she, "were this a moment to declare it?"

"This were the only moment," returned Elinor; another may not be allowed you!

"Thou say true!" said Constance, bursting afresh into tears: after
tomorrow -- Heavens! what a thought! -- after tomorrow, it will be criminal
to recollect that ever I have seen him? --

"I have then judged rightly," cried Elinor; but, Madam, since you have avowed
thus far, may I not ask further, to whom is it that your affections are so
deeply engaged?

"And what would it avail to tell thee?" returned Constance; -- I cannot! my
lips dare not pronounce his name.

Will you permit me to name him, Madam! said the Damsel.

"Thou can, not" cried Constance.

"And yet I have at times fancied I had discovered him," rejoined Elinor.

"Heavens! exclaimed Constance," and how have I then betrayed myself? What
unguarded expression has ever escaped me?

"Your lips, Madam," returned the Damsel, have indeed never betrayed you; but
of the language of your eyes you have been less conscious -- when last Lord
Frederic was here, you looked at him with an earnestness --

Is it possible I should have been observed? cried Constance: O! Elinor, durst
I have spoken to Lord Frederic! Could I but have asked him one question! -- I
had once almost collected sufficient courage; but I met my Father's eye, and I
dreaded lest I should inspire him with any suspicion. Methought, could I have
spoken with Lord Frederic apart --

Sir Albert listened, and the paleness of despair overspread his cheek.

It would not be difficult to find an opportunity of speaking with Lord
Frederic, said Elinor; -- "many such" -- Will occur in the castle of Dornheim,
said Constance impatiently; but it will then be too late. -- I cannot, it is
true, give my heart to the Baron; but, never, when my hand shall be his, will I
indulge it in any voluntary recollection of another -- yet, could I but know he
lived!

"Who lived, Madam?" cried Elinor; "of whom are you speaking?

Did thou observe the casque Lord Frederick wore that day? said Constance.

Of which the crest was a dragon with expanded wings? demanded Elinor.

"I would I could know," said Constance, how that casque came into his
possession?

And in what manner could that interest you? rejoined the Damsel.

Sir Albert listened more eagerly than before.

"If mistake not greatly," returned the Lady Constance, that casque had once
another owner.

To whom then did it belong, Madam? said Elinor.

"To one whom thou have never seen," replied Constance; -- to one whom I will
never see again!

"Was he then the lover who gained your affections?" demanded the damsel.

"He loved me once," said Constance, but he knew not with what sentiments I
regarded him. I was persuaded that my Father would never consent to our union;
and I purposely slighted him, in the hope of eradicating from his breast a
passion which could only render him miserable. It is now some years since I
have seen him; and by this time he has questionless forgotten me. I hope he
has; -- for my destined marriage would become doubly afflicting to myself, if I
thought that the news of it would give his heart a pang. -- It is impossible
but that he must have forgotten me -- yet I have not forgotten him!

And how can you imagine it possible he can have forgotten you? replied the
enraptured Albert, presenting himself before the window. -- Ah! loveliest
Constance! how little are you acquainted with the power of your own charms, if
you suppose that the heart which once confessed it, could ever know a second
love!

At the sound of his well-known voice, Constance flew to the window; but when
she beheld him, she trembled, and had nearly fainted; and, when she would have
spoken to him, his name was all that she was able to pronounce. -- He gazed on
her with a transport which left him no remembrance of any of the difficulties
which still remained to encounter.

"My adored Constance!" exclaimed he, how infinitely am I repaid at this moment
for all the sufferings of my tedious absence! -- though banished from your
presence I have been insensible to every pleasure; though equally unconscious
and undeserving of your, love, every anxious fear, every jealous doubt has
distracted my soul!

"But whence -- " cried she, with an hastening and interrupted voice -- how
came you --? in this remote Forest. I had not expected -- I thought you far
distant: -- what chance has brought you hither?

"My impatience to review you," returned he, was the sole motive of my journey.
I could no longer support the anguish of my separation from you. -- And at what
a moment has my happy fortune led me to this Castle! at the moment, lovely
Constance! in which your lips have declared, that, unworthy as I am of any
place in your remembrance, you have not forgotten me!

"Heavens! exclaimed she, and have you then heard what I have carelessly spoken?

Can you forgive me, dearest Constance? said Sir Albert: I expected to have
heard you avow your preference of my rival; the apprehension was too painful to
be borne; and I could not resolve to tear myself from the spot where your voice
first caught my car, till the dreadful certainty should free me from the
torture of suspense: -- from that I indeed am freed; and the fear lest I should
have incurred your displeasure by presuming to listen to your discourse, is now
the only trouble of which my soul is insensible. -- Can you forgive me,
Constance?

If you have occasioned me any displeasure, returned she, it has been by the
suspicion which impelled you to listen. I would not, methinks, that you should
have heard with what sentiments I thought of you; -- but that you should
suppose I harbored such for any other: --

Overcome with joy at this unexpected meeting, Sir Albert spoke freely of the
love which, for so many years, he had buried in unbroken silence; and the Lady
Constance, forgetful of the reserve which had formerly induced her to reject
even his most distant courtesies, acknowledged the affection with which he had
long since inspired her heart. She was, however, the first who awoke from this
dream of transport; she recollected her situation, and burst into tears. -- He
eagerly demanded their cause.

"Alas!" cried she, we have only met, that may the more severely feel the pain
of our eternal separation!

"Never! exclaimed he; never, my Constance! shall thou be torn from me!

"But how," said she can I escape the dreadful fate to which they destine me?

"Fly from their power!" returned Sir Albert: this arm shall shield you from
pursuit! -- It is not my own interest. pursued he, which could ever have
induced me to urge you to such a step. When I formerly knew you, encircled with
prosperity, I would rather have died than have proposed to you to share my
poorer fortunes; and had you but now given me reason to suppose you could be
happy with my rival, believe me, my Constance! no distraction to which such an
idea would have driven me, could ever have inspired me with any wish to disturb
that happiness. But, situated as you are, it is to rescue you from misery, not
to ensure to myself the highest earthly blessing, that I entreat you to fly
with me from him who would so unworthily avail himself of your father's power
to force you to the marriage which you dread. I know the delicacy of your mind;
and I know how unavailing the splendour of the situation to which the Baron of
Dornheim could raise you, would be to constitute your felicity. -- I can offer
you no riches; nor would I, even at this moment, my adored Constance! ask your
hand, could I any otherwise than by receiving it, be entitled to the character
of your protector. The Lady Constance listened, and her heart acknowledged the
generosity of those sentiments, of which the former conduct of Sir Albert had
left her no room to doubt the sincerity: yet she hesitated to comply. Never had
she hitherto disobeyed her Father; unless it had been by the involuntary
affection she entertained for him whose merits deserved her tenderest love, but
whose situation, she well knew, would preclude him from any chance in his
favor. And now to fly the marriage enforced by his commands, and to give her
hand in opposition to his will; -- she was alarmed at the idea, and her strict
sense of duty forbade her to consent. But Elinor, who had hitherto taken no
part in the discourse, now interposed, and in the strongest terms, supported
the proposal of Sir Albert. She urged every excuse which the peculiar situation
of the Lady Constance offered for her compliance; reminded her in how short a
time her escape from the Baron would be impossible; and placed before her in
the most odious colors, every circumstance of the projected marriage, which
she knew inspired her with the greatest dread. She even represented to her the
guilt she would incur by falsely plighting her faith to him, while she was
conscious of the impossibility of recalling her affections from their first and
only object. Against these arguments, against the persuasions of Sir Albert,
and the pleadings of her own heart in his favor, the Lady Constance was unable
to defend herself; she yielded to their force, and consented to entrust herself
to the protection of her lover. Transported at her compliance, he would have
had her instantly throw herself from the window where she stood, which was not
so high but that she might have done it without danger; for he was anxious to
avail himself of the present moment, as well because he feared lest she should
recede from her intentions, as because many circumstances might intervene to
render her escape, at any future time, less easy. But Elinor earnestly
dissuaded her from this: she said that many of the Baron's attendants were
wandering in the Forest, awaiting the time of his departure; and she was urging
many other difficulties, when Sir Albert himself recollected a circumstance
which obliged him to give up the idea; he had left his horses at the Castle of
Dornheim; and it was impossible for Constance to proceed so far on foot as to
the nearest town where others might be procured. He therefore concurred in the
arrangement proposed by Elinor, who offered, when all the family should be
retired to rest, to admit him into the garden, toward which looked the chamber
of the Lady Constance, who, on seeing him, should let herself down from the
window, and should be conveyed by him to his horse. Elinor entreated that she
might be the companion of her flight; to which she, with much satisfaction,
agreed. It afterward, however, occurred to the damsel that it would be better
if Sir Albert had the key of the garden, and were to admit himself; since then
she need not quit her mistress at the moment when her presence might be of so
much avail to support her spirits, and confirm her resolution; she could not at
that time go in quest of it, because it lay in the room in which the Baron of
Dornheim was entertained; but, as soon as he should quit the Castle, she said
she could easily possess herself of it; and she requested Sir Albert to tell
her where he might be found by her, when she should bring it to him. He
described the situation of the Cottage of the Peasant who had offered him a
lodging; and there she promised he should see her soon after sunset.

After a little further discourse between him and the Lady Constance, which
they terminated by the interchange of the most solemn promises of affection and
fidelity, the necessity of his hastening to recover his horses, or to procure
others in their stead, obliged him to tear himself from her. Ere he departed,
she drew a white plume from her hair, and threw it to him from the window.

"Wear this in your casque," said she: I shall distinguish it by the light of
the moon: and I shall fly without apprehension of mistake, to the only
protector in whom I would confide!

Sir Albert kissed the plume, and placed it in his casque. May I ever give you
cause to continue that confidence in me, my beloved Constance! cried he: -- And
be assured that I shall value this pledge of your affection more highly than my
life. Good Angels guard you till we meet again! -- till we meet! --
transporting thought! -- to part no more!

Even that idea did not enable Sir Albert to quit the window without pain; but
Elinor repeatedly reminding him of the importance of the expedition, he at last
complied with her instances, and bade the Lady Constance a final adieu.

It had been his intention to repair to the Cottage of the Peasant, and to
procure some messenger whom he might thence dispatch to the castle of Dornheim
(whether he had resolved he never would himself return) to order his Esquire to
hasten to him immediately with his horses. He deemed it unnecessary to make any
excuse to the Baron for his abrupt departure, since Lord Frederic, whose more
immediate guest he had been, might well suppose that it was in consequence of
their conference in the Forest: and he left it to him to place it in what light
he should choose, to his Father. His purpose, however, was anticipated; for he
was not yet out of sight of the Castle of Hertzwald when Maurice met him. The
Esquire expressed great joy to review his master; and recounted to him, that on
his not returning with Lord Frederic, he had been much troubled; and after
waiting some time without being able to procure any intelligence of him, he had
at last concluded he must be gone to visit the Lady Constance, whom he well
knew his impatience to review; and that he had therefore taken that road in
quest of him. Sir Albert commended his diligence, and imparted to him the happy
result of the conference he had with her, and her promise to fly with him that
night from her Father's Castle: he added, that it was his intention to carry
her to Vienna; and, as soon as the rites of the Church should have rendered her
indissolubly his, to demand the protection of the Emperor, whose former marks
of favor left him no doubt of obtaining it, against any exertions which might
be made by the Baron of Dornheim to force her from him; and he flattered
himself that the intercession of so powerful a mediator might dispose her
Father to an earlier reconciliation than could otherwise be reasonably expected.

While he was speaking he heard the trampling of horses; and he retired behind
some trees to avoid them. It was the Baron and his troop, returning to the
Castle of Dornheim. -- Sir Albert felt a degree of satisfaction, that he had
quitted that of Hertzwald without having had time to see the Lady Constance.
After they had passed, he walked on with Maurice; and enquiring of him for his
horses, the Esquire replied, that he had left them at the Castle of Dornheim,
not knowing his intention to return thither no more. Sir Albert ordered him to
go immediately and bring them to him at the peasant's cottage; whither he
hastened himself, imagining that, since the Baron was already departed, Elinor
would speedily visit him with the key which was to admit him into the garden of
Hertzwald.

His generous temper never open to mistrust, induced him to place a full
confidence in the interest she had expressed in her mistress's concerns. The
assertion of Lord Frederic, that one of the damsels of the Lady Constance was
in his pay, had not, in those moments of joy, recurred to his memory; nor,
though it had, would Sir Albert ever have suspected that damsel to be Elinor.
Yet Elinor had for some time been won by the gifts of Lord Frederic, to convey
to him private intelligence of every confidence her mistress reposed in her.
She had hitherto flattered him with the persuasion, that the Lady Constance
slighted his Father on account of the preference she felt for himself; and it
was with a view of leading her to an avowal of this that she had begun the
conference, which contrary to her hopes, had drawn from her the confession of
her love for Sir Albert. Disappointed by this, and still more by his sudden
appearance, Elinor had only listened to the discourse which ensued between
them, with a view of betraying their mutual interests to Lord Frederic; and,
having formed a scheme which she was persuaded would be very acceptable to him,
she possessed herself of the key, and set out, not for the Cottage where Sir
Albert awaited her, but for the Castle of Dornheim. She was closely veiled,
left any of the domestics of the Baron should know that she belonged to the
Lady Constance; and, as it had been her custom in former visits she had made
there, she inquired for one whom she knew to be particularly attached to Lord
Frederic, by whom she was immediately and privately conducted to his chamber.

On his return from following Sir Albert, he had found that his Father was gone
to the Castle of Hertzwald, whither himself had received no invitation; and he
had passed the day alone, freely indulging the wild distraction of his mind,
and forming new schemes of violence. -- At the entrance of Elinor, his
countenance was brightened by a gleam of hope; and he eagerly asked her what
news she brought him?

"Such, my Lord," returned she, as I trust when you shall have heard it all,
you will deem deserving of some thanks: but the first circumstance I must
impart to you, will be little welcome -- you have a rival, hitherto unthought
of.

"Who? -- what rival?" exclaimed he.

"Let me first, my Lord," said the damsel, request you to tell me whence you
obtained the casque you wore when last you visited our Castle?

I had it from a Knight in the Imperial service, replied Lord Frederic: he lent
it to me once, when I was sent upon a sudden expedition: I liked it -- was
lighter than my own; -- and I gave him another in exchange for it. -- But what
of that casque?

Was that Knight named Albert, my Lord? demanded Elinor.

"He was," returned Lord Frederic.

"Then know in him," said she, the favored lover of the Lady Constance.

Lord Frederic started from his seat in fury; he recollected the manner in
which his conference with Sir Albert had terminated in the morning, and he
wondered he had not before discovered what he was now so incensed to learn. His
rage vented itself in many horrid imprecations; and scarcely could Elinor
restrain him from going instantly in quest of the rival, on whom he thirsted to
avenge himself.

"Were you more calm, my Lord," said she, I could direct you to a surer
vengeance than, your sword could give you.

"What vengeance", cried Lord Frederic: tell me of vengeance, and I will listen
to thee.

"This night," returned Elinor, Sir Albert is to steal away the Lady Constance.
I know not whether she would have consented to this measure, had not I
persuaded her: but I overcame her scruples; and I have promised to admit him
into the garden, where she is to meet him.

"Thou, Elinor!" exclaimed Lord Frederic: is this the friendship thou did
promise me?

I shall leave that to your own decision, my Lord, replied she. Here is the key
of the garden-gate; and here is a white plume, which if you place in the front
of your casque, Constance will sly to you as to Sir Albert, and you may bear
her whither you will.

"My excellent Elinor?" cried he: in this device I recognize thy genius. This
will indeed avenge me on them both!

"Nor is this all, my Lord," resumed the damsel -- When once before,
unsuspicious of this pre-occupation of her heart, I would have counseled you
to propose to the Lady Constance a flight with you, to avoid the marriage to
which I knew she was averse, you objected the detriment which might arise to
your own fortunes, from an action which would so greatly irritate your Father.

"I care not for that now," exclaimed the impetuous youth: I would sacrifice my
fortunes, nay my life, rather than miss this glorious opportunity.

But you need endanger neither, my Lord, returned the damsel -- I have offered
to attend the Lady Constance in her flight; let me therefore return the
following morning to the Castle, and I will throw the imputation on Sir Albert,
with such circumstances as shall not only prevent any suspicion from fastening
on you, but shall determine both her Father and your own to wreak on him the
rage which the wrong they will suppose him to have done them will inspire. I am
going to him now, to inform him, as from his mistress, that she will fly with
him tomorrow night, instead of this: tomorrow, therefore, he will voluntarily
throw himself into their hands; and judge my Lord, whether the Baron of
Dornheim, believing him the rival who has robbed him of his bride, will prove a
reluctant executioner of the severest vengeance your fury could dictate to your
wishes.

However satisfactory Elinor had imagined the plot she had thus treacherously
laid, would prove to Lord Frederic, his transports still exceeded her
expectations.

He promised her the most boundless rewards, and as an earnest of them,
presented her with a rich jewel he wore on his finger. She received it with
much satisfaction, and gave him such further directions as she judged
necessary, with regard to the conduct he must observe, the more effectually to
deceive the Lady Constance. She then quitted him, and hastened to the Cottage,
where Sir Albert had long waited in anxious expectation of her. When he saw her
approach, he went hastily out to meet her, and demanded whether she had brought
him the promised key?

"Alas! no, Sir!" returned she, with a well-dissembled concern -- the Lady
Constance has sent me the reluctant bearer of a message, which, I fear will
greatly disappoint you: it will be impossible for her this night to leave the
Castle.

"Impossible!" exclaimed Sir Albert: O Elinor! what cruel tidings do thou
bring me! Will Constance violate her promise?

"Not willingly, valiant Sir!" replied the damsel; nor indeed are you to
consider this any other than a short delay of a measure in which her happiness
is, if possible, more concerned than your own. Tomorrow night you may assure
yourself she will be yours.

"But why not tonight?" cried he.

"Sir," answered Elinor, when, after the Baron's departure, I went in quest of
the key, I found that it had been removed from its customary place, and the
Lady Constance soon learned, with great disquietude, that her Father was gone
from home on some sudden business, and that, uncertain at what hour he might
return, he had taken with him the key of the garden, meaning to readmit himself
that way, without obliging his family to watch for him.

"But if he has taken the key," cried Sir Albert impatiently, why cannot I
scale the wall?

"Alas! Sir," replied she, and do you not then consider the danger of his
returning at the moment to surprise you? should he meet you in your flight with
the Lady Constance, what but eternal ruin to your hopes could be the
consequence? He would certainly attempt to force her from you; and, should you
defend her, think what would be her sensations should her Father fall by your
hand! Her mind is so deeply impressed with the idea, that I am confident, no
arguments you could urge, would persuade her this night to venture: -- but
tomorrow no such dangers will threaten you; and tomorrow you may depend on
her flying with you, to escape the tyranny of those who would force her to
espouse the man whom she detests.

Sir Albert was by no means disposed to content himself with this delay of his
hopes, but Elinor said so much, and with such an appearance of a sincere
attachment to his interests, that he was at last obliged to submit, and to
consent to wait till the following night. The damsel promised to re-visit him
in the morning, to bring him word whether he might safely attempt another
conference with the Lady Constance during the course of the day, and likewise
to arrange with him finally the mode of her escape. She then quitted him, and
went back to the Castle of Hertzwald; when to her mistress, who had longed for
her return, she accounted for the length of her absence, by feigning that Sir
Albert had detained her with innumerable questions respecting all that had
befallen the object of his love during their tedious separation. The deceived
Constance was pleased at every instance of the tender interest he took in her
concerns: yet, during the absence of Elinor, her resolution had begun to waver,
and her apprehensions of the guilt she should contract, by a marriage contrary
to the will of her Father, had almost determined her to stay, and suffer him to
sacrifice her happiness for ever. But the crafty discourses of the damsel
revived so strongly in her breast her horror for the Baron, and her love for
the valiant Albert, that she was confirmed in her former intentions; and with a
kind of dread lest further reflection should finally oblige her to renounce
them, she awaited the hour appointed for her flight.

She retired earlier than usual to her chamber; for her consciousness of her
intended disobedience overwhelmed her in the presence of her Father, with all
the confusion of guilt; and, unaccustomed to dissemble, she fancied that her
every look betrayed the hidden purpose of her heart. Had he conversed with her
with kindness, she would have found it impossible to command her feelings; but,
with more than usual harshness, he reproved her for the aversion she expressed
toward him, whom it was his pleasure she should espouse, and exaggerated the
passion with which her charms had inspired the Baron, in such terms as tended
only to heighten the disgust with which she thought of him. She heard in
silence; for she dared not trust herself to answer: but, when she left the
room, the idea struck upon her mind, that she quitted it, not for a night, but
perhaps for ever; and she burst into tears. In her own chamber she wept for
some time without restraint; while Elinor was busied in preparing such things
as it was expedient she should be provided with on her journey.

In the mean time the family retired to rest, and the hour approached, at which
Sir Albert was to arrive. The heart of Constance palpitated with expectation,
and her tears ceased to flow. Nor had she expected long, before she descried a
figure in the garden; his arms, as he advanced, glittered to the moon-beam; and
he was soon so near, that she distinguished the white feather in his casque. He
came under her window; and Elinor, apprehensive lest her mistress should
observe that his voice was not that of Sir Albert hastily desired him in a
whisper, not to speak, lest he should be heard by any one who might yet be
stirring in the Castle. He comprehended her meaning, and made her a sign of
obedience. For Constance, it had been unnecessary to enjoin her silence; -- for
the first time in her life, she was about to commit an action, of which she
doubted the propriety; and on that action the whole of her future fate was to
depend: -- her emotion was so strong, that it hardly left her the power of
speech; and she would even yet have receded from her purpose, and remained at
the Castle, but Elinor reproached her irresolution, and represented to her,
that if she neglected the present moment, escape at any future one would be
impossible. She had previously provided a ladder of ropes, and the trembling
Constance descended from the window.

Ere she reached the ground, her transported lover caught her to his breast;
she was offended at a boldness so new to her, and disengaged herself from his
arms, in a manner sufficiently expressive of her displeasure. Apprehensive of
too soon alarming her, he restrained his passion, and with a respectful air,
led her toward the gate of the garden, where a confidential servant was
waiting with two fleet horses. He vaulted on one, taking before him in his arms
his lovely and unsuspecting prize: his servant, in the same manner, took charge
of Elinor: and applying spurs to their horses, they sat out with the utmost
speed.

Meantime, the real Sir Albert, little imagining for what purpose his name and
crest had been assumed, had sat for some time, after the damsel had left him,
indulging his disappointment at the message she had treacherously brought him.
Maurice was not yet returned with the horses: Sir Albert wished for his
arrival, that he might have with him one to whom he could speak freely on the
subject which occupied him; and at last, impatiently rising, he walked forth
into the Forest, where for a while he strolled, disquieting himself with
inventing new obstacles which might arise to prevent the accomplishment of his
hopes on the morrow. The night was now set in, and its shades seemed to offer
some relief to the trouble of Sir Albert; for they revived in his memory the
reflections which had agitated his mind, when, at a similar hour, he had
traversed that part of the Forest the preceding night; and when he recollected
how invaluable he should then have thought the certainty which he now
possessed, of the love of Constance, he was ashamed of having so far suffered
the delay of the promise, which she still meant to fulfill, to prey upon his
peace: he endeavored to divest himself of every desponding fear, and earnestly
recommended the object of his affections to the protection of every Saint and
Holy Angel.

He then recollected, that, by wandering at so late an hour, he was detaining
from rest the peasant to whose courtesy he was indebted for a lodging; but he
had attended so little to his way, that he was at a loss to determine which
path would lead him back to his cortage. He was still hesitating, when he
descried at some distance, a light, glimmering through the trees. He hastened
toward it; but soon perceived that it was brighter than could proceed from a
candle in a peasant's window. Still he advanced: -- it seemed to recede before
him. Surprised and struck with some emotion of dread, he still followed it;
when suddenly it sunk into the earth, and Sir Albert perceived that he was at
the mouth of the Cavern of Death.

His dream, the strange accounts he had received at the Castle of Dornheim, and
the determination he had formed to explore the mysteries of that dismal place,
of which the various events of the day had suspended the remembrance, now
rushed at once upon his mind; the disappointment which had prevented his
quitting the Forest that night, now appeared to him the interposition of that
destiny which had reserved him for the discovery of some dire secret; and he
resolved immediately to attempt the adventure, to which the inward presages of
his soul so strongly impelled him.

The night was not dusk; but, in that spot, the thick shadow of the trees
diffused a gloom through which objects were scarce discernable; yet a few
gleams of light were reflected by a narrow but rapid stream, which having its
source in the innermost part of the Cavern, forced its passage through the
rocks, a little below the only entrance it presented to human feet. That
entrance, for many years untrod, was half overgrown by briars, amid which
screamed the birds of night. Sir Albert attempted to separate the branches; but
the want of a light embarrassed him; and, but a few paces beyond the, mouth of
the Cavern, the darkness was total. He judged it necessary to return to the
peasant's cottage to procure a torch: as he now knew in what part of the Forest
he was, he found the way thither without difficulty.

At the door he was met by Maurice, who was arrived then with his horses, and
who had wondered at his absence, knowing that it was already the hour at which
he had appointed to repair to the Castle of Hertzwald. Sir Albert acquainted
him with the alteration that had taken place in his schemes, and with his
intention to enter immediately the Cavern of Death. Maurice heard him with
visible consternation, and would have remonstrated; but Sir Albert interrupted
him --

"Be satisfied," said he, that I require not thee to follow me. Were thou less
superstitiously fearful, thy company on such an adventure, would to myself
diminish the sensation of awe with which my mind is even painfully impressed;
but coward as thou art, thou could afford me no assistance. Remain here with
my horses, and await my return. -- If no evil befall me, thou shall see me ere
the morning dawn.

He then went into the cottage, and demanded a torch. When the peasant heard
the purpose for which he required it, he expressed the same horror which was
visible in the countenances of all in whose presence the Cavern of Death was
named.

"Alas! valiant Sir!" cried he, what desperate project have you formed? No
human being has ever entered it, and returned to the regions of the living.

Sir Albert continued unshaken in his resolution. -- The peasant reluctantly
gave him a torch, and he returned alone to the mouth of the Cavern.

Though his soul was fortified with a courage which rose superior to every
danger, yet his imagination was affected by the various terrific circumstances
which attended the adventure he had undertaken; and if his ear caught the light
flutter of the leaves, or if the shadow of a branch, agitated by the wind,
waved across his path, he started, and for an instant fancied it supernatural.

When he reached the Cavern, he again attempted to disentangle the briars which
obstructed his entrance: but finding it difficult, he drew his sword, and with
that soon opened himself a passage. The birds, which had long been accustomed
to roost undisturbed among their branches, now roused, flew out in such
numbers, that Sir Albert found it necessary to retire a few steps, left, as
they all made toward the light, the motion of their wings should extinguish
his torch. When they were dispersed, he again advanced; and finding the passage
now clear, he commended himself to the protection of his Tutelary Saint, and
entered the Cavern. For a few paces he proceeded with his sword still drawn;
but his path soon became so difficult, by reason of the large fragments of the
broken rocks over which he was obliged to climb, that he found it necessary to
sheath it, that he might be at liberty to assist himself with his hand; and
indeed of no encounter with such enemies as it might avail against, had he, in
that place, any apprehension.

As he advanced, the horrors of the Cavern seemed to deepen. The chill damp air
froze the current of his blood: the silence was only broken, at distant
intervals, by droppings from the roof, encrusted with half congealed vapors.
At every step he trod more lightly; and if sometimes his foot slid upon a
smooth and slippery stone, his heart, at the sound beat with a quicker motion.
By degrees, he approached the bed of the subterraneous stream which he had
observed issuing near the mouth of the Cavern; and the death-like stillness of
the place was interrupted by the noise of its current, first, murmuring at a
distance, then, as his path wound nearer to it, roaring with impetuous fury
over the rough rocks which obstructed its course.

Sir Albert now found himself obliged to stoop, for the roof was too low to
permit him to walk upright. He advanced, and it became still lower; but, after
he had proceeded a few steps on his hands and knees, it suddenly widened, and
he found himself in a spacious and lofty part of the Cavern; though neither of
its extent nor height could he form any accurate judgment, for its bounds were
lost in impenetrable darkness. In that thick and obscure air, his torch cast no
light but on the hand which bore it. Only when he climbed the steep banks which
overhung the stream, the white foam of its waters enabled him to trace its
course, where it fell from a high rock in a broken cataract.

The deafning noise of the torrent filled the soul of Sir Albert with an
unknown horror: he descended precipitately from the bank, and retreated to a
rock, which seemed on one side the boundary of the Cavern; against which he
leaned, while his imagination, unrelieved by any visible object, and wholly
occupied in the recollection of his dream, was left at liberty to represent
him, now, the hideous phantom hovering in the dusky air, and now, the fleshless
warrior, shunning his embrace, and waving high the fatal sword.

Sir Albert did not long give way to these visionary fears, but strove by
reflection to recall the firmness, which, at no moment of real danger, ever had
forsaken him. He was ashamed of his weakness; and recollecting that no
circumstance which could authorize it had as yet occurred, he withdrew his arm
from the rock, and would have proceeded to explore farther when he felt himself
suddenly drawn back; -- his heart gave a fearful beat; he turned his head with
perturbation, but saw nothing near him; he looked eagerly on all sides, and at
last, concluding his own tertors had deceived him, he would again have advanced
from that spot, when again he felt himself drawn back; and instantly a Form, to
which even his fancy could assign no certain shape, flitted by him through a
chasm in the rock, which the darkness had before prevented his observing, but
which, when he approached it, opened to his view a long narrow passage, leading
downwards with a steep descent, at the further extremity of which he descried a
small red flame; it resembled the dog star, when he sets bloodily in a misty
horizon.

Sir Albert now summoned all his resolution, and descended the path. --
Hitherto, the ground on which he had trodden had been hard and rocky; but now,
at every step his feet sunk into a loose dry sand. Guided by the flame, which
grew larger and brighter as he advanced, he soon reached a small and nearly
circular vault, entirely illuminated by its radiance; and beyond this no
further path appeared.

In this spot, thus supernaturally pointed out to him, Sir Albert was persuaded
he was to meet the conclusion of the adventure. He crossed himself, and
implored the protection of the holy Angels; then, fixing his eyes on the flame,
which hung in the air considerably above his head, he observed that it darted
downwards, in a spiral ray, on a spot where the sand rose in a little hillock:
and he heard around him a faint sound, like the fluttering of distant pinions.
He regarded the hillock, and observed somewhat glittering beneath the surface:
he stooped, and removing a little of the sand, discovered the blade of a sword;
but what were his emotions, when he perceived that the hilt was grasped by the
dry cold hand of a skeleton!

The words of the phantom who had visited him in his sleep, were instantly
present to his remembrance: and he dropped keeling on the earth.

"Yes, injured Spirit?" exclaimed he; thou whom I know not by what name to
address, but who have questionless led me hither, and art now invisibly present
to my invocation! I receive thy gift! and I swear to allow myself no rest, till
the vengeance shall be completed, in which, though by what mysterious connection
as yet I comprehend not, thou have taught me to believe my own destiny involved!

As he uttered these words, with an awe which half checked his voice, he
extended his hand to take the sword; and instantly at his touch, the bony
fingers which held it, unclosed themselves, and left it in his grasp. At the
same moment the flame, with a vivid flash, disappeared; and a sudden whirlwind
arising extinguished the torch, and involved Sir Albert in an eddy of the sand.

His soul, already worked up to the highest pitch of horror, now fainted within
him; and he sunk on the ground, almost as lifeless as the ghastly form which
lay beside him. He continued for some time devoid of all sensation; and, when
his recollection returned to him, as he unclosed his eyes in total darkness, he
felt that his hand was laid on that of the skeleton. -- He drew it back with
hasty terror. -- He again made an effort to recover his fortitude; and, rising,
he listened to the rushing of the torrent, and hoped, by following that sound,
to find the passage between the rocks by which he had entered that recess. But
suddenly it was rendered visible to him by a light which streamed through it
from the outer part of the Cavern. He approached, and perceived several lights
moving in different directions across the further entrance; and he imagined he
heard the steps of feet, and the clash of arms; when, in an instant, a cry of
horror, uttered by many united voices, assailed his ear; and amid the
inarticulate shrieks of some, he could distinguish that others, exclaimed,
blood! a cataract of blood.

The Cavern now shook from its foundations, and the voices were at once lost in
a crash, which seemed as if the whole frame of Nature were violently rent
asunder. The sound was reverberated from the hollow sides of the Cavern in
repeated echos, which by degrees died away, and again no noise was heard,
beside the rushing of the torrent.

The lights had disappeared, yet still a faint glimmering remained, which
enabled Sir Albert to discern the passage. Still grasping the fatal sword, he
now reascended his former path, and, on issuing out into the open part of the
Cavern, he perceived that the glimmering he had observed was that of a torch,
which lay unextinguished on the ground. Rejoiced to recover a light, he took it
up, and soon discovered that the violent noise he had heard, had been
occasioned by the fall of a huge fragment of the rock, under which, on a
further examination, he perceived the mangled bodies of two men, whom its
enormous weight had crushed. -- Struck with new horror, he was regarding these
wretched victims, when he heard behind him a deep and agonizing groan. -- He
started! -- and after some interval, it was repeated. -- He turned, and looking
round, he at last descried an armed figure, lying prostrate on the earth. -- As
he approached him, this unknown person groaned again.

"Who art thou?" cried Sir Albert, bending over to regard him; and what purpose
led thee hither?

The stranger, at the sound of a human voice, half raised his head, and
discovered to Sir Albert the features of the Baron of Dornheim? -- Astonished,
and scarcely crediting his eyes, he stood for a moment silent; while the Baron,
on beholding, him, shrunk aghast! and again turning his face to the earth,
lifted up his arm, as if to shroud himself from the view of some terrific
object.

Whither would thou drag me, avenging Spirit? exclaimed he, with a faint and
trembling voice.

Sir Albert, accosting him by his name, demanded to whom he addressed himself,
and what had thus strangely agitated him; but to all his questions he returned
such disordered answers, as induced the Knight to believe that distraction had
seized him. At last the Baron, with a sudden start, again raised his head, and
leaning on his arm, regarded Sir Albert with a fixed horror.

"Why do you thus wildly gaze one me?" cried the Knight; "do you not know me?"

"Know thee!" exclaimed the Baron; Ah! too well I know thee! -- And that sword?
The moment threatened by the Phantom is arrived, and already is my family
extinguished on the earth!

"My Lord!" said Sir Albert, these words bear no common meaning; and
circumstanced as I am, they concern me too nearly to suffer me to forbear
insisting on an explanation of them. -- Rise! and prepare immediately to answer
the demand which the events of this night sufficiently authorize me to make.

The Baron rose, as if awed by some power he durst not disobey; but presently
starting with new affright -- Yon ghastly vision! exclaimed he; that crimson
torrent! -- Save me -- hide me from the view!

"These are the terrors of guilt my Lord!" cried Sir Albert; and vainly would
you strive to escape the visions created by your own accusing conscience.

"Vainly indeed!" replied the Baron -- yet, if thou would hear the dire
disclosure I must make to thee, in pity lead me from this scene of horror! --
here I cannot! -- it is impossible? -- they haunt me -- the Demons of
Vengeance haunt me, and the unappeased Spirit of the Dead hovers around me, and
urges them to seize their prey!

Sir Albert saw, that in effect his mind was too much disordered to permit him
to make any connected narration in that dreary place, which impressed with
dismay the heart even of the innocent; and he led the way toward the mouth of
the Cavern while the Baron followed him with unsteady steps.

They were in the narrowest part of their passage, when the light of Sir
Albert's torch was reflected by the gleam of armor; he looked, and beheld a
man half hid in a cavity of the rock. On finding himself discovered, the
stranger came forth trembling, and falling on his knees, petitioned for his
life. The Knight demanded wherefore he had sought to conceal himself? He
acknowledged that he was one of the vassals of the Baron of Dornheim, by whom
he had been brought into the Cavern to assassinate Sir Albert.

"Is this true, my Lord?" said the Knight, looking sternly around.

"It is most true," replied the Baron -- such was indeed my purpose; but the
Agents of an Invisible World have interposed, and I have vainly striven to
resist the decrees of fate

Sir Albert ordered the man to rise and follow them; and soon emerging from the
Cavern, though night still reigned profound amid the Forest, her shadows, to
the eyes of those who had so long been buried in that region of subterranean
darkness appeared almost the refulgence of day.

At the earnest entreaty of the Baron, Sir Albert advanced some paces, till
they had reached a spot, out of hearing of the sound of the murmuring current:
there pausing -- "and now, my Lord!" said he, I will proceed no further, till
you shall have fully explained to me, as I know you are well able to do, the
mysteries which the recesses of yon Cave enfold. Why are you thus aghast when
you behold this Sword? And who was the murdered Warrior in whose fleshless hand
I have found it?

"That murdered Warrior," replied the Baron, "was thy Father!

Sir Albert started!

"And in me," continued the Baron, "thou viewest his murderer!"

Sir Albert's hair stood erect with horror, and his eyes sparkled with
unutterable fury.

Suspend thy vengeance till thou have heard me further, resumed the Baron: I
feel that the hour of retribution is arrived, and a power more than mortal
compels me to unfold the tale I tremble to pronounce.

Rodolph, Baron of Dornheim, was thy Father. He was my Brother -- my elder
Brother; and from the Holy Land was he returning, to claim the inheritance
which, at the death of our common parent, devolved of right to him, when I,
covetous to possess it, met him in this Forest, with a band of ruffians devoted
to my interest. He was alone; but, with his native valor, and with that Sword,
which had often drank deeply of the blood of Infidels, he long defended himself
against his assassins. At last, overpowered by numbers, he fell; and, in the
convulsions of death, he so strongly grasped the hilt, that one of my men,
unable to force it from him, was about to strike off the hand which held it,
when I forbade him. To none of the brave Knights who had warred in Palestine
was the Sword of Rodolph unknown; and, should it be found in my possession, or
in that of any of my people, a discovery that he had perished by our hands
might have ensued: -- I therefore commanded them to forego the rich spoil, and
to conceal it, with the body, in the innermost recesses of yon gloomy Cavern. A
report of his death upon the journey was then circulated; and no suspicion of
my concern in it arising in the minds of any, I succeeded to the vacant Barony,
of which I have ever since, in the opinion of the world, been the undisturbed
possessor. But the world has not known the secrets of my own guilty heart.
Often, at the still and solemn hour of midnight has the Spirit of my murdered
Brother visited me; sometimes in silence pointing to his wounds, and waving his
bloody Sword, sometimes threatening me with vengeance, in a voice, of which,
even in the hours of apparent festivity, the sound has ever continued in my
ears. -- Of five former Sons whom I have lost, the untimely deaths were
announced to me by this Phantom; but the great and final stroke which was to
complete the measure of my punishment, and for ever cut off my family from the
earth, he taught me to expect at the moment in which his Sword should pass into
the possession of his own rightful heir. -- With what terror I have awaited
that moment, those only can know, who, like me, have known the guilt of blood:
-- from a faint hope to avade the menace, I have made repeated efforts to
regain the Sword; but the fear lest I should expose my crime to detection,
forbade me to employ for that purpose any but those who had been my former
accomplices; they severally attempted it; but their courage proved unequal to
encounter the horrors of the Cavern. Meanwhile, I had recourse to every means,
to discover who was that heir to whom the sword was destined, I could obtain no
further information, than that Rodolph, ere he went to the Holy Land, had
espoused a Lady at Prague, under a feigned name, lest my Father, who had
destined him for another alliance, should be made acquainted with the marriage;
but what afterward became of that Lady, or whether she had borne him another
Son, I could never learn, but continued in a state of the most painful
uncertainty till yesternight, when, on your first entrance, I for a moment
fancied you the visionary object of my nightly terrors: -- Your name was
repeated by my Son, and I strove to suppress my strong emotions; but still your
resemblance to the noble Rodolph had filled my mind with dire forebodings, and
your ring too certainly confirmed them, for well did I remember it in the
possession of my Brother. This morning, your own narration explained to me
every circumstance which could yet give rise to any doubts. From that moment,
your death was determined; and already had I concerted the plan of your
assassination, when with dismay I learned that you were gone to explore the
recesses of the Cavern of Death. The moment which was to restore to you the
Sword of your Father, seemed now at hand: -- by one desperate effort could I
only hope to avert the fate impending over my house; -- and to that effort some
supernatural impulse seemed to urge me on, and to overpower the dread, with
which even the distant view of a place which I fancied conscious of my crime,
had hitherto inspired me. -- I armed as many of my vassals as I durst confide
in, and at their head I entered the Cavern, hoping to find you, bewildered in
its labyrinths, ere you should have seized the Sword on which my destiny
depended. Animated by this idea, neither I, nor two of my accomplices in the
murder of your Father, the only two who still survived, seemed to remember our
former guilty dread, till we reached the spacious vault in which you found me.
There the awful rush of the torrent struck upon our souls, and in a moment
revived our terrors. we ascended its bank -- we beheld the foaming cataract --
to our eyes it seemed a cataract of blood! -- those of my attendants whose
consciences accused them of no former crimes, uttered a cry of dismay at the
dire prodigy, and fled; but we, whose hand had been crimsoned with the blood of
Rodolph, stood, rivetted by horror to the spot -- but we stood not long, before
the fall of the impending rock overwhelmed my two companions, of whom one was
Maurice, your Esquire, but my ancient vassal.

"Maurice!" exclaimed Sir Albert; was "he disloyal?"

From the moment when I acquainted him with your birth, returned the Baron, his
fears concurred with his former attachment to me, and with the rewards I
offered, to induce him to betray to me your every design. It was from him I
learned your purpose of entering the Cavern.

The Baron was proceeding, when the trampling of horses interrupted him: -- he
paused; and Sir Albert, looking round, descried a troop of men, who guided by
the light he bore, were hastening toward him. On their nearer approach, it was
discernible that four among them, who were on foot, bore a corpse, on a bier
made of interwoven boughs. The Baron's mind misgave him; he eagerly questioned
them, and, while they hesitated to answer, he forced a passage through them,
and rushed to meet the corpse; he recognized the pale and blood-stained
features of his Son.

The bearers sat down their load. -- The Baron uttered not a word, but threw
himself on the bier, and in convulsive sobs, gave vent to the passions which
agonized his soul. -- Sir Albert drew near, and with strong emotions beheld the
face of Lord Frederic. -- The Baron suddenly turned, and before he was aware of
his purpose, snatched from his hand the Sword of Rodolph, and plunging it in
his own breast, sunk expiring on the body of his Son. -- The horsemen alighted,
and crowded round him; but succor was too late; -- pointing to Sir Albert, in
a faultering accent he bade them regard in him their rightful Lord; and then,
drawing forth the weapon from the wound, his life issued with it, in a stream
of blood.

Sir Albert, falling on his knees, awfully adored the severe justice of the
Almighty Avenger of the crime of mortals.

Those who surrounded the bier, all vassals of the Barony of Dornheim, were
struck with consternation at this fatal catastrophe, and eagerly enquired of
each other the meaning of their late master's dying words* Sir Albert, in
succinct terms, and without expatiating on the guilt of him who lay lifeless
before them, acquainted them with the discoveries which that night had brought
forth; a narration confirmed by him who had been found concealed in the Cavern,
and who had been present at the Baron's confession; and all most readily
acknowledged the Son of Rodolph as their Lord, and entreated him to suffer them
immediately to conduct him to the Castle. He complied with their request, and
proceeded thither with them; whilst those who had before borne the body of Lord
Frederic, now bore that of his Father with it on the same bier.

On their way, Sir Albert demanded the particulars of the death of the former.
-- They confessed, that the Baron had sent them with orders to lie in wait for
Sir Albert himself; but that the similarity of the arms and vestments of Lord
Frederic had deceived them, and assaulting him, they had not discovered their
mistake till he had fallen beneath their swords.

When they reached the Castle, where the chief officers and most of the
domestics were in waiting to re-admit their Lord, the tidings they brought of
his death at first diffused a general dismay; but Sir Albert convened the
vassals in the great hall, and in a modest, but forcible address, stated to
them his claim to the succession, and adduced such proofs as left them no room
to question his right to the domains of his Ancestors. Many of the older men
who were present, remembered Lord Rodolph, and loved his memory; and they, with
acclamations of joy, retraced his features in those of his Son; and, as the
character of the late Baron had not been such as to engage the affections of
any of his people, there were none who did not receive their new Lord with
demonstrations of unfeigned gladness.

Sir Albert now wished to be alone, that he might reflect at leisure on the
extraordinary events of the night, and compose the agitation of spirits into
which so many unexpected discoveries had thrown him. But, as he was proceeding
along a passage, in his way to a private apartment, the Seneschal followed him,
and demanded what he would have done with regard to two Ladies who had been
brought that night to the Castle, by the order of the late Baron. Sir Albert,
demanded who they were: the Seneschal unlocked the door of an apartment on one
side of the passage, and Sir Albert beheld the Lady Constance! Surprised and
delighted, he flew toward her; but her astonishment and joy seemed even to
exceed his own.

"By what miracle art thou preserved?" cried she: What Guardian Power has
delivered thee from the foes by whom, when they tore me from thee, I left thee
encircled?

Her words seemed at first mysterious to Sir Albert; but Elinor, finding it
impossible to avoid the discovery of her treason, threw herself at their feet,
and voluntarily confessed it; and then it appeared, that after the Lady
Constance, deceived by her arts, had betrayed herself into the power of Lord
Frederic, she was still unconscious of her mistake, when they were assaulted by
the troop which the Baron, informed by the similar treachery of Maurice of her
intended flight with Sir Albert, had sent out to intercept them: that Lord
Frederic had been obliged to set her down in order to defend himself; and that
two of the troop, in compliance with the orders they had received, had
immediately seized herself and Elinor, and had borne them to the Castle, which
they had reached about an hour before; during which interval she had abandoned
herself to the bitterest grief, and had incessantly wept the inevitable death
of the imaginary Sir Albert.

These circumstances afforded the pious Knight new cause to admire the
dispensations of Providence, which had thus rendered the meditated crimes of
the victims of its justice the means of bringing down its judgments on their
heads; and he could not but feel some satisfaction, that his enemies had thus
been the instruments of their own destruction; since he was now spared the task
of avenging his murdered Father on one so nearly allied to him as the Baron,
and of disputing his claim to the succession, with one with whom he had lived
on such habits of intimacy as with Lord Frederic, till the impious proposal he
had made him in the Forest had discovered to him the blackness of his soul. The
Lady Constance heard with transport, of the change which that night had
effected in the fortunes of her Lover.

The morning now began to dawn; and Sir Albert immediately dispatched a
messenger to her Father, to inform him of the death of the late Baron, and his
own succession, in right of his Father, Lord Rodolph -- to acquaint him that
his Daughter was at the Castle; and to invite him thither, to learn such
further particulars as it was expedient he should know.

The invitation was immediately complied with; nor was Sir Albert deceived in
his hope, that he who had been about, from motives of interest, to sacrifice
his only child to a man so unworthy to possess her, would, with equal
readiness, consent to bestow her on himself, who now enjoyed the power and
dignities of his late rival. His proposals were received with manifest joy;
and, till the marriage could be celebrated with proper magnificence, the Lady
Constance returned with her Father to the Castle of Hertzwald, where during
that interval, Sir Albert, now universally acknowledged Baron of Dornheim,
daily visited her.

He caused the bodies of the late usurper and his Son to be privately interred:
but the remains of his unhappy father, himself, at the head of a large body of
his vassals, re-entered the Cavern of Death to bring forth; and mourning his
untimely fate with the deepest expressions of filial sorrow, he caused them to
be deposited, with the most solemn rites of the Church, and every funeral
honor, in the Chapel of the Castle: erecting over them a magnificent tomb,
above which was suspended the fatal Sword.

Shortly after, he espoused the Lady Constance; and in the hand of her who had
been the object of his earliest affections, he received the completion of that
felicity to which his virtues entitled him.

FINIS.

