FEATURES OF Mr. JAY's TREATY. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED A View of the Commerce of
the UNITED STATES, AS IT STANDS AT PRESENT, AND AS IT IS FIXED BY Mr. JAY's
TREATY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, BY LANG and USTICK. 1795.

CONTENTS.
I. The origin and progress of the negotiation for the Treaty, are not
calculated to excite confidence 5 II. Nothing is settled by the Treaty 8 III.
The Treaty contains a colorable, but no real Reciprosity ib. IV. The Treaty is
an instrument of Party 11 V. The Treaty is a violation of the general
principles of neutrality, and is in collision with the positive previous
engagements which subsist between America and France 14 VI. The Treaty with
Great Britain is calculated to injure the United States, in the friendship and
favor of other foreign nations 19 VII. The Treaty with Great Britain is
impolitic and pernicious, in respect to the domestic interests and happiness of
the United States 21 VIII. The British Treaty and the Constitution of the
United States, are at war with each other 26 VIEW of the commerce of the United
States, as it stands at present, and as it is fixed by Mr. Jay's Treaty 48
[FROM THE AMERICAN DAILY ADVERTISER]
Messrs. Dunlap and (...)
THE following Sketch of "The Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty," was made,
originally, with a view to ascertain, for private satisfaction, the principles
and operation of an Instrument, which has excited such extensive curiosity, and
is calculated to produce such important effects. It is published, however, at
the instance of several persons, who think that the subject should be placed in
every possible light; and that no citizen can be justified at this crisis, in
suppressing his opinions, or in withholding his share of information from the
common stock. But while it is committed to the press, I wish it to be
considered merely as a text, which may hereafter be extended by commentary, or
explained by illustration; and though it will give me pleasure (since my sole
object on this occasion is the investigation of political truth) to see it
become a source of candid animadversion; I trust it will not, according to the
custom of contending parties, be regarded as an instrument of faction, nor be
made the foundation of slander and abuse.

FEATURES OF Mr. Jay's Treaty.
I. The origin and progress of the negotiation for the Treaty, are not
calculated to excite confidence.
1. THE administration of our government have, seemingly at least, manifested a
policy favorable to Great Britain, and adverse to France.

2. But the house of representatives of Congress, impressed with the general
ill conduct of Great Britain toward America, were adopting measures, of a
mild, though retaliating nature, to obtain redress and indemnification. The
injuries complained of were, principally, 1st. The detention of the western
posts -- 2dly. The delay in compensating for the negroes carried off at the
close of the war -- and 3dly, The spoliations committed on our commerce. The
remedies proposed, were, principally, 1st. The commercial regulations of Mr.
Madison -- 2dly. The non-intercourse proposition of Mr. Clarke -- 3dly. The
sequestration motion of Mr. Dayton -- 4thly. An embargo -- and 5thly, Military
preparation.

3. Every plan of the legislature was, however, suspended, or rather
annihilated, by the interposition of the executive authority; and Mr. Jay, the
chief Justice of the United States, was taken from his judicial seat, to
negociate with Great Britain, under the influence of the prevailing sentiment
of the people, for the redress of our wrongs. Query -- Are not his commission
and the execution of it, at variance? Is any one of our wrongs actually
redressed? Is not an atonement to Great Britain, for the injuries which she
pretends to have suffered, a preliminary stipulation?

4. The political dogma of Mr. Jay are well known; his predilection, in
relation to France and Great Britain, has not been disguised; and even on the
topic of American complaints, his reports, while in the office of secretary for
foreign affairs, and his adjudications while in the office of chief justice,
were not calculated to point him out as the single citizen of America, fitted
for the service in which he was employed. Query -- Do not personal feelings too
often dictate and govern the public conduct of ministers? But whatever may have
been his personal disqualifications, they are absorbed in the more important
consideration of the apparent violence committed by Mr. Jay's appointment, on
the essential principles of the constitution. That topic, however, has already
been discussed, and we may pass to the manner of negociating the treaty in
England, which was at once obscure and illusory. We heard of Mr. Jay's
diplomatic honors; of the royal and ministerial courtesy which was shown to
him, and of the convivial boards to which he was invited: but, no more! Mr.
Jay, enveloped by a dangerous confidence ^n the intuitive faculties of his own
mind, or the inexhaustible fund of his diplomatic information, neither
possessed nor wished for external aid; while the British negociator, besides
his own acquirements, entered on the points of negotiation, fraught with all
the auxiliary sagacity of his brother ministers, and with all the practical
knowledge of the most, enlightened merchants of a commercial nation. The result
corresponds with that inauspicious state of things. Mr. Jay was driven from the
ground of an injured, to the ground of an agressing, party; he made atonement
for imaginary wrongs, before he was allowed justice for real ones; he converted
the resentments of the American citizens (under the impressions of which he was
avowedly sent to England) into amity and concord; and seems to have been so
anxious to rivet a commercial chain about the neck of America, that he even
forgot, or disregarded, a principal item of her own produce, (cotton) in order
to make a sweeping sacrifice to the insatiable appetite of his maritime
antagonist. But the idea of the treaty, given by Mr. Pit in answer to Mr. Fox,
who, before he had seen, applauded it as an act of liberality and justice
toward America, was the first authoritative alarm to our interests and our
feelings. "When the treaty is laid before the parliament (said the minister)
you will best judge whether any improper concession has been made to America!"

5. The treaty being sent her^ for ratification, the President and the Senate
pursue the mysterious plan in which it was negociated. I has been intimated,
that till the meeting of the senate, the instrument was not communicated even
to the most confidential officers of the government: and the first resolution
taken by the senate, was to stop the lips and ears of its members against every
possibility of giving or receiving information. Every man, like Mr. Jay, was
presumed to be inspired. In the course of the discussion, however, some
occurrences flashed from beneath the veil of secrecy; and it is conjectured
that the whole treaty was, at one time, in jeopardy. But the rhetoric of a
minister (not remarkable for the volubility of his tongue) who was brought
post-haste from the country; the danger of exposing to odium and disgrace the
distinguished American characters, who would be affected by a total rejection
of the treaty; and the feeble, but operative, vote of a member transported from
the languor and imbecility of a sick room, to decide in the senate a great
national question, whose merits he had not heard discussed; triumphed over
principle, argument and decorum!

6. But still the treaty remains unratified; for, unless the British government
shall assent to suspend the obnoxious twelfth article, (in favor of which,
however, many patriotic members declared their readiness to vote) the whole is
destroyed by the terms of the ratification: and if the British government shall
agree to add an article allowing the suspension, the whole must return for the
reconsideration of the senate. But the forms of mystery are still preserved by
our government; and attempts to deceive the people have been made abroad, upon
a vain presumption, that the treaty could remain a secret, till it became
obligatory as a law.

For instance, in Fenno's paper of the 25th of June, it is unequivocally
declared, "the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation, was ratified yesterday
by the Senate of the United States; and, even while he corrects that mistake in
the paper of the following day, he commits an error of a more extraordinary
kind (particularly when we consider that he is the confidential person, who
printed the treaty for the use of the senate) by asserting, that in the twelfth
article, "the United States are prohibited from exporting to Europe from the
said states, sugar, coffee, cotton and cocoa, the produce of any of the West
India islands." The fact must have been known to Mr. Fenno, that the
prohibition operates ^^iversally; whether the prohibited articles are the
produce of the West India islands, of the East Indies, of the United States, or
of any other part of the world. The next essay to render the envelopements of
the treaty still more opaque, appeared in the American Daily Advertiser, of the
27th of June. The writer (who is said to be a member of the Senate) likewise
regards the ratification, in his introduction, as a perfect one; and after
giving a gloss to the general texture of the treaty, he ascribes the obnoxious
principle of the twelfth article, to an error which, it appears, has been
inadvertently introduced. An error inadvertently introduced into an instrument,
which was under the consideration of the chief justice of the United States,
and the British minister, for a term of eight months! and introduced too, into
a part of that very article, which is made the sole foundation of the whole
commercial superstructure!! Whenever the twelfth article ceases, the treaty
declares every other article, except the ten first articles, shall also cease!
But the author of that sketch proceeds one step further -- he says, "that every
cause of offense or collision toward the French, seems to have been studiously
avoided, in the progress of the negotiation;" for, "no article of the treaty
clashes in the smallest degree, with the obligations and engagements contracted
with that gallant nation!" Let the treaty speak for itself -- it is more to be
hoped than expected, that the voice of France should not likewise be heard in
opposition to so bold an assertion.

II. Nothing is settled by the Treaty.
1. The western posts are to be given up.

2. The northern boundary of the United States is to be amicably settled.

3. The river meant by St. Croix river in the treaty, is to be settled.

4. The payment for spoliations is to be adjusted and made.

5. The ultimate regulation of the West India trade is to depend on a
negotiation to be made in the course of two years after the termination of the
existing war.

6. The question of neutral bottoms making neutral goods is to be considered at
the same time.

7. The articles that may be deemed contraband, are to be settled at the same
time.

8. The equalization of duties laid by the contracting parties on one another,
is to be hereafter treated of.

9. All the commercial articles depend on the existence of the twelfth article,
which may continue twelve years, if it is so agreed within two years after the
expiration of the war; but if it is not so agreed, it expires, and with it all
the dependent parts of the treaty. Query -- Does not the Senate's suspension of
the twelfth article bring us to the same ground?

10. The whole business of Mr. Jay's negotiation is left open by the
twenty-eighth article, for alteration, amendment and addition, by new articles,
which, when agreed upon and ratified, shall become a part of this treaty.

Query -- Does not the history of treaties prove, that whenever commissioners
have been appointed by the parties, to take all the subjects of their dispute
ad referendum, for the sake of getting rid of an immediate pressure, and
patching up a peace, the matter terminates in creating, not in settling
differences?

III. The Treaty contains a colorable, but no real, Reciprocity.
1. The second article provides for the surrender of the western posts in June,
1796; but it stipulates, that in the mean time, the citizens of the United
States shall not settle within the precincts and jurisdiction of those posts;
that the British settlers there shall hold and enjoy all their property of
every kind, real and personal; and that when the posts are surrendered, such
settlers shall have an election either to remain British subjects, or to become
American citizens. Query -- Were not the western posts, and all their precincts
and jurisdiction, the absolute property of the United States by the treaty of
peace? Query -- What equivalent is given for this cession of the territory of
the United States to a foreign power? Query -- How far do the precincts and
jurisdiction of the posts extend? Query -- Does not the treaty give an implied
assent to major Campbell's claim, by adopting its language, as far as the falls
of the Miami, and to the northern claim upon the territories of New York and
Vermont?

2. The third article stipulates that the two contracting parties may frequent
the ports of either party, on the eastern banks of the Mississippi. Query --
What ports has Great Britain on the eastern banks of the Mississippi?

3. The third article likewise opens an amicable intercourse on the lakes; but
excludes us from their seaports, and the limits of the Hudson's bay company;
and excludes them from navigating our Atlantic rivers, higher than the highest
port of entry in each. Query -- What are the limits of the Hudson's bay
company? Query -- What equivalent do the United States obtain for the general
freedom of navigation, portage and passage? For it must be remembered, that the
British rivers penetrate the heart of the country, but of those we can take no
advantage; while Great Britain is in fact admitted to all the advantages of
which our Atlantic rivers are susceptible.

4. The sixth and seventh articles provide for satisfying every demand which
Great Britain has been able, at any time, to make against the United States
(the payment of the British debts due before the war, and the indemnification
for vessels captured within our territorial jurisdiction) but the provision
made for the American claims upon Great Britain, is not equally explicit or
efficient in its terms, nor is it co-extensive with the object. Query -- Why is
the demand for the negroes, carried off by the British troops, suppressed,
waved, or abondoned? The preamble to the treaty recites an intention to
terminate the differences between the nations: was not the affair of the
negroes a difference between the nations? and how has it been terminated?

5. The ninth article stipulates, that the subjects of Great Britain and the
citizens of the United States, respectively, who now hold lands within the
territories of either nation, shall hold the lands in the same manner as
natives do. Query -- What is the relative proportion of lands so held? Query --
The effect to revive the claims of British subjects, who, either as traitors or
aliens, have forfeited their property within the respective states? Query --
The operation of such a compact on the internal policy of the union, combined
with the solemn recognition of a colony of British subjects, professing and
owing allegiance to the British crown, though settled within the acknowledged
territory of the United States, by virtue of the second article?

6. The tenth article declares, that neither party shall sequester or
confiscate the debts or property in the funds, etc. belonging to the citizens
of the other, in case of a war, or of national differences. Great Britain has
fleets and armies; America has none. Query -- Does not this, supported by other
provisions, which forbid our changing the commercial situation of Great
Britain, or imposing higher duties on her than on other nations, deprive the
United States of their best means of retaliation and coercion? Query -- Is it
not taking from America her only weapon of defense; but from Great Britain the
least of two weapons which she possesses? What is the relative proportion held
by the citizens of the contracting nations, respectively, in the funds, etc. of
each other.

7. The twelfth article opens to our vessels, not exceeding seventy tons, an
intercourse with the British West India islands, during the present war, and
for two years after: but it prohibits our exporting from the United States,
melasses, sugar, cocoa, coffee, or cotton, to any part of the world, whether
those articles are brought from British, French, or Spanish islands, or even
raised (as cotton is) within our own territory. Query -- Are vessels of seventy
tons equal to maintain the most beneficial part of our trade with the West
Indies, the transportation of lumber, and^.? Query -- Do we not, in the time of
war (and the continuance of the privelege, for more than two years after the
war depends on the situation in which his majesty of Great Britain shall then
find himself in relation to the islands) enjoy a greater privilege, under the
temporary proclamations of the colonial governors, than this article admits?
Query -- Have not the articles which we are prohibited from exporting, formed,
of late, a valuable part of our trade? Is not cocoa chiefly cultivated by the
Spaniards? Is not cotton a staple of America? Is our own own consumption equal
to our importation or growth of the prohibited articles? Will not the want of a
vent for any surplus quantity, affect the other branches of our commerce,
diminish the demand for ship building, and injure our agriculture? If we are
now thrown out of this branch of the carrying trade, shall we be ever able to
recover it? and, in short, will not the loss be of lasting detriment to all our
maritime exertions?

8. The thirteenth article admits us to trade in the British settlements in the
East Indies: but it excludes us from any share in the coasting trade of that
country; it forbids our penetrating the interior of the country, or holding an
intercourse with the natives, unless under a license from the local British
government; and it compels us to land all the articles that are there shipped,
in the United States. Is not China the independent territory of the emperor? Is
not Canton an open port accessible to all nations? Do we not obtain there, and
at independent places in the East Indies with which we have, at present, an
uninterrupted communication, tea, porcelain, ^ankeens, silk, etc. upon the
principles of a free trade? Does not a very advantageous part of the trade in
that quarter of the globe, consist in the exchange of the products and
manufactures of the East Indies for those of China, and vice versa? Do not our
importations of East India goods far exceed our consumption? Is not the trade
which we carry on with those goods in Europe, highly beneficial? Are not sugar
and coffee a part of our importations from India, and does not the 12th article
prohibit our re-exporting them? Does our trade to Europe, founded on the
previous intercourse with India, depend on the British license; and can it be
maintained, under the disadvantage of a double voyage? Are we not, every
voyage, making favorable impressions on the natives of China? Do we not
participate, at present, in the carrying trade of that country? Does not our
interest in it increase rapidly?

9. The several articles that regulate the rights and priveleges of the
contracting parties within their respective territories, in case either of them
is engaged in a war, may cease in two years after the present war is
terminated, and cannot be protracted beyond twelve years. Query -- Are not all
these advantages, in effect, exclusively favorable to Great Britain, a
principal maritime power of Europe; often engaged in wars; and interested to
obtain for her ships, her colonies, and herself, the ports and supplies of this
extensive continent?

Is it probable that, during the longest possible existence of this treaty
(twelve years) America will be engaged in maritime wars, will want English
ports as a refuge for men of war, or as a retreat for prizes? Or that it will,
during that period, be of importance to her objects, to prevent her enemies
from arming in English ports, or selling their prizes there?

10. The twenty-second article provides for ships of war being hospitably
treated in the ports of the respective contracting parties; and that officers
shall be treated with the respect that is due to the commissions which they
bear. Query -- Could not the principle of reciprocity, as well as humanity,
suggest to Mr. Jay, that some provision should be made to protect our citizen
sailors from the sangs of British press-gangs in England; and from the horrors
of their prison-ships in the West Indies? Were the commissions of his Britannic
majesty of more regard than the liberties of American freemen? Or, was it
unknown, that thousands of our sailors have been occasionally enslaved by the
impress tyranny of the British government? Or, that thousands have lost their
lives in noxious prisons, while their vessels were carried into British ports
for "LEGAL ADJUDICATION?"

11. The fourteenth article provides for a perfect liberty of commerce and
navigation, and for the accommodation of traders; but subject always to the
laws and statutes of the two countries respectively: Query -- Are not the laws
and statutes of England infinitely more rigid, on the subjects of this article,
than the laws and statutes of America?

IV. The Treaty is an Instrument of Party.
1. The discussions, during the session of Congress in which Mr. Jay's mission
was projected, evinced the existence of two parties, upon the question, whether
it was more our interest to be allied with the republic of France, than with
the monarchy of Great Britain. Query -- Do^ not the general complexion of the
treaty decide the question in favor of the alliance with Great Britain? Query
-- Whether that complexion does not manifestly arise from the provisions, for
admitting a British colony within our territory, in the neighborhood of the
western posts; for admitting the whole British nation, without an equivalent,
into a participation of our territory on the eastern bank of the Mississippi;
for naturalizing all the holders of lands; for opening a general intercourse
with their traders on the lakes, in the interior of our country, rendering (as
it is idly said) the local advantages of each party common to both; for
regulating the external trade of the two nations with each other; for admitting
citizens to be punished as pirates, who take commissions, etc. from a
belligerent power, adverse to either contracting party; for fettering the
operations of our treaty with France; for surrendering criminals, etc. etc. etc.

2. The measures proposed by one party to retaliate the injuries offered by
Great Britain to our territorial, commercial and political rights, were opposed
by the other, precisely as the treaty opposes them. For instance: --

(1.) Mr. Madison projects a regulation of our commerce with Great Britain, by
which the hostile spirit of that nation, might be contro^led on the footing of
its interest. The treaty legitimises the opposition, which was given to the
measure in Congress, by declaring in article fifteen, "that no other or higher
duties shall be paid by the ships or merchandise of the one party, in the ports
of the other, than such as are paid by the like vessels or merchandise of all
other nations; nor shall any other or higher duty be imposed in one country on
the importation of any articles of the growth, produce, or manufactures of the
other, than are, or shall be, payable on the importation of the like articles
of the growth, etc. of any foreign country. (2.) Mr. Clarke proposes to
manifest and enforce the public resentment, by prohibiting all intercourse
between the two nations. The treaty destroys the very right to attempt that
species of national denunciation, by declaring in the same article, that "no
prohibition shall be imposed on the exportation or importation of any articles
to or from the territories of the two parties respectively, which shall not
equally extend to all other nations." (3.) But Mr. Dayton moves, and the house
of representatives support his motion, for the sequestration of British debts,
etc. to ensure a fund for paying the spoliations committed on our trade. The
treaty (without regarding the respect due to the commission which is borne by
our members of Congress) not only despoils the government of this important
instrument to coerce a powerful, yet interested adversary into acts of justice,
but enters likewise into a commentary, which, considering the conduct of one of
the branches of our legislature, Lord Grenville, consistently with decorum,
could not have expressed, or at least, Mr. Jay, for the sake of our national
dignity, ought not to have adopted. The tenth article declares, that "neither
the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals of the other,
nor shares nor moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the public
or private banks, shall ever, in any event of war or national difference, be
sequestered or consiscated, it being unjust and impolitic, that debts and
engagements contracted and made by individuals having considence in each other
and in their respective governments, should ever be destroyed or impaired by
national authority on account of national differences and discontents." The
terms are very similar to those that gave Mr. Dayton offense in a speech
pronounced by Mr. Ames; and certainly it will be deemed no mitigation, that the
charge of committing " an unjust and impolitic act," has been wantonly
engrafted upon the most solemn of all instruments. -- a public treaty! Query:
-- Would Lord Grenville have consented to brand his Royal Master with the title
of Great Sea Robber, if Mr. Jay's urbanity could have permitted him to borrow
the epithet from another member of Congress, in order to insert it, in the
article that relates to the British spoliations on our trade? But perhaps, Mr.
Jay forgot, that the commentary operated as a reflection on the government of
the United States, and only meant it as a reproach to Great Britain, for
sequestering during the late war, and retaining at this moment, the property
belonging to Maryland, lying in the bank of England. It might, likewise, be
intended as a satire upon the parliamentary sequestration of French property in
the famous "Intercourse Act:" or, perhaps, Mr. Jay anticipated the revolution
in Holland, and designed his commentary as a warning against the seizing of
Dutch property, public and private; which, however, has since taken place, in
spite of his solemn admonition.
3. The trials that had occurred relative to the equipment of French privateers
in our ports; and the enlistment of our citizens in the service of the
republic, had produced some embarrassment in the course of party pursuits.
These are obviated by the treaty. The British nation by which the empress of
Russia has always been supplied with naval officers, and whose fleets and
armies are always crowded with volunteers from other nations, consents that her
subjects shall not serve against us; and stipulates that our citizens shall not
serve against her. This contract is made with a power actually engaged in a
war; and seldom more than seven years clear of one; by a power at peace, not
liable, from her local position, and political constitution, to be involved in
war, and in strict alliance with the nation against whom the stipulation will
immediately operate. Captain Barney and the other Americans, who have joined
the arms of France, are thus involved in the most serious dilemma. If they
expatriate themselves, they may possibly escape the vengeance of the American
government; but will that save them from the vengeance of Great Britain, whose
concessions on the doctrine of expatriation are not quite so liberal? By the
bye, it may here be seasonably repeated, that while Mr. Jay was so willing to
prevent American citizens from entering into the service of France, he might
surely have taken some pains to secure them from being pressed into the service
of England. He would have found, on enquiry, that the instances of the latter
kind are infinitely more numerous than of the former. But it is enough that the
measure will be introductory of a law, favorable to the view of a party which
reprobates every idea of assisting the French, and cultivates every means of
conciliating the British.

4. It has, likewise, been thought by some politicians, that the energies of
our executive department require every aid that can be given to them, in order
more effectually to resist and control the popular branches of the government.
Hence we find the treatymaking power employed in that service; and Congress
cannot exercise a legislative discretion on the prohibited points (though it
did not participate in making the cession of its authority) without a
declaration of war against Great Britain. George the third enjoys by the treaty
a more complete negative to bind us as states, than he ever claimed over us as
colonies.

V. The treaty is a violation of the general principles of neutrality, and is
in collision with the positive previous engagements which subsist between
America and France.
1. It is a general principle of the law of nations, that during the existence
of a war, neutral powers shall not, by favor or by treaty, so alter the
situation of one of the belligerent parties, as to enable him more
advantageously to prosecute hostilities against his adversary. If, likewise, a
neutral power shall refuse or evade treating with one of the parties, but
eagerly enter into a treaty with the other, it is a partiality, that amounts to
a breach of neutrality. These positions may be supported by the authority of
the most esteemed writers on the subject; but it will be sufficient in the
present case, to cite the conduct of Great Britain herself. Thus, it has been
adjudged by Lord Mansfield, "that if a neutral ship trades to a French colony,
with all the privileges of a French ship, and is thus adopted and naturalized,
it must be looked upon as a French ship, liable to be taken." See judge
Blackstone's reports, 1 vol. p. 313, 314. According to he principle on which
this judgment was given, the act of issuing the ^emorable orders of the 6th of
November, 1793, and the consequent seizure of all our vessels, are attempted to
be justified. Great Britain alleges (when it is injurious to France) that
trading with the French islands, on a footing not allowed before the war, is a
breach of neutrality, and cause of consiscation: and, therefore, Great Britain
must also admit, at least America will not deny, that trading with the British
islands, on a footing not allowed before the war; or, in different words,
altering and enlarging the commercial relations of the two countries, is
equally a breach of our neutrality toward France. When the sword is found to
cut both ways, the party who uses it, has no right to complain.

2. That we have, on the one hand, evaded the overtures of a treaty with
France, and on the other hand, solicited a treaty from Great Britain, are facts
public and notorious. Let us enquire, then, what Great Britain has gained on
the occasion, to enable her more advantageously to prosecute her hostilities
against France.

(1) Great Britain has gained time. As nothing is settled by the treaty, she
has it in her power to turn all the chances of the war in her favor; and, in
the interim, being relieved from the odium and embarrassment of adding America
to her enemies, the current of her operations against France is undivided, and
will of course flow with greater vigor and certainty. We have been for so many
years satisfied with the promises of the treaty of peace, that Great Britain
has cause to expect, at least, an equal period of credit, for the promises of
the treaty of amity. If, indeed, it is true, that the reasons assigned by Lord
Grenville to Mr. Jay, for declining an immediate surrender of the posts, were,
first, that the British traders might have time to arrange their out-standing
business; a privilege that is expressly granted by the treaty, and could not
therefore, furnish a real excuse for delay; and secondly, that the British
government might be able to ascertain what would be the probable effect of the
surrender, on the Indians; a reservation that demonstrates an intention to be
governed by events; we can very well account for the late extensive shipment of
artillery and ammunition to Canada; and may easily calculate the importance of
gaining time, in order to promote the American, as well as European, objects of
Great Britain. (2.) Great Britain gains supplies for her West India colonies;
and that for a period almost limited to the continuance of the war, under
circumstances which incapacitate her from furnishing the colonial supplies
herself; and, indeed, compel her to invite the aid of all nations, in
furnishing provisions for her own domestic support. The supplies may be carried
to the islands either in American bottoms not exceeding seventy tons, or in
British bottoms of any tonnage. (3.) Great Britain gains an advantage over
France, by prohibiting the exportation of sugar, etc. in consequence of which
the colonies of France must, in a great measure, remain unsupplied with
provisions, etc. as they can only in general pay for them in those articles,
whose use is confined to the American consumption. It will be remembered, that
the produce of the French islands has of late constituted a great part of our
European remittances. If, therefore, that trade is cut off, and at the same
time, besides employing our own small craft of seventy tons, Great Britain is
allowed, to any extent of tonnage, to be our West India factor, it is obvious
that our consumption of sugar, coffee, etc. etc. will be abundantly supplied,
without maintaining an intercourse with the French, or even with the East
Indies, to procure any of those articles. Perhaps this method, though less
bold, will be more effectual to prevent our furnishing the French islands with
provision, than declaring them to be in a state of blockade, and seizing the
vessels that attempt to visit them. (4.) It is another important gain to Great
Baitain (which might, likewise, have been adverted to under the feature of
reciprocity) that, to any extent of tonnage, her vessels may carry on the West
India trade for us, either to supply our domestic consumption, or European
engagements, subject to no other or higher duties than our own vessels, while
our own vessels are restricted to a pitiful size, and circumscribed to a
particular voyage. But whatever may be thought of the benefit of acquiring for
America even this scanty participation in the West India trade, no one (after
the rejection of the twelfth article) will deny that the whole measure changes
the relative situation of the two countries, avowedly in favor of Great
Britain, and operatively injurious to France; and every such change is
derogatory to our boasted neutral character. (5.) The admission of Great
Britain to all the commercial advantages of the most favored nation, and the
restraints imposed upon our legislative independence, as stated in the party
feature of the treaty, are proofs of predilection and partiality in the
American government, which cannot fail to improve the resources of Great
Britain, and to impair the interests, as well as the attachments, of France.
(6.) The assent to the seizure of all provision-ships, and that, in effect,
upon any pretext, at a period when Great Britain is distressed for provisions,
as well as France; and when the system of subduing by famine has been adopted
by the former against the latter nation, is clearly changing our position, as
an i^dependent republic, in a manner detrimental to our original ally. That our
merchants will be paid a reasonable profit for their cargoes, etc. may render
the measure more palatable to us; even under the loss of the return cargo, the
derangement of the voyage, and the destruction of the spirit of commercial
enterprise; but that consideration cannot render it less offensive to France.
It may properly be here remarked, that Sweden and Denmark have obtained, by a
spirited resistance, an actual indemnification for the seizures which have
heretofore taken place, and an exemption from all such outrages in future;
while America has only put those which are past, in a train of negotiation, and
has given a legitimate effect to those which are to come. The order, which, the
English gazettes say, has recently been issued for seizing American
provision-ships, on their passage to France, ought not, therefore, to be
complained of, as it is merely an exercise, by anticipation, of the right
granted by the treaty. (7.) Great Britain has gained the right of preventing
our Citizens from being volunteers in the armies or ships of France! This is
not simply the grant of a new right to Great Britain, but is, at the same time,
a positive deprivation of a benefit, hitherto enjoyed by France. Neither the
laws of nations, nor our municipal constitution and laws, prohibited our
citizens from going to another country, and there, either for the sake of
honor, reward, or instruction, serving in a foreign navy, or army: -- Colonel
Oswald and many others have done it: -- Captain Barney and many others are
doing it. But a proclamation must issue to recall all such volunteers, and
punishment must follow disobedience, if the twenty-first article of the treaty
is to be effectuated, as the supreme law of the land. (8.) Great Britain has
gained a right to treat and punish as pirates, any of our citizens who shall
accept, even while they are in France, any commission to arm a privateer, or
letter of marque. It ^s true, that a similar provision is contained in other
treaties; but we are now only considering the alterations which are made by the
treaty under discussion, in favor of Great Britain, and inju^^^s to France,
How far there exists a power to define piracy, by treaty, will be remarked in
delineating another scature of Mr. Jay's diplomatic offspring. (9.) Great
Britain has doubly g^^ned, by obtaining in our ports, an asylum for her ships
of war, privateers, prizes, etc. stipulating for an exclusion of those of her
enemies, other (it is admitted) than France. The twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth
articles of the projected treaty, are nearly copied from the subsisting treaty
with France. It would be curious, however, to reflect on the very different
motives, which must justify (if the idea of justification could, in the late
instance, be at all admissible) these analogous grants. The concession to
France was made when we were at war, and she was not; it was made upon a
certainty of reciprocal advantage; and it was made as a price for obtaining the
aid of that gallant nation, in the establishment of our independence. The
concession is made to Great Britain when she is at war, and we are not; --
without any rational prospect of deriving any reciprocal advantage from it; and
under such circumstances of injury and insult, as might have admonished us to
reserve it as the price for obtaining aid from other nations, in resisting her
hostilities, instead of paying it for smiles without affection, and promises
without sincerity. When we were making treaties with Holland, Prussia, etc. did
we not expressly exclude them from such important, and, as we have already
seriously experienced, such dangerous privileges?
But it will be asked, perhaps what mighty benefit has Great Britain gained, in
this case, at the expense of France, since the prior similar privileges of
France are exclusive? Answer: -- That as the privilege of Great Britain will
operate against every other nation, it will immediately affect the French
republic's alliance, offensive and defensive, with the United Provinces, which
preceded the ratification, at least, of the treaty: and it may, eventually,
have the same pernicious influence in relation to Prussia, Spain and Portugal,
whose disposition to change sides, in the present war, has been unequivocally
expressed. Thus, though Holland and Prussia made treaties with us, long before
Great Britain would admit the idea of a negotiation, and though Spain and
Portugal are the only customers, who furnish us with the ready money balance,
for the very purpose of paying our annual accumulation of debt to Britain, the
harbors of America are open to their vessels as prizes, but shut to them as
friends: They may be brought hither and sold by their enemies: but if they have
captured their enemy, all, but common necessaries, shall be denied to them! The
habits, bias, and opinions of a people, ought not to be altogether disregarded
in making a treaty. What honest, feeling American, could patiently see an
Englishman, our sunshine ally, bringing into our ports, as prizes, the ships of
Holland, our ally in the times that tried min's souls; -- a republic,
indissolubly united with France, -- that earliest, latest, best of friends?
What honest, feeling American, even submitting to a scene so painful, would
willingly assist in expelling from our ports the ships of Holland, which had
merely retaliated, by the capture of their foe?

3. But it is time to advert to the cases of collision between the two
treaties; and these are of such a nature as to produce a violation of the
spirit, though not a positive violation of the words, of the previous
engagements, that subsist between France and America -- They are causes of
offense, and clash in the highest degree.

(1.) By the ninth article of the treaty of allia^^^ with France, we guarantee
the possessions of that nation in America. It is true, that our situation is
such as to incapacitate, and of course to excuse us, from a direct fulfillment
of this guarantee; but it is equally true, that we violate our faith, whenever
we do any thing that will, either directly or indirectly, endanger those
possessions. Query -- Whether facilitating the means of supplying the British
forces in the West Indies, will not be the effect of the arrangements relative
to the trade with the British islands? Query -- Whether restraining our
intercourse with the French islands, as a consequence of the treaty already
predicated, will not expose them to want, and of course to the necessity of
yielding to their enemies? Does not every such advantage given to Great
Britain, clash with our engagements to France? (2.) By our treaty with France,
and indeed with several other nations, it is expressly stipulated, that free
vessels shall make free goods. At the time of entering into the stipulation,
and even at this moment, the maritime strength of France (always superior to
that of Denmark and Sweden, which has, under similar circumstances, been
successful) could command the respect of the world for her engagments. It is
true, America neither was, nor is, in a situation to produce the same
complaisance; and, on the ground of that weakness, France has, hitherto,
heartily dispensed with a strict performance of the treaty. But though America
cannot enforce, she ought not to abandon her engagements: she may submit to
imperious necessity, but she cannot voluntarily bring into question the right
of protecting, as a neutral power, the property of France; while France is not
only ready and able to afford her property the stipulated protection, but, in
conformity to the stipulation, actually allows the property of Great Britain to
pass free, under the sanction of the American flag. When, therefore, the treaty
with Great Britain agrees, that within two years after the termination of the
existing war, it shall be discussed "whether in any, and what cases, neutral
vessels shall protect enemies' property" -- does it not clash with our previous
promise to France, that free ships shall make free goods? And when the treaty
with Great Britain, in formal and explicit terms, further agrees, "that in all
cases where vessels shall be captured or detained, on suspicion of having on
board enemies' property, etc. the part which belongs to the enemy shall be made
prize" -- Is not this an evident collision with our previous agreement with
France, and with the security which British property enjoys in consequence of
it? While France adheres to her treaty, by permitting British goods to be
protected by American bottoms, is it honest, honorable, or consistent, on our
part, to enter voluntarily into a compact with the enemies of France, for
permitting them to take French goods our of our vessels? We may not be able to
prevent, but ought we to agree to the proceeding? Let the question be repeated
-- Does not such an express agreement clash with our express, as well as
implied, obligations to France? (3.) By enumerating, as contraband articles, in
the treaty with Great Britain, certain articles which are declared free in the
treaty with France, we may, consistently with the latter, supply Great Britain;
but, consistently with the former, we cannot supply France.
Thus, our treaty with France (and, indeed, every treaty which we have)
expressly declares, that, "in general, all provisions which serve for the
nourishment of mankind and sustenance of life; furthermore, all kinds of
cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sail cloths, anchors and any
part of anchors, also ships, masts, planks, boards and beams of what trees
soever; and all other things proper either for building, or repairing ships,
and all other goods whatever, which have not been worked into the form of any
instrument for war, by land or by sea, shall not be reputed contraband."

The treaty with Great Britain expressly declares, "that timber for ship
building, tar or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and
generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels, unwrought
iron, and fir planks only excepted, shall be objects of confiscation, whenever
they are attempted to be carried to an enemy."

Whether this stipulation can be considered as founded on a principle of
reciprocity, since the articles declared to be contraband are among our
principal exports, but among the principal imports of Great Britain, might have
been adverted to, in tracing a former feature of the treaty; but let it be now
heartily answered, whether it is not in collision with our previous engagements
with France? The right to make such a stipulation, is not, at present,
controverted; but only the assertion, that exercising the right does not clash
in any degree with the terms and spirit of the French treaty. France exempts
those important materials of our commerce from confiscation, in favor of all
the world: Great Britain condemns them to confiscation, whenever they shall be
carried to her enemies; and the compact is made, while France is one of her
enemies!!

VI. The Treaty with Great Britain is calculated to injure the United States,
in the friendship and favor of other foreign nations.
1. That the friendship and favor of France will be affected by the formation
of so heterogeneous an alliance with her most implacable enemy, cannot be
doubted, if we reason upon any scale applicable to the policy of nations, or
the passions of man. From that republic, therefore, if not an explicit
renunciation of all connection with the United States, we may at least expect
an alteration of conduct: and, finding the success which has flowed from the
hostile treatment that Great Britain has shown toward us, she may be, at
length, tempted to endeavor at extorting from fear, what she has not been able
to obtain from affection. She will, probably, declare Great Britain in a state
of blockade, for the purpose of seizing our vessels in Europe; and she may
institute courts for "legal adjudication," in order to confiscate our vessels
in the West Indies. Great Britain will then chuckle at the scene. No one can
doubt that our embarrasments will gratify, not only the avowed objects, but the
latent resentments, of that nation. Even if she could obliterate the memory of
our revolution, she cannot, with pleasure, behold the successful experiment of
a republican system of government; nor the rapid advances of a commercial
competitor. The moment she has produced a quarrel between America and France,
she may exclaim, "Delenda est Carthago." America is again a colony! How
different were the interests and dispositions of our tried friend! That our
government should preserve its purity and independence -- that our commerce and
agriculture should attain their zenith -- were views once congenial with the
policy and affections of the French nation: Heart, head, and hand, she would
have joined in promoting them, against the arts and enmities of all the rest of
the world! What a change, then, have we made!

"Look on this picture, and on that:
"The counterfeit presentment of two Allies!
"Who would on this fair mountain leave to feed,
"To batten on that moor!"
2. During the war, we, likewise, formed a seasonable and serviceable treaty
with the United Netherlands; and, shortly after the war, treaties were
established with Swedenm Prussia, etc. But in order to avoir even the
appearance of clashing or collision with the French treaty, the powers, thus
early in courting our alliance, were not allowed those privileges of asylum for
themselves, and of excluding their enemies from our ports, which are conceded
in the projected treaty to Great Britain. Have those nations no cause for
jealousy and reproach? What principle of policy, or justice, can vindicate the
partiality and predilection, that has been thus shown?

3. But the projected treaty (after an affected recognition of preexisting
public treaties) declares, that while Great Britain and America continue in
amity, no future treaty shall be made, inconsistent with the articles, that
grant the high and dangerous privileges, that have been mentioned. Every nation
of the earth (except France) is thus sacrificed to the pride and interest of
Great Britain. And with what motive, or upon what consideration, is the
sacrifice made? It has been stated in a former, and will be more fully shown in
a future, feature of Mr. Jay's treaty, that the United States do not enjoy any
equivalent for this, nor for any other, concession which is made to Great
Britain: But the mischief does not end with the folly of a lop-sided bargain.
By granting these exclusive privileges to Great Britain, by declaring that no
commercial favor shall be conferred on other nations, without her
participating in them, we have thrown away the furest means of purchasing, on
any emergency, the good will and good offices of any other power: We cannot
even improve the terms of our old treaty with France. For all the advantages of
trade that Spain, Portugal, Holland, etc. might, and probably would, upon a
liberal footing of reciprocity, have given us, -- what have we now left, to
offer as the basis of negotiation and compact?

4. The alteration which the treaty makes in the relative situation of several
nations with America, and the conduct, that is likely to be pursued by those
nations, in order to counteract its effect, merit serious reflection. Will
Spain see without some solicitude, the partition which we have made with Great
Britain, of our territory on the eastern bank of the Mississipi? How would our
projected treaty work, if France should recover Pondicherry, etc. in the East
Indies; should subdue and retain the West India islands; should stipulate with
Spain for the cession of Louisiana; and should conquer Nova Scotia? The curious
cordon with which we have allowed Great Britain to circumvent us (and of which
more will be said hereafter) being thus broken, how are we to calculate the
consequences?

5. Considering the Indians as a foreign nation, is not the treaty calculated
to exalt the character of Great Britain, and to depreciate the character of
America, throughout the savage world? What right has Great Britain to negociate
for Indians, within the limits of our jurisdiction? Suppose the existing
western posts surrendered, may not Great Britain establish other posts in a
contiguous or more advantageous station? Is she not left at liberty to pursue
the fur trade in our territory as well as her own? Will not her enterprise in
traffic, superior capital and experience, enable her to monopolize that trade?
And will she not, in future, have the same motives, and the same means, to
foment Indian hostilities, that have hitherto been indulged and employed, at
the expense of so much American blood and treasure?

VII. The Treaty with Great Britain is impolitic and pernicious, in respect to
the domestic interests and happiness of the United States.
1. If it is true, and incontrovertibly it is true, that the interest and
happiness of America, consist (as our patriotic president, in his letter to
Lord Buchan, declares) in being little heard of in the great world of politics;
in having nothing to do in the political intrigues, or the squabbles of
European nations; but, on the contrary, in exchanging commodities, and living
in peace and amity with all the inhabitants of the earth; and in doing justice
to, and in receiving it from, every power we are connected with; it is is
likewise manifest, that all the wisdom and energy of those who administer our
government, should be constantly and sedulously employed to preserve, or to
attain, for the United States, that enviable rank among nations. To refrain
from forming hasty and unequal alliances; to let commerce flow in its own
natural channels; to afford every man, whether alien or citizen, a remedy for
every wrong; and to resist, on the ^^rst appearance, every violation of our
national rights and independence, are the means best adapted to the end which
we contemplate. It may be objected, that we are already involved in some
alliances, that have had a tendency rather to destroy our public tranquillity,
than to promote our public interest. But a difference of circumstances will
require and justify a difference of conduct. For instance -- it was necessary
and politic, in the state of our affairs at the commencement of the revolution,
to pay a premium for the friendship and alliance of France: we could not have
insured success without the cooperation of that nation: and as the price that
we paid for it was not greater than the benefit that we derived from it, we
cannot now, with justice, cavil at our bargain. But was the inducement to form
an alliance with Great Britain, of a nature equally momentous? Is the advantage
flowing from the sacrifices that are made, equally compensatory? Why should we,
at this auspicious season of our affairs, venture to undermine the fundamental
maxim of our domestic happiness, by wilfully obtruding on the great world of
politics, or wantonly involving ourselves in the political intrigues and the
squabbles of Europen nations? Suppose (as it is often alleged and sometimes
proved) that our treaty with France is productive of inconveniences; will it
happen in the political, any more than in the physical or moral world, that by
multiplying the sources of evil, we shall get rid of the evil itself? If,
according to the quondam opinion of the friends of a British alliance, our
commerce has been restrained in its operations; or if our government has been
menaced in its peace and stability, by a practical developement of the terms of
our treaty with France, shall we better our situation, because we make another
treaty upon the same terms with Great Britain; and furnish two nations, instead
of one, with an opportunity to perplex and distress us in pursuing our natural
and laudable policy -- the policy of exchanging commodities, and living in
peace and amity with all the inhabitants of the earth; doing justice to, and in
receiving it from, every power we are connected with!

2. But even if the question was at large, and we were now under a necessity of
deciding, for the first time, whether we would be allied to the monarchy of
Great Britain, o^ to the republic of France, how would a rational estimate of
the interests and happiness of the United States (the true and only touchstone
for solving, in the mind of an American, such an enquiry) lead us to decide? To
those members of the senate, who could regard the twelfth article of the treaty
as a mark of parental care and wisdom, by which Great Britain was fondly
desirous of restraining the excesses of our commercial ardour; excesses that
might eventually and prematurely debilitate and destroy us! To those members of
the senate, who could, with filial gratitude, declare, that an alliance with
Great Britain was natural; that an alliance with France was artificial; since,
although we were partially indebted to France for our independence, we were
entirely indebted to Great Britain for our being! To all who can cherish such
ideas, or utter such language, these strictures will be ungracious and
unprofitable: but they claim a candid attention from the patriot, who
remembers, that when the parent sought to destroy, the friend interposed to
save; and from the statesman, who possesses too much wisdom to be influenced by
prejudice, and too much fortitude to be controuled by fear.

Are the interests and happiness of the United States involved in the permanent
establishment of a republican government? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to
cultivate the friendship of a republic, actuated by a fellow feeling, than the
alliance of a monarchy impressed with jealousy and apprehension. Are the
interest and happiness of the United States connected with her territorial and
political independence? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to fortify herself by an
alliance with a nation, whose territorial jurisdiction, and physical
characteristics, preclude the possibility of collision; than attach herself to
a nation whose language, manners and habits, facilitate the execution of every
attempt to encroach; and whose territorial possessions are in an irritating and
dangerous contact with our own. Are the interest and happiness of America to be
promoted by an active employment of the vast store of materials of the first
necessity, which nature has bestowed on her; by the extension of her commerce;
and by the freedom of her navigation? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to court
the countenance and protection of a nation, whose occasions of envy are
comparatively few; -- whose temptations are to foster, not to counteract, our
schemes of commercial opulence and enterprise; -- and whose imperial glory and
existence do not depend upon a claim of universal maritime superiority; --
rather than consent to bask beneath the baneful shade of an alliance with a
nation, whose very existence is, probably, the tremendous stake in opposition
to our prosperity: and whose embraces, like the embraces of the tyrant's image,
may be rendered the most effectual instruments of torture and destruction. Are
the interest and happiness of the United States dependant on the cordiality of
their union, and the permanency of their government? And again -- Do that
cordiality and that permanency, depend upon the confidence and mutual good
understanding, which subsist between the people who formed the government, and
the officers whom the people have appointed to administer it? Yes: -- Then it
would be the part of duty, as well as policy, in those officers to follow the
unanimous sentiment of the people, by preferring a liberal and faithful
alliance with France, to a constrained and hypocritical alliance with Great
Britain.

3. The first striking effect of the treaty, to endanger the interests, and
disturb the happiness of the United States, may be detected by a geographical
sketch of the cordon, or line of circumvallation, with which it enables Great
Britain to fetter and enclose us. The proximity of Canada and the western
posts, has heretofore been a cause of great uneasiness; but that is a trifling
source of vexation, compared with what we shall have in future to encounter.
Suppose ten thousand radii were drawn diverging from the center of the United
States; not one of them could escape the conventional circle of British
territory, jurisdiction and occupancy. Has an American occasion to travel to
the east or the north? The barriers of Nova Scotia and Canada present
themselves. Is it his wish to penetrate the great western wilderness? A new set
of British posts will intercept his progress, even if he shall be allowed
peaceably to pass the British colony within the precincts and jurisdiction of
Detroit. Does business require him to cross, or float down, the Mississippi? He
may evade the vigilance of the Spaniard, but he will find the eastern bank of
the river monopolized by British traders, and probably protected by British
gun-boats. He is in hopes, however, to avoid all difficulty by a passage on the
ocean? Alas! our Atlantic harbors are crowded with prizes to British
privateers, and our sea coast is lined with British cruisers! Yet, let us for a
moment imagine, that this ill fated traveller has surmounted his domestic
obstacles, whither can he fly, to be emancipated from the foreign jurisdiction
of Great Britain? In the West Indies, his cock boat is measured and steered,
according to the scale and course prescribed by the treaty. In the East Indies
he can hardly exchange a commodity, or make a single acquaintance, without the
British license. In Europe, if, during a British war, he carries goods
belonging to an enemy of Great Britain, they will be seized as prize; if he
takes ship-timber, tar, rozin, etc. they are liable to be confiscated as
contraband; and if his cargo consists of provisions, the British may take it,
by treaty, at their own market price!

One idea more about the boundary of the United States. Before the revolution,
Great Britain had projected that general arrangement and division of her
colonial possessions in America, which she has since, upon a smaller scale,
carried into execution with respect to Canada. The territory then intended to
be allotted to the government of the Canadas, was extended by a line running
along the northern boundaries of the eastern colonies, along the western
boundary of Pennsylvania, and along the courses of the Ohio, into the
Mississippi. Since we are left at a loss for a positive definition of the
precincts and jurisdiction of the western posts, as ceded by the treaty to the
settlers under British titles, may we not conjecture, that Great Britain
contemplates the territorial extent of her original project? Does not major
Campbell's unexpected pretension, and the constant claim of the Indians, at the
instigation of the British, to establish the Ohio as a boundary between them
and the United States, give some countenance to such a conjecture?

4. But should an American, not stimulated by the desire of traveling into
foreign countries, be content to prosecute the objects of his honest industry
within the British territorial circle, bounding and constituting his own home,
will his condition be much better than the condition of his itinerant fellow
citizen? What with the establishment of British colonies and British
warehouses; the naturalization of British land-holders; and, in short, the
unqualified admission of Englishmen, owing allegiance to the British crown,
throughout our lakes, rivers and territory, while we are excluded from their
seaports, company-lands, etc. etc. an American will hardly be able to find
elbow-room for himself and family. Their pecuniary capital being larger; their
means being easier; their experience being greater, -- they must, inevitably,
under such circumstances, become our merchants, manufacturers, farmers, etc.
etc. They will import for us, in their vessels, all the products and fabrics of
Europe, Asia and Africa -- They will export for us, in their vessels, every
article that our soil can furnish; our merchants will dwindle into clerks; our
husbandmen will degenerate into the condition of the feudal villienage; and
thus, in a short course of years, America will probably exhibit the astonishing
spectacle of a country possessed, cultivated, and enjoyed by aliens! The
ancient inhabitants of Great Britain, in a similar manner, invited those Saxons
to their island as friends and allies, who soon afterward became their
conquerors and masters.

5. In such a state of things, the interest and happiness of the United States
must languish and expire! At first the American mind will be corroded, by
contrasting the elevation of the guest with the depression of the host. A
struggle will probably ensue; but the influence of wealth, and the patronage of
extensive commercial and manufactural institutions, etc. will even divide the
Americans themselves; and, by dividing, capacitate the British settlers to rule
them. Is this an idle phantom -- a visionary suggestion? No! For, is not a
great part of our trade, at this moment, monopolised by British subjects, under
the mask of American citizenship? Has not the influence of British credits, and
British politics already formed a considerable party in our government, and
among our merchants? Disguise it as you will -- let pride deny, and shame
suppress the sentiment -- still, it is too evident to every candid and
discerning observer, that the only subsisting difference in the opinions and
conduct of the citizens of America, arises from this fatal cause. Why, at the
moment of reprobating self-created societies for civil purposes, do we gladly
see the formation of self-created societies for military purposes; the city
cohorts and Praetorian bands? Why are our merchants, who so anxiously called
forth the voice of their fellow citizens in applauding the proclamation of
neutrality, so circumspect and so torpid in giving their testimony about the
treaty? How comes it, that amidst the acclamations of the 4th of July, the
treaty is toasted in the little circle of English manufacturers, on the banks
of the Passayik; and at the convivial tables of the English emigrants on the
plains of the Genesee? How comes it that every man who prefers France to Great
Britain -- republicanism to monarchy, -- is denominated Antifederalist,
Jacobin, Disorganiser, Miscreant, etc. while men of another humor arrogantly
and exclusively assume the titles of Federalists, Friends to order, etc. etc.?
But let every hopest American reflect seriously and seasonably, upon the means
of promoting the interest and happiness of the United States, and he will
disdain, as well as dread, to augment, by the adventitious force of treaties,
that paramount interest, which Great Britain has already insidiously acquired
in our commerce, navigation, manufactures, territory, and government.

6. Besides the injury eventually to be apprehended from these causes, the
treaty is calculated to impair the interest and happiness of the United States,
by producing an immediate and violent concussion in the federal atmosphere. For,

It ransacks the archives of our revolutionary transactions; and rejudges the
solemn judgments of our courts of justice.

It condemns individuals to the payment of debts, from which they had
previously been discharged by law.

It makes the government of the union responsible for the contracts of private
citizens, and the defalcations of bankrupts.

It disregards the freedom of our commerce and navigation: and it restrains the
use of our staple commodities.

It does not exact a just indemnification for the detention of the western
posts.

It does not require the payment, stipulated by the preceding treaty, for the
value of the negroes carried off at the close of the war.

It does not provide for the freedom and safety of our seamen, in their
intercourse with the British dominions.

Let any one of these propositions be separately analyzed, and sufficient cause
will be found to excite and justify popular dissatisfaction; but view them
combined, and the mind is shocked with an apprehension, that the ratification
of the treaty, may be the death-warrant of the union!

VIII. The British Treaty and the Constitution of the United States are at war
with each other.
1. Self-preservation is the first law of society, as well as of individuals:
It is the radical principle of all political compacts. Nations (says Vattel)
are bound to guard their own preservation, and to pursue their own perfection.
We have incessant opportunities, indeed, of observing the operation of this
universal rule; in animals of instinct, as well as in animals of reason; in the
world of things, as well as in the world of beings.

2. Self-preservation, however, is a relative idea: it relates to the nature of
the animal; to the constitution of the society. A man may lose his human
character, without destroying his vital existence; and a government may be
changed in its essence, without being subverted in its forms.

3. So, likewise, without open assault or positive violence, the sources of
animal life may be poisoned, by the imperceptible contaminations of a luxurious
habit: so, without the aid of terror or force, the legitimate foundations of
government may be undermined, by the insidious encroachment of the rulers, and
by the sedative acquiescence of the people. Governments, indeed, have too
generally proved to be a kind of political chrysalis, passing, by progressive
transmutations, from the grub of pure democracy, to the butterfly of absolute
monarchy.

4. But it will not yet be denied in America, that as the people have the sole
right to constitute their government, the rule of self-preservation requires
that the government should be maintained, in practice as well as in theory,
such as they have constituted it. To render it, by any construction of the
written articles of our social compact, other than a republican government,
would be as fatal a subversion, as daring usurpation, or military conquest,
could atchieve. For, what real difference does it make to a nation, whether its
constitution is seized upon by an enterprizing individual, as in the Swedish
revolution of 1770; or overthrown by a triumphant warrior, as in the recent
extinction of the Polish monarchy; or voted out of doors, as in the
disorganizing edicts of the long parliament of England? Thus, likewise, for one
department of the government to assume the authority of another; or, by
constructive amplifications of its own jurisdiction, so to monopolize the
attributes of government, as to render the other departments useless and
inefficient, must ever be deemed an effectual subversion of any constitution.
The mode of distributing and organizing the powers of government, as well as
the consideration of the nature and extent of the powers to be delegated,
essentially belongs to the people; and in the body politic, as well as in the
body natural, whenever any particular member absorbs more than its allotted
portion of the aliment, that is destined to vivify and invigorate the whole,
debility and disease will infallibly ensure. After the emperors had usurped the
functions, privileges and powers of the senate, and of the popular magistrates
of Rome, they preserved the formalities of the commonwealth, but they trampled
on the liberties of the people. Though the parliaments of France had long been
deprived of every deliberative faculty, as the representatives of the people,
they were summoned to the last, as the ministerial officers of the monarch, for
the purpose of registering his edicts.

5. The government of the United States, being then theoretically a republican
government, and with great propriety denominated a government of departments,
let us proceed to examine how far the principles of self-preservation, and the
duty of pursuing the perfection of our political system, are involved in the
ratification of the projected treaty with Great Britain.

The second section of the second article of the constitution says, that, "The
President shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate,
to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur."

To the exercise of this power no immediate qualification, or restriction, is
attached: but must we therefore suppose that the jurisdiction of the President
and senate, like the jurisdiction ascribed to the British parliament, is
omnipotent? To place the authority of our President and senate on the same
footing with the prerogative of the king of Great Britain, will not be
commensurate with the objects to which the treaty extends. It must be
remembered, that the treaty of peace, by which the rights of sovereignty and
soil were ceded by the king of Great Britain to the United States, was
negociated and ratified under the positive sanction of an act of parliament:
And it is expressly stated in Vattel, that the king of Great Britain cannot, by
treaty, confer the rights of citizenship on an alien. B. 1. c. 19. s. 214. Now,
Mr. Jay's treaty does both these things (as will be hereafter demonstrated)
without the intervention of the legislative authority of the union.

6. The consequence of admitting this unqualified claim to omnipotence, in
transacting the business of the nation, would be so hostile to the principle
and preservation of our government, that it is an indispensable duty (obsia
principiis) to controvert and resist it. Whenever the President and two-thirds
of the Senate shall be desirous to counteract the conduct of the house of
representatives; whenever they may wish to enforce a particular point of
legislation; or whenever they shall be disposed to circumscribe the power of a
succeeding Congress; a treaty with a foreign nation, nay, a talk with a savage
tribe, affords the ready and effectual instrument for accomplishing their
views; since the treaty or the talk will constitute the supreme law of the
land. That such things may happen, let the history of Mr. Jay's mission and
negotiation testify.

7. If the extraordinary treaty-making power is paramount to the ordinary
legislative power -- supercedes its exercise -- and embraces all its objects;
let us endeavor to trace whither the proposition will carry us.

The fifth article of the constitution vests a power in two-thirds of both
houses of Congress, to propose amendments to the constitution.

Let us suppose that a defect in our judiciary, or in any other department,
operated injuriously to a foreign nation, -- could the Senate, and President,
uniting with that foreign nation, and excluding the house of representatives
propose an amendment upon the subject? If they could by these means originate,
might they not by other means effectuate, alterations in the fundamental points
of our government; and make, in fact, a new constitution for us?

By the eighth section of the first article, Congress is empowered to borrow
money on the credit of the United States.

Suppose it was deemed expedient to subsidize Portugal, instead of building
frigates, to keep the Algerines within the streights of the Mediterranean: --
Could two-thirds of the Senate and the President, either borrow, or guarantee a
loan for that purpose by treaty?

The same section empowers Congress to establish uniform laws on the subject of
bankruptcies.

Suppose Great Britain had remarked, that, as her subjects were constantly the
creditors of the citizens of the United States, she was deeply interested in
our system of bankrupt laws: -- Had the President and two-thirds of the Senate,
a right to incorporate such a system with the projected treaty?

The same section empowers Congress to coin money, to regulate the value
thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standards of weights and measures.

Suppose the Birmingham manufacturers offered, on a cheap plan, to supply us
with coin? Suppose Great Britain were pleased to insist upon our receiving her
guineas at their English value, and upon our promising not to sweat, deface, or
clip them, according to the current practice of the union? Suppose France were
desirous that we should adopt the fanciful project of that republic, respecting
weights and measures? -- Could all, or any, of these propositions be acceded to
and established by treaty?

The ninth section of the same article declares "that the migration or
importation of such persons as the states now existing shall think proper to
admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year eighteen
hundred and eight."

Suppose Mr. Wilberforce had negociated on the part of Great Britain, instead
of Lord Grenville, and had made the prohibition of the importation of slaves
into the United States, in the year eighteen hundred and eight, sine qua non:
-- Could the President and two-thirds of the Senate admit and legitimise the
stipulation by treaty?

By the constitution, Congress has the power to constitute tribunals inferior
to the supreme court.

Suppose Great Britain desired, for the future, as well as for the past, to
establish a tribunal of her own judges in America, for deciding controversies
between British subjects and American citizens: -- Could this be accomplished
through the medium of a treaty?

By the constitution, Congress is endowed with the power of declaring war.

Suppose Lord Grenville had insisted, and Mr. Jay had approved, that the treaty
should be an offensive and defensive alliance; and, that we should forthwith
join Great Britain in her hostilities against France: -- Could the President
and Senate thus negociate us into a war?

By the constitution it is declared, "that no person holding any office, etc.
under the United States, shall, without the consent of Congress, accept of any
present, emolument, office or title, of any kind whatsoever, from any king,
prince, or foreign state."

Suppose our envoy had been offered a present or a title by the British monarch
-- would the consent of the treaty be tantamount to the consent of Congress,
for the purpose of approving and justifying his acceptance?

By the constitution it is provided, that all bills for raising revenues, shall
originate in the house of representatives; and, that no money shall be drawn
from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law.

Suppose Great Britain had stipulated, that as soon as the commissioners had
fixed the sum due to her subjects for old debts, the President should draw a
warrant for the amount, and that the same should be paid out of all public
moneys, in the treasury of the United States, prior to the payment of any
antecedent appropriation by law: -- Would this be the proper subject for a
treaty, or for an impeachment?

8. But fatigued and disgusted with displaying, thus hypothetically the
monstrous consequences, which will inevitably flow from the jurisdiction
claimed on behalf of the President and Senate, to bind the United States by any
treaty, and in all cases whatsoever; let us particularly examine the numerous
and extravagant infractions of the constitution, which the projected treaty
actually commits. Recent as is the establishment of the federal constitution,
it is, indeed, to be lamented, that the possibility of violating it, is not a
matter of floating and fluctuating popular opinion; but a matter susceptible of
fixed and positive proof. For, who does not recollect, that a bill touching the
fundamental principle of the government (its representative quality) after
having passed both houses of Congress, was declared by the President to be
unconstitutional; and, therefore, undeserving of his official approbation and
signature? Who can forget, that a law touching the essential properties of the
judicial department of our government, after being ratified by every organ of
legislative authority (the president, senate, and house of representatives) was
declared by chief justice Jay, and his associate judges, to be
unconstitutional; and, therefore, incapable of being executed and enforced?
With such authoritative precedents (and there are many others that might be
adduced from the transactions of individual states) of the possibility of
deviating from the rule and meaning of our constitution, are we to be damned
for political heresy, merely because we doubt, or deny the infallibility of Mr.
Jay's negociating talents? And must every man be accursed (to use, for a
moment, the intolerant language of the late secretary of the treasury, in his
character of the New York Camillus) who thinks, that the American envoy and the
British minister were at least as likely to mistake, or misconstrue, the
constitutional boundaries of the American government, as the president, sen^^e,
and house of representatives of the United States? It is certainly, upon the
whole, more candid, and more covincing, to put "the defense" of the treaty upon
the true trading ground, taken by the New York, chamber of commerce; -- to wit,
-- "that we have made as good a market as such pedlars h^d a right to expect on
the royal exchange; and that we cannot afford to fight, though we must submit
to be plundered."

9. Let us proceed, however, in examining the points on which the British
treaty is at war with the American constitution.

(1.) By the constitution of the United States, the JUDICIAL POWER is vested in
one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to
time establish; and its jurisdiction embraces, among other things,
"controversies between a state, or citizens thereof, and foreign states,
citizens or subjects."

By the treaty, a tribunal other than the supreme court, or any inferior court
established by Congress, is erected, with a jurisdiction to ascertain the
amount of any losses or damages sustained " by diverse British merchants and
others, his majesty's subjects, on account of debts, etc. that still remain
owing to them by citizens or inhobitents of the United States:" And it is
agreed, "that in all such cases, where full compensation for such losses and
damages cannot, for whatever reason, be actually had and received by the said
creditors, in the ordinary course of justice, the United States will make full
and complete compensation, for the same, to the creditors," etc.

Remarks. 1. It is the right of every independent nation to establish and
maintain a judicial authority, co-extensive with its territorial possessions.
The principle is indisputable, and it is incidentally recognized by Lord
Mansfield and other great lawyers, in the celebrated controversy between the
king of Prussia and Great Britain, relative to the Silesia Loan. 2. The
constitutional tribunals of the United States were adequate to the
administration of complete justice, in the very cases for which the treaty
provides a special tribunal. 3. If it is possible in any case, with any nation,
and at any time, to stipulate, by treaty, for the erection of a tribunal, in
order to ascertain and liquidate debts due from citizens to foreigners, may it
not be done in every case, with every nation, and at every time? 4. Is not the
Court of Commissioners, in effect, an High Court of Errors and Appeals for the
United States with power to revise and reverse every judgment, that has been
given since the year 1783, either in a federal or state court, in every cause
between a British subject and an American citizen? 5. Wherever the recovery of
the principal debt has been protracted by the forms of law -- wherever there
has been an abatement in inte^est, by the compromise of the parties, or the
verdict of a jury -- wherever the debtor has become insolvent; this high court
of Commissioners may sustain an appeal, and can award damages for the detention
or loss of the debt. It is true, the treaty adds, that this "provision is to
extend to such losses only as have been occasioned by lawful impediments;" but
the extent of the discretion of the commissioners, in adjudging what
constitutes a lawful impediment, is without limitation or control; and the
nature of the evidence, by which their minds are to be informed, is without
rule or definition; since (in the language of the treaty) it may be "either
according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two countries, or
in such other manner as the said commissioners shall see cause to require or
allow." Thus, not only erecting a court unknown to our constitution, but
admitting a species of proof, not recognized by the legal forms of our country.
6. Let us appeal to Mr. Jay himself, upon the constitutionality of such
proceedings. By an act of Congress, the judges of the circuit courts were
required to take, and report to the secretary at war, certain proofs in the
case of invalids and pensioners. The judges refused (as we have already
noticed) to execute the act, declaring it to be unconstitutional, as well on
account of the nature of the duty imposed upon them, as on account of the
revisionary power, which was vested in the secretary at war. By the t^e^ty, the
President and Senate will appoint commissioners, in conjunction with the king
of Great Britain, to hold a court of appeals from every court in the union; and
to determine judicial questions, upon private controversies, between British
subjects and American citizens. Now, let us ask, whether it is more
unconstitutional for the legislature to impose new and extraordinary duties
upon a court, existing according to the constitution, than for the executive to
create a new and extraordinary tribunal, incompatible with the constitution;
inasmuch as it can only act upon the alienation of the jurisdiction, previously
and ^clusively vested in our domestic courts; -- the jurisdiction of hearing
and deciding judicial questions, upon private controversies, between British
subjects and American citizens? 7. But this is not the only infraction of the
constitution, involved in the arrangement alluded to -- the obligation of
private contracts is transferred from individuals to the public. The framers of
the constitution, in declaring that "all debts contracted, and engagements
entered into, before its adoption, shall be as valid against the United States
under the constitution, as under the confederation," could hardly anticipate,
that they charged the treasury of the union with the payment of all the
outstanding debts of the individual citizens of America! And when Congress was
vested with a power "to lay and collect taxes, to pay the debts, and provide
for the common defense and general welfare of the United States;" it certainly
was never contemplated, that the government of America became the insurer of
every British ^^^^^ant, against litigious delays, and fraudulent or accidental
ban^^^^cies! It cannot be suggested that Great Britain acts in a similar manner
upon our complaints of the spoliations on our trade. For, the injury that we
have sustained, originated in on act of government -- the ^^j^red individuals
are, in the first instance, bound to apply to the British courts of justice --
and the public are only responsible in the l^st resort, for the individual
aggressors.


(2.) By the constitution of the United States, Congress is empowered to
establish "an uniform rule of naturalization;" and that power has accordingly
been exercised in an act that provides, among other things, that 'no person
heretofore proscribed by any state, shall be admitted a citizen, except by an
act of the legislature of the state in which such person was proscribed."

By the Treaty, all the British settlers and traders, within the precincts or
jurisdiction of the western posts, are allowed an election either to remain
British subjects, or to become citizens of the United States: And it is agreed,
"that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of the United
States, may hold, grant, sell or devise the same, to whom they please, in like
manner as if they were natives; and that neither they, nor their heirs or
assigns, shall, so far as may respect the said lands, and the legal remedies
incident thereto, be regarded as aliens."

Remarks. Is not the treaty at war with the constitution in this great and
delicate point of naturalization? A British colony is, ipso facto, by the magic
of Mr. Jay's pen, converted into an American settlement! Every British subject,
who now holds lands (and when we recollect the recent speculations for the sale
of lands, how can we calculate the extent of the adoption?) is, without ordeal
or restraint, endowed with all the rights of a native American! If it is
possible, by treaty, to give the rights of property to aliens, may not the
civil rights of the community be disposed of by the same potent instrument? If
it is possible, by treaty, to confer citizenship on the British garrison at
Detroit, and its contiguous settlers, why may we not, by treaty, also confer an
instantaneous citizenship on every flight of emigrants, that shall hasten to
our shores from Germany or Ireland? It may not be amiss here to intimate a
doubt of the power of the federal government to regulate the tenure of real
estates: it is no where expressly given, and, therefore, cannot be
constitutionally implied; and it seems to be among the necessary and natural
objects of state legislation. But let us presume (what is highly probable) that
there are amongst the settlers within the precincts or jurisdiction of the
western posts, certain proscribed persons -- can the treaty, in spite of the
law, restore them to the rights of citizenship, without the authoritative
assent of the state that proscribed them? Again -- Is every man whose estate
was liable to confiscation as a traitor, or as an alien, in consequence of the
revolution, entitled now to hold l^nds as a native? The Fairfax claim in
Virginia; the claim of the Penns in Pennsylvania; and the claims of Galloway,
Allen, etc. etc. may hence derive a dangerous principle of resuscitation. Look
to it well.

(3.) By the constitution, Congress is empowered to regulate commerce with
foreign nations.

By the treaty, the commerce of the United States, not only directly with Great
Britain, but incidentally with every foreign nation, is regulated.

Remarks. There is not a source of legislative jurisdiction, upon the subject
of commerce, which is not absorbed by this executive compact. The power of
regulating commerce with foreign nations, is expressly and specifically given
to Congress: Can a power so given to one department, be divested by
implication, in order to amplify and invigorate another power, given in general
terms to another department? But more of that hereafter.

(4.) By the constitution, Congress is empowered to regulate commerce with the
Indian tribes.

By the treaty, it is agreed, that "it shall at all times be free to British
subjects, etc. and also to the Indians dwelling on either side of the boundary
line of the United States, freely to pass and repass by land or inland
navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two parties on
the continent of America, etc. and freely to carry on trade and commerce with
each other." The treaty, likewise, provides, that "no duty of entry shall ever
be levied by either party on pelt ies brought by land, or inland navigation
into the said territories respectively; nor shall the Indians passing or
repassing with their own proper goods and effects, of whatever nature, pay for
the same any impost or duty whatever."

Remarks. It is easy to perceive that t^^ stipulations, in favor of the
Indians, were introduced at the insta^^e of Great Britain; and her motives are
not even attempted to be disguised. Her traders will boast of the favor and
security, which she has compelled America to grant to the Indians; and so
engage their confidence and attachment; while the privilege of free passage and
the exemption from duties, will inevitably throw the whole fur-trade into the
hands of the British. The surrender of the western posts, under such
circumstances, ^an produce no loss to Great Britain, and will certainly be of
no advantage to America: It will not add a shilling to the profits of our
Indian traffic; nor insure us a moment's suspension of Indian hostilities! But,
to prosecute our constitutional enquiry -- what right is there, by t^eaty, to
regulate our commerce with the Indian tribes? Whenever a treaty of peace and
amity has heretofore been concluded with the Indians, it has been the
constitutional practice of the President, to call on Congress to regulate the
commerce with them. Such calls were totally unnecessary, if the same thing
might as well and as lawfully be done by treaty; and if it could not be done by
treaty in the case of the Indians, neither could it be done by treaty in the
case of a foreign nation: For, both are expressed in the same terms, and
included in the same member of the section. "Congress shall have power (says
the constitution) to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the
several states, and with the Indian tribes." What right is there by treaty to
declare that no duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on peltries,
etc. (and a similar promise is made in cases that more immediately affect Great
Britain) since Congress has the sole power to lay and collect taxes, duties,
etc. to pay the debts, and provide for the common defense, and general welfare
of the United States? If we may, negatively, say, by treaty, that certain
duties shall not be laid, may we not affirmatively say, by treaty, that certain
other duties shall be laid? And then what becomes of that part of our
constitution, which declares, "that all bills for raising revenue shall
originate in the house of representatives?" But let us imagine for a moment,
that it is in the power of the President and Senate to regulate our commerce
with the Indian tribes; ought not the regulation to be made with the Indians
themselves? Why suffer Great Britain to negociate and stipulate for Indians
actually residing within the territory of the United States? Is such a
concession consistent with the dignity and independence of our government --
with the peace and interest of the nation? Let Mr. Randolph's letter to Mr.
Hammond, on the conduct of general Simcoe and major Campbell be referred to, as
an answer to this question. It is not, at present, within reach to be quoted;
but its contents were too important to have already escaped the memory of any
reflecting American.

(5.) By the constitution, Congress is empowered "to define and punish piracies
and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of
nations."

By the treaty, the definition and punishment of certain offenses, not known by
any law of the union, is declared and permitted; to wit -- 1st. For accepting
commissions or instructions from any foreign prince or state, to act against
Grea ^^^tain. 2d. For accepting any foreign commission or letter of marque for
arming any privateer, etc. Great Britain may punish an American citizen as a
pirate. 3d. For not treating British officers with that respect which is due to
the commissions they bear, and for offering any insult to such officers, the
offenders shall be punished as disturbers of the peace and amity between
America and Great Britain. 4th. For making a prize upon the subjects of Great
Britain, the people of every other belligerent nation (except France) shall be
punished by a denial of shelter or refuge, in our ports.

Remarks. To define crimes, and apportion punishments, is the peculiar province
of the legislative authority of every free government: but it is obvious, from
the foregoing recapitulation, that the executive authority has likewise
encroached upon that province, by the instrumentality of its treaty-making
power. Can a citizen be surrendered by treaty to all the pains and penalties of
piracy? Then by treaty, he might be subjected to all the pains and penalties of
treason. It is true, that the constitution reserves to itself the exclusive
right of declaring what shall constitute treason; but it is equally true, that
it bestows on Congress the exclusive right to define and punish piracy: and the
invasion of the right to des^^^ in one case, is as unconstitutional as the
invasion of an actual definition in the other. But what legitimate authority
can a treaty suggest, in order to justify the restraint upon that right of
expatriation, which Congress itself has not ventured to restrain, while
legislating on subjects of a similar class? It is not intended to convey the
slightest doubt of the power and propriety of controuling our citizens in their
conduct toward foreign nations, while they are within the reach of domestic
coercion: but to prohibit and American freeman from going whither he pleases,
in quest of fortune and happiness -- to restrict him from exercising, in a
foreign country, and in a foreign service, his genius, talents and industry; to
denounce him for seeking honor, emolument or instruction, by enlisting within
the territory, and under the banners of another nation -- to do such things, is
to condemn the principle of our own policy, by which we invite all the world to
fill up the population of our country: To do such things is, in fact, to
prostrate the boasted rights of man. It is hardly worth a pause to ask, What
proportion of respect is due to the commission of a British officer? and what
degree of punishment the refusal or neglect to pay it, may deserve?

(6.) By the constitution it is declared, that "no tax or duty shall be laid on
articles exported from any state."

By the treaty, "it is expressly agreed and declared that the United States
will probibit and restrain the carrying any melasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa, or
co^^on, in American vessels, either from his majesty's islands, or from the
United States, to any part of the world."

Remarks. This is an extract, it is true, from the twelfth article of the
treaty; but it equally serves to show the probability of attempts to violate
the constitution. Besides, the advocates for the treaty are hasty and
premature, when they desire to throw the twelfth article entirely out of
consideration: for, by that proposition, though they should save the treaty,
they effectually destroy its author. They are hasty and premature for another
reason: the twelfth article is to be suspended for the declared purpose of
negociating something as a substitute; and, therefore we must consider its
principle, in order to ascertain how far any modification of it could be
rendered palatable. But, on constitutional ground, when it is declared, that no
duty shall by law be laid on articles exported from any state, is it not
absurd, or wicked to suppose, that by treaty the exportation of the articles
themselves can be prohibited? The obvious intention of the constitution is to
encourage our export trade; -- the immediate effect of the treaty is to
obstruct and annihilate it.

(7.) There are many other points in which a collision occurs between the
constitution and the treaty, but to which the scope and nature of these
strictures will not admit a full attention. It may be cursorily remarked,
however, that a cession of territory, which will, probably, be the consequence
of settling an^^^ the boundaries of the United States, and even the actual
cession of the precincts of the western posts, though in favor of individuals,
are subjects for serious reflection. If a part of the United States may be
ceded -- if a whole state may be ceded, what becomes of the guarantee of a
republican form of government to every state? The propriety of presenting this
consideration to the public mind, will be allowed by those who know, that, in
the course of the senatorial debate, the right of ceding by treaty a whole
state, nay, any number of the states, short of a majority, was boldly asserted,
and strenously argued!!!

(8.) It may not be amiss, likewise, to add, that our government has no more
right to alienate powers that are given, than it has to usurp powers that are
not given. For instance, an act of Congress could not (and can a treaty?)
surrender the right of sequestering the property of a hostile nation -- the
right of giving commercial preferences to a friendly nation -- and the right of
suspending a ruinous intercourse with any nation? Great clamours have been
raised against the exercise of these rights; and, undoubtedly, they should only
be used in the last resort; but they are rights recognized by the law of
nations; and they are rights often essential to the duties of
self-preservation, and sometimes necessary to the accomplishment of reciprocal
justice.

10. Having taken this review of the actual warfare between the constitution
and Mr. Jay's diplomatic work, and of the destructive consequences of the claim
of the executive, to bind the United States, in all cases whatsoever, by
treaty; let us recur to the position with which the present feature was
introduced, namely, the duty of preserving the constitution, such as it was
made and intended by the people, and we shall find, by a faithful comparison of
theory with practice, that the government of the United States may be
transformed through the medium of the treaty-making power, from a republic to
an oligarchy -- from a free government of several departments, legislative,
judicial and executive -- to the simple oristocratical government of a
President and Senate.

11. This fatal effect, however, of converting our government from the system
which the people love, to a system which they abhor, -- from what it was made
in theory, to what it was never intended to be made by practice -- can only
proceed from error or corruption. It would ill become the writer of these
strictures, who so freely, but it is hoped, so fairly, expresses an opinion, to
impute to any man or set of men, a sinister and traitorous design against the
constitution of our common country. The denunciations fulminated by the
New York Camillus, and his small circle of coadjutors, harmlessly expand
themselves in the violence of their explosion: like the denunciations of the
Tiara, they spring from an arrogant claim of infallibility; and like them too,
will only excite the derision or the disgust of an enlightened nation. Is it
credible, that every citizen of the United States, from Georgia to
New Hampshire, who reprobates Mr. Jay's treaty, must either be an enemy to our
government, or a rancorous incendiary? Is it to be presumed that no man can
utter a sentence of disapprobation respecting the principles of the treaty,
without feeling a sentiment of animosity, respecting the person of the
negociator? Are we really such slaves to faction; -- so trammelled with party;
-- so insensible to virtue, truth and patriotism; -- that every thought which
we conceive, every expression which we use, on this momentous occasion, must be
connected with the possible (but it is ardently hoped the distant) event of
electing a successor to the present chief magistrate of the union? Yet, such
are the base and sordid motives, passionately and wantonly ascribed by Camillus
and the scanty troop of advocates, who follow him in supporting the treaty, to
the great host of the American people, rising (as it were) in mass to condemn
it.

If it could be thought a convenient, a reputable, or a necessary task, how
successfully might the argument of recrimination be employed! Who, it could be
asked, are the persons that support the treaty? What are the motives that
actuate them? Is it surprising that the men who advised the treaty, or that the
THE MAN who composed it, should endeavor, by the force of ingenuity, art, or
defamation, to rescue it from general malediction and impending ruin? Was it
not to be expected, that a faction, uniformly eager to establish an alliance
with Great Britain, at the expense of France, would strenuously attempt to
procure the ratification of any instrument, calculated to accomplish that
object? Does not consistency require from him, who openly projected in the
Federal Convention, and from those, who secretly desire in the execution of
public offices, the establishment of an aristocracy, under the insidious title
of an energetic scheme of government, that they should approve and countenance
every practical application of any medium, by which the barriers that separate
our constitutional departments, may be overthrown, and the occasions for
interposing the popular sanction of the legislature, may be superceded or
avoided? Is it not natural, that British merchants and British agents -- is it
not necessary, that British debtors and British factors, -- should cl^^orously
unite, or tacitly acquiesce, in the applause bestowed upon a compact, which,
however detrimental to America, is beneficial to Great Britain -- the nation of
chief importance to the allegiance and affections of some of those characters,
and to the opulence and subsistence of all? Or, if the paltry idea of an
electioneering plan must be forced upon our consideration, is it not, at least,
as likely, that the party, which aims at making a President of Mr. Jay, will,
or that ground alone, exert itself in "The Defense" of the treaty, as that the
party, which is desirous of conferring the same elevated office on Mr.
Jefferson, will, for no other reason, attempt to blast the fruits of his
competitor's negotiation? Considering, indeed, that Camillus himself, by
confining his "Defense" to the treaty as advised to be ratified by the senate,
virtually abandons the treaty as negociated and concluded by Mr. Jay: -- and
also, considering that a part of Camillus's defense of the present treaty
arises from the ambiguity that Mr. Jay had left in the former treaty with Great
Britain (upon which, however, his character as a negociator was founded) we
might be led to suppose, that Mr. Jay's pretensions to the wisdom of a
statesman, and to the station of a President, were not deemed, even by his own
party, to be any longer tenable; but that Camillus still condescends, on the
obvious presumption of a subsisting rivalship, to impeach the ministerial
character, and to depreciate the official performances, of Mr. Jefferson.

But why should we arbitrarily abuse, instead of endeavoring rationally to
convince each other? We all have the same right, from natural and from social
law, to think and to speak: it is true, that we do not all possess the same
powers of reason, nor the same charms of eloquence; but when men are on an
equality in the possession, as well as in the right of exercising, those
endowments, there can be no amicable way of adjusting a difference of opinion,
but that which is adopted for adjusting all the other differences of a free
people -- an appeal to the voice of the majority! Now, let it be allowed (and
so far ought it to be allowed, but no farther) that Mr. Jay, who negociated the
treaty; the twenty members of the senate, who assented to a conditional
ratification; and Mr. Hamilton, and the New York chamber of commerce, who have
appeared in support of it (an enumeration that comprises, it is believed, all
that have hitherto avowed a perfect approbation) are in the possession of as
great a proportion of information, integrity and talents, as a like number of
citizens, selected for their approved wisdom, virtue and patriotism, from the
aggregate of those who have publicly condemned the treaty; and then let it be
heartily answered, which scale in the balance must, of right, preponderate?
After such a selection, there will still remain the great body of the community
in opposition to a ratification; and, as members of that comm^^ity, thousands
of individuals, who honorably served during the late war, in the field and the
cabinet, and many of whom at this moment serve with zeal, fidelity and wisdom
in the various departments of government. Is it not then the symptom of an
arrogant vanity -- of a tyrannical disposition -- to stigmatize such an
opposition to a projected measure, with the name of 'Faction?' The violence
offered to Mr. Hamilton's person in New York, and to Mr. Bingham's house in
Philadelphia, have justly excited the indignation of every sincere republican;
but even that reprehensible and odious conduct is not to be compared to the
enormous guilt of endeavoring to force the opinion of a few individuals upon
the people, as the ultimate test of political truth; and to cast an odium upon
the late conventions, in which (according to the language of the constitution)
"the people were peaceably assembled, to petition the government for the
redress (or rather the prevention) of a grievance."

But let the pardon of the reader be granted for this digression; and we will
return to a delineation of the feature that lies before us.

12. Declining, then, either to create, or to follow, a bad example, let us
ascribe the deviation from the principles of our constitution to an erroneous
construction, rather than to a wilful perversion; and let us exert our skill in
averting the evil that threatens, rather than indulge our resentment in
convicting those who labor to produce it.

Our government, therefore, being a government of departments, it is (as we
have already observed) inconsistent with the duty of self-preservation; or, in
other words, it must proceed from an error in construction; that one department
shall assume and exercise all, or any, of the powers, of all, or any, of the
other departments. -- "The departments or government (to adopt the elegant
figure used by an excellent judge, in a late admirable charge to a Philadelphia
jury) are planets that revolve, each in its appropriate orbit, round the
constitution, as the sun of our political system." Thus, if the legislative,
executive, or judicial departments shall encroach, one upon the orbit of the
other, the destruction of the order, use, and beauty of the political system,
must as inevitably ensue, as the destruction of the order, use, and beauty of
the planetary system would follow, from a subversion of the essential
principles of attraction, repulsion and gravity.

13. It was necessary, however, that the power of making treaties with foreign
nations, should be vested in one of the departments of the government: but the
power of making treaties is not, in its nature, paramount to every other power;
nor does the exercise of that power naturally demand an exclusive jurisdiction.
A nation may carry on its external commerce without the aid of the
treaty-making power; but it cannot manage its domestic concerns without the aid
of the legislative power: the legislative power is, consequently, of superior
importance and rank to the treaty-making power. Again: The legislative power
exercised conformably to the constitution, must be direct, universal, and
conclusive in its operation and force upon the people; but the treaty-making
power is scarcely in any instance independent of legislative aid to effectuate
its efforts, and to render its compacts obligatory on the nation. A memorable
occurrence in the English history will serve to illustrate both of these
positions: It is the fate of the commercial part of the famous treaty of
Utrecht, concluded between France and England in the year 1712. "The peace
(says Russel in his History of Modern Europe, vol. 4. p. 457) was generally
disliked by the people, and all impartial men reprobated the treaty of commerce
with France, as soon as the terms were known. Exception was particularly taken
against the 8th and 9th articles, importing "That Great Britain and France
should mutually enjoy all the privileges in trading with each other, which
either granted to the most favored nation; that all prohibitions should be
removed, and no higher duties imposed on the French commodities, than on those
of any other people." The ruinous tendency of these articles was perceived by
the whole trading part of the kingdom. It was accordingly urged, when a bill
was brought into the house of commons for confirming them, that the trade with
Portugal, the most beneficial of any, would be lost, should the duties on
French and Portuguese wines be made equal, etc. etc. These and similar
arguments induced the more moderate tories to join the whigs, and the bill was
rejected by a majority of nine votes. In relating the same transaction,
Smollet's history of England, vol. 2. p. 242, 246, contains some passages too
remarkable to be omitted on the present occasion. "Against the 8th and 9th
articles, (says the historian) the Portuguese minister presented a memorial,
declaring, that should the duties on French wines be lowered to the same level
with those that were laid on the wines of Portugal, his master would renew the
prohibition of the woolen manufactures, and other products of Great Britain.
Indeed, all the trading part of the nation exclaimed against the treaty of
commerce, which seems to have been concluded in a hurry, before the ministers
fully understood the nature of the subject. This precipitation was owing to the
fears that their endeavors after peace would miscarry, from the intrigues of
the whig faction, and the obstinate opposition of the confederates." "Another
bill (continues the same writer, in a subsequent page) being brought into the
house of commons, for rendering the treaty of commerce effectual, such a number
of petitions were delivered against it, and so many solid arguments advanced by
the merchants, who were examined on the subject, that even a great number of
tory members were convinced of the bad consequence it would produce to trade,
and voted against the minister on this occasion."

Perhaps there cannot, in the annals of all the nations of the earth, be found
two cases more parallel than the one which is thus recorded in the English
history, and the one which at present agitates the American nation. -- 1. All
impartial men reprobated both treaties, as soon as the terms were known. 2. The
admission of the opposite contracting party to an unqualified participation in
trade, with the most favored nation, is, in both cases, a principal source of
complaint. 3. The removal of all prohibitions, and the surrender of the right
to impose higher duties on the commodities of the opposite contracting party,
than on those of any other people, are, in both cases, condemned. 4. The good
and the intelligent, of all parties, have united their influence, in both
cases, to prevent a confirmation of articles of so ruinous a tendency. 5. The
whole nation, in both cases, have exclaimed against the treaty. 6. Both
treaties were concluded in a hurry, before the ministers fully understood the
nature of the subject. 7. Innumerable petitions (and who will NOW deny the
propriety of exercising the American right to petition?) were delivered against
both treaties. 8. And the Portuguese minister declared, in effect, of the
treaty of Utrecht (mutatis mutandis) what the minister of France will, probably
declare of the treaty of London (but what America surrenders the right of
saying at any time to Great Britain) "If you ratify your alliance with the
British, you must surrender your alliance with France."
If such a wonderful similarity of circumstances concur in the negotiation,
terms, and reception of these memorable instruments, let us hope that the
guardian angel of American liberty and prosperity, has, also, doomed them
finally to experience a merited similarity of fate!

14. But having thus shown, that, even in Great Britain, the treaty-making
prerogative is neither paramount nor exclusive (though the generality of judge
Blackstone's expressions on the subject, would, perhaps, lead to that
preposterous conclusion) we might be satisfied to presume, on general
principles, that so high a claim of jurisdiction could not be maintained, at
least, on the part of our president and senate. Yet, let us endeavor, by the
infallible test of the constitution, to put the matter, if possible, beyond
doubt and controversy; and, having established that each department of the
government should be confined to its proper orbit, let us endeavor to
ascertain, what that orbit is, in relation to the treaty-making power.

(1.) The power of the president and senate to make treaties, is given, (as we
have already stated) in general and unrestricted terms.

But the powers given to Congress (except in an instance to be hereafter
noticed) are definite in their terms, and appropriated in their objects.

Let us ask, then, by what rule of construction a power primarily and
specifically given to one body, can be assumed and exercised by another, to
which, in a subsequent clause, a mere general authority is given?

Upon the common law principles of construction, the specific powers would
clearly, in such a case, be deemed a reservation and exception out of the
general grant. But e^^^^ according to a rule furnished by the constitution
itself, the same ^esult will be produced. Thus, the twelfth ratified amendment
declares, "that the powers not delegated to the United States by the
constitution, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people." Now,
if the general power granted for the purpose of making treaties, can set at
naught the jurisdiction specifically given to Congress for the purpose of
making laws may it not, with equal propriety and effect, overleap the boundary
thus interposed between popular rights and constituted powers? In the one case,
the reservation is expressly declared -- in the other, it is necessarily
implied.

(2. But if the delegation of a general power does, ipso facto, convey a right
to embrace, in the exercise of that power, every authority not in compatible
with its objects, the consequence will be, that Congress may enter into
treaties as well as the president and senate.

For, Congress is vested with a jurisdiction "to make all laws, which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into execution their own powers:" and what
laws are, in that respect, necessary and proper, they must, from the nature of
the thing, be the judge.

Suppose, therefore, that Congress was desirous of forming an alliance,
offensive and defensive, with France, but could not obtain the constitutional
number of two-thirds of the senate for accomplishing the measure by treaty, --
and act of Congress, in order to regulate commerce with that nation, would
afford as effectual a mode (according to the new doctrine) since the act, on
the pretext of an equivalent for commercial advantages, might legislate us into
the coveted alliance. The temptation and facility of proceeding in this way is
obvious; -- the passing of a law requiring but a majority of the senate;
whereas the ratification of a treaty requires the concurrence of two-thirds of
the members of that body.

(3.) It is not, however, necessary to mingle and confuse the departments of
our government, contrary to the first principles of a free republic; nor to
make a part of our political system equal to the whole, contrary to the
soundest axioms of demonstrative philosophy, in order to give a just, efficient
and salutary effect to the treatymaking power of the president and senate. For
although,

In the first place, the treaty-making power cannot bind the nation by a
decision upon any of the subjects, which the constitution expressly devolves
upon the legislative power:

Yet, in the second place, the treaty-making power may negociate conditionally,
respecting the subjects that constitutionally belong to the decision of the
legislative power;

And, in the third place, every other subject, proper for the national compact
of a republic, may be negociated and absolutely concluded by the treaty-making
power.

(4.) That such a distinction was intended by the framers of our present
excellent constitution, the reasons that have been glanced at, must, it is
thought, sufficiently prove to every ingenuous mind: But let one argument more
be adduced.

By the ninth article of the old confederation, it was declared, "That the
United States, in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive right
and power of determining on peace and war."

By the existing constitution of the United States, it is provided, "That
Congress shall have power to declare war, grant letters of marque and
reprisal," etc.

Now, it is evident, that by omitting to deposit with Congress the power of
making peace, in addition to the power of declaring war, the framers of our
present government, had in full view the division of its department, and the
corresponding distribution of its powers.

Congress, under the confederation was a single body, and therefore,
necessarily possessed of all the little legislative, executive, and judicial
authority, which the states had been pleased to delegate to the union.

The government of the United States, on the contrary, is a compound system, of
which the Congress is only the legislative department: and, therefore, the
executive and judicial functions are elsewhere to be sought for and exercised.

Hence it is, that although the power of declaring war is (as it ought to be)
left with Congress, the power of making peace is (as it ought to be)
transferred to the executive; being a natural appendage of the general power of
making treaties.

This deduction serves likewise to demonstrate, that the framers of the
constitution, did not intend to leave the powers that are specifically given to
Congress, at the mercy of the power that is generally given to the president
and senate. By expressing a positive jurisdiction in favor of the former, it
excludes a claim of jurisdiction in favor of the latter.

(5.) Nor is it in the power of making treaties only, that the constitution has
abridged the executi^^ department of its customary attributes, in order to
augment the sources (...) legislative jur^^diction.

In Great Britain ((...) instance) the executive possesses the power of making
peace; of granting letters of marque and reprisal; of regulating weights and
meas^^es; of ^o^^ing money, regulating the value thereof, and of foreign coins;
of ^^recting courts of judicature; of conferring the rights of denizenship on
aliens, etc. etc.

In the United States the power for all those purposes is absolutely vested in
the legislature.

15. On reviewing the various positions that have been taken in the course of
these strictures, a desire is felt to exhibit the corroborative opinions of men
who have been justly valued by the public: It will be useful to the reader, as
well as pleasing to the writer, to indulge the disposition in a few instances,
and in a brief manner.

(1.) It has been laid, that the power of regulating commerce belonged to
Congress.

The report of Mr. Mason (a member of the federal convention) on that subject,
was delivered in the convention of virginia as follows: "With respect to
commerce and navigation, I will give you, to the best of my information, the
history of that affair. This business was discussed [in the convention] at
Philadelphia for four months; during which time the subject of commerce and
navigation was often under consideration; and, I assert, that eight out of
twelve, for more than three months, voted for requiring two-thirds of the
members present in each house to pass commercial and navigation laws. True it
is, that afterward it was carried by a majority as it stands. If I am right,
there was a great majority for two-thirds of the states in this business, till
a compromise took place between the northern and southern states; the northern
states agreeing to the temporary importation of slaves; and the southern states
conceding, in return, that navigation and commercial laws should be on the
footing in which they now stand."

(2.) It has been said, that the treaty-making power could not cede a part of
the union, nor surrender a citizen to be punished as a pirate.

The opinion of Mr. Randolph (a member of the federal convention, and now
secretary of state) delivered in the same convention, contains the following
passage: "I conceive, that neither the life, nor the property of any citizen,
nor the particular right of any state, can be effected by a treaty."

Mr. Madison, also, justifying and recommending the adoption of the
constitution to his fellow citizens, says, with respect to the treaty-making
power -- "I am persuaded, that when this power comes to be thoroughly and
heartily viewed, it will be found right and proper. Does it follow, because
this power is given to Congress, that it is absolute and unlimited? -- I do not
conceive that power is given to the president and senate to dismember the
empire, or to alienate any great, essential right. I do not think the whole
legislative authority have this power. The exercise of the power must be
consistent with the object of the delegation."

(3.) It has been said, the right of suspending a commercial intercourse with
any nation, and the right of sequestering an enemy's property, etc. were rights
essential to an independent government, and recognized by the law of nations.

Vattel contains the following, among many other passages on those subjects:
"Every state has a right to prohibit the entrance of foreign merchandise, and
the people who are interested have no right to complain of it, as if they had
been refused an office of humanity.

B. 1. c. 8. s. 90. "It depends on the will of any nation to carry on commerce
with another, or to let it alone."

Ibid. s. 92. "The goods even of the individuals in their totality ought to be
considered as the goods of the nation, in regard to other states. From an
immediate consequence of this principle, if one nation has a right to any part
of the goods of another, it has a right indifferently to the goods of the
citizens of that part, till the discharge of the obligation."

Ibid. s. 81, 82. "It is not always necessary to have recourse to arms, in
order to punish a nation: the offended may take from it, by way of punishment,
the privileges it enjoys in his dominions; seize, if he has an opportunity, on
some of the things that belong to it, and detain them till it has given him a
just satisfaction."

B. 2. c. 18. s. 340. "When a sovereign is not satisfied with the manner in
which his subjects are treated by the laws and customs of another nation, he is
at liberty to declare, that he will treat the subjects of that nation in the
same manner that his are treated."

Ibid. s. 341.

(4.) It has been said that the constitution ought to be preserved such as the
people have made it; that, of course, the departments of government ought to be
kept separate and distinct, each revolving in its proper orbit, and that no
other judicial tribunal could be erected by a law of the legislative power,
much less by a treaty of the executive power, than what the constitution
prescribes, or expressly permits.

On this interesting subject we fortunately possess the opinions of the judges
of the supreme court, and of the judges of some of the district courts, in the
case of the act of Congress (already more than alluded to) which they have
unanimously adjudged to be unconstitutional and void.

Extract from the opinion of judges IREDELL and SITGRIAVES.
" First: That the legislative, executive and judicial departments are each
formed in a separate and independent manner; and that the ultimate basis of
each is the constitution only; within the limits of which each department can
alone justify any act of authority.

" Secondly: That the legislature, among other important powers, unquestionably
possesses that of establishing courts, in such a manner as to their wisdom
shall appear best, limited by the terms of the constitution only; and to
whatever extent that power may be exercised, or however severe the duty they
may think proper to require, the judges, when appointed in virtue of any such
establishment, owe implicit and unreserved obedience to it.

" Thirdly: That at the same time such courts cannot be warranted, as we
conceive, by virtue of that part of the constitution delegating judicial power,
for the exercise of which any act of the legislature is provided, in exercising
(even under the authority of another act) any power not in its nature judicial,
or if judicial, not provided for upon the terms the constitution requires.

" Fourthly: That whatever doubts may be suggested, whether the power in
question is properly of a judicial nature, yet inasmuch as the decision of the
court is not made final, but may be, at least, suspended in its operation by
the secretary at war, if he shall have cause to suspect imposition or mistake,
this subjects the decision of the court to a mode of revision which we consider
to be unwarranted by the constitution: For, though Congress may certainly
establish, in instances not yet provided for, courts of appellate jurisdiction;
yet, such courts must consist of judges appointed in the manner the
constitution requires, and holding their offices by no other tenure than that
of their good behavior; by which tenure the office of secretary at war is not
held. And, we beg leave to add, with all due deference, that no decision of any
court of the United States can, under any circumstances, in our opinion,
agreeably to the constitution, be liable to a reversion, or even suspension, by
the legislature itself, in whom no judicial power of any kind appears to be
vested, but the important one relative to impeachments."

Extract from the opinion of judges WILSON, BLAIR, and PETER'S.
"The people of the United States have vested in Congress all leg^stative
powers, granted in the constitution.

"They have vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior courts at the
Congress shall establish, the judicial power of the United States.

"It is worthy of remark, that, in Congress, the whole legislative power of the
United States is not vested: an important part of that power was exercifed by
the people themselves, when they 'or^rined and established the constitution.'

"This constitution is the 'supreme law of the land:' This supreme law, 'all
judicial officers of the United States are bound, by oath or affirmation to
support.'

"It is a principle important to freedom, that in government, the judicial
should be distinct from, and independent of, the legislative department. To
this important principle, the people of the United States, in forming their
constitution, have manifested the highest regard.

"They have placed their judicial power, not in Congress, but in 'courts.' They
have ordained, that 'the judges' of those courts shall hold their offices
during good behavior;' and that, 'during their continuance in office, their
salaries shall not be diminished.'

"Congress have lately passed an act 'to regulate (among other things) the
claims to invalid pensions.'

"Upon due consideration, we have been unanimously of opinion, that, under this
act, the circuit court, held for the Pennsylvania district, could not proceed:

" First, Because the business directed by this act, is not of a judicial
nature. It forms no part of the power vested by the constitution in the courts
of the United States; the circuit court must, consequently, have proceeded
without constitutional authority.

" Secondly, Because, if, upon that business, the court had proceeded; its
judgments (for its opinions are its judgments) might, under the same act, have
been revised and controuled by the legislature, and by an officer in the
executive department. Such revision and control we deemed radically
inconsistent with the independence of that judicial power, which is vested in
the courts; and, consequently, with that important principle, which is so
strictly observed by the constitution of the United States."

Extract from the opinion of chief justice JAY, and judges CUSHING and DUANE.
"The court were unanimously of opinion.

" First, That by the constitution of the United States, the government thereof
is divided into three distinct and independent branches; and, that it is the
duty of each to abstain from, and oppose, encroachments on either.

" Secondly, That neither the legislative nor the executive branches, can
constitutionally assign to the individual any duties, but such as are properly
judicial, and to be performed in a judicial manner.

" Thirdly, That the duties assigned to the circuit court by the act in
question, are not of that description; and that the act itself does not appear
to contemplate them as such; inasmuch as it subjects the decision of these
courts, made pursuant to those duties, first to the consideration and
suspension of the secretary at war, and then to the revision of the
legislature; whereas, by the constitution, neither the secretary at war, nor
any other executive officer, nor even the legislature, are authorized to sit as
a court of errors on the judicial acts or opinions of this court.

SUCH. upon the whole, are "THE FEATURES OF MR. JAY's TREATY." It was not
intended to protract this sketch of then, to so great a length; and yet, more
circumstances are recollected, that might have been inserted, than could, upon
a fair reconsideration, be retrenched. If it shall, in any degree serve the
purposes of truth, by leading, through the medium of a candid investigation, to
a fair, honorable, and patriotic decision, the design with which it was
written will be completely accomplished, whether RATIFICATION or REJECTION is
the result.

But, before the subject is closed, let the citizens of the union be warned
from too credulous an indulgence of their prejudices and their fears. The
discordant cry of party is loud; and the phantoms of war assail the
imagination: yet, let us not ^^deluded by stratagem, nor vanquished by terror.
The question is not a question between party and party, but between nation and
nation: -- it is not a question of war or peace, between military powers; but a
question of policy and interest between commercial rivals. The subject is too
momentous, to be treated as the football of contending factions; -- it appeals
from the passions to the judgment; from the selfishness to the patriotism of
every citizen!

That the British treaty, or a British war, is a necessary alternative, will be
more fully controverted, if the writer's present intention of delineating
"FEATURES OF THE DEFENSE," shall be carried into effect. But, in the mean time,
let a few self-evident propositions contribute to relieve the public mind, from
the weight of that apprehension.

1. The disposition of Great Britain, manifested by the order of the 6th of
November, 1793, by the speech of Lord Dorchester to the Indians, and by the
repeated invasions made, under General Simcoe's authority, upon our territory,
is naturally hostile to the United States. 2. Even if the United States could,
by any means, soothe and convert that disposition into amity and peace, the
projected treaty is too high a price to pay for such a change. 3. The refusal
to enter into the projected treaty with Great Britain, is not a just cause of
war; and if a pretense, only, is wanting, it may be found in the toasts at our
festivals, as well as in the acts of our government. 4. But the ratification of
the treaty will assuredly give umbrage to another nation -- to an ancient ally.
5. If war is inevitable either with Great Britain, or with France, it would be
more politic for the state, more congenial to the sentiments of the people, to
engage the former, than the latter, power. 6. In case of a war with Great
Britain, we have assurance, that France will aid us with all the energy of her
triumphant arms. 7. In case of a war with France, we ought not to count upon
the assections, and we cannot rely upon the power, of Great Britain, to
befriend us.
[FROM THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE.] View of the Commerce of the United States, as
it stands at present, and as it is fixed by Mr. Jay's Treaty.
1. Actual State.

AMERICAN ships from Europe enjoy a protecting duty of 10 per cent on the
amount of duties on goods, wares, and merchandises, imported into the United
States in foreign bottoms from Europe, and of 30 to 50 per cent. on teas
imported in foreign bottoms from Asia or Europe, paid by foreign bottoms, more
than is paid on such goods imported in our own vessels. Foreign bottoms pay
also 44 cents a ton on every voyage, more than is paid by American shipping;
all which had been allowed by the federal government, to encourage American
ship-builders, mariners, mechanics, merchants, and farmers.

1. Stat^ by Treaty.

By treaty, America cedes Great Britain, the right of laying duties on our
ships in Europe, the West Indies, and Asia, to countervail these, and engages
not to increase her duties on tonnage on this side, so as to check the exercise
of this right: in consequence British ships may be put, at the discretion of
the British government, on exactly the same footing, as American ships in the
carrying trade of Europe and Asia.

2. Actual State.

Americn ships, of any size, now go freely to all the British West Indies, sell
their cargoes, and bring returns as it suits them.

2. State by Treaty.

By treaty American ships are to be reduced to seventy tons, in order to be
admitted in the British-West Indies.

3. Actual State.

American ships may now freely load melasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa, or cotton,
to any part of the world from the United States.

3. State by Treaty.

By treaty American ships are to be totally prohibited this commerce, which is
to be carried on under any flag but theirs.

4. Actual State.

American citizens can now go supercargoes to India, settle and reside, and do
their business there.

4. State by Treaty.

By treaty no American citizen can settle or reside in these ports, or go into
the interior country, without special license from the local government, who
may, under color of this, impose what obstacles they p^^se to the commerce.

5. Actual State.

Americn now enjoys the right of regulating commerce, so as to encourage one
nation and discourage another, in proportion to benefits received, or injuries
felt respectively.

5. State by Treaty.

All this abandoned by the treaty so far as respects Great Britain; no duties
can be laid on British goods but what must apply to all other nations from whom
we import g^ods -- no embargoes on exports to British ports, but what must
apply to all nations ^like.

6. Actual State.

American ships now freely navigate to the British dominion in India, and from
thence proceed with cargoes to any part of the world.

6. State by Treaty.

By treaty American ships ar^ admitted as usual into the British ports of
India, but prohibited carrying any return cargoes except to the United States;
prohibited also from the coasting trade in the British ports of India, from
which they were not, that I know of, before excluded.

7. Actual State.

Timber for ship-building, tar, or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp,
cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels,
not contraband by former treaties of the United States.

7. State by Treaty.

All these articles made contraband by this treaty.

8. Actual State.

American ships carrying provisions, by America claimed as having a free right
of passage to the ports of their destination.

8. State by Treaty.

This claim now apparently waved; such American ships, when taken, to be
allowed indemnity of freight, demurrage, and a reasonable mercantile profit,
the amount whereof not ascertained.

9. Actual State.

American ports open to prizes made on Britain by France; and America possessed
of the liberty to grant similar douceurs to other nations, as she sees fit in
future compacts with them.

9. State by Treaty.

American ports now opened to prizes taken by Britain from any nation except
France, but shut to prizes taken from Britain by Spain, or any other power not
favored in this way, by treaties already made; of course discouraging to our
future negociations with all powers, France and Britain excepted.

10. Actual State.

American ships allowed at present freely to enter British ports in Europe, the
West Indies and Asia, but shut out from the seaports of Nova Scotia and Canada.

10. State by Treaty.

American ships allowed to go into these ports, but under new restrictions of
size, in the West Indies, and of latitude of trade in the East Indies; the
ports of Halifax, Quebec, etc. still shut to America.

11. Actual State.

American ships thus partially allowed entrance into British ports.

11. State by Treaty.

British ships allowed universal entrance into all our ports.

12. Actual State.

American ships now sail, though not under naval protection, under guarantee of
all the British effects possessed here, which might be made answerable for our
floating property, if unjustly seized on by Great Britain in case of a war, so
much apprehended by the chamber of commerce of New York.

12. State by Treaty.

By treaty, American ships deprived of this guarantee; sequestrations or
confiscations being declared impolitic and unjust, when applied to stocks, or
banks, or debts; though nothing said about them when applied to ships or
cargoes.

13. Actual State.

British debts now recoverable in the federal courts of the United States, but
reposing on the solvency of the debtors only.

13. State by Treaty.

By treaty a new court of commissioners opened on this subject, with immense
power and guarantee of the United States, who must meet, indeed, at
Philadelphia, but may adjourn where they please. Nothing said of debts due to
Americans in England, if, by legal impediments, prevented from recovery there.

14. Actual State.

America sends Mr. Jay to recover redress for spoliations on our commerce
actually sustained.

14. State by Treaty.

By treaty a court of commissioners opened, who are to sit in London without
power of adjournment, as in the case of the commission for debts. Americans
must, therefore, transport themselves and claims to London, and employ counsel
there, to recover what the commissioners shall think fit to allow them:
admirable compensation indeed!

15. Actual State.

American ships much plagued by British privateers.

15. State by Treaty.

By treaty the privateersmen are to give 15,00 l. to 3000 l. sterling security
for their good behavior.

16. Actual State.

American citizens may now expatriate and serve in foreign countries.

16. State by Treaty.

By treaty they are declared pirates, if serving against Great Britain; but no
provision made to guard American seaman from being forced to serve in British
ships.

17. Actual State.

America possesses claims to a large amount on account of negroes carried off,
and the Western Posts detained, in violation of the treaty of 1783.

17. State by Treaty.

These claims all waved by the treaty, without reference to the merits of these
pretensions.

The casting up of the above, is submitted to the Chamber of Commerce of
New York.

Errors, outstandings, and omissions excepted.

Philadelphia, July 27, 1795.
FINIS.

