CAUTIONARY HINTS TO CONGRESS, RESPECTING THE SALE OF THE WESTERN LANDS,
BELONGING TO THE UNITED STATES.

PHILADELPHIA: WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, Printer, Franklin's Head, green sign, No.
36, Chesnut-street, SOUTH SIDE. 1795.

CAUTIONARY HINTS.
BY the treaty of peace, and the cessions of the several states in the union,
the United States possess an extent of territory out of the jurisdiction of any
state, and hitherto unsettled, equal to, or perhaps more than, the territory of
all the states in the union together. The constitution of the United States
provides, that Congress shall have power to dispose of, and make all needful
rules and regulations respecting that territory: and it appears from a late
report of a committee in Congress, that it is in contemplation, as soon as a
peace is concluded with the Indians, to make sale of those lands, or a part of
them, for the purpose of discharging the national debt.

There can be no doubt, that the cessions of the several states were made with
a view to this great object, nor that the lessening and final discharge of the
national debt is of the first importance to our political happiness. It may,
however, be well worthy of consideration, whether it ought to be effected,
altogether in this mode, at once, or by degrees, since it is possible, that a
precipitate endeavor to remove the burden from our shoulders, may entail a
heavier grievance upon the nation.

It appears from some late documents, that the revenue of the United States is
at present so considerable, as to leave a surplus of 600,000 dollar for the
last year, even after defraying the burdens of the Indian war, the building of
frigates, and other armed vessels, etc. and the expense attending the late call
of the militia to suppress the insurrection in Pennsylvania; the estimates for
the Indian war, frigates and fortifications, amounted the last year to the sum
of 4,917,227 dollars. -- The expense of the call of militia I have seen no
estimate of, but I presume it can fall very little, if at all, short of a
million of dollars. -- From the fair prospect which we are given to hope, there
is now before us, of peace, both at home and abroad. there is reason to hope,
that if we shall not be wholly liberated from these burdens, they will be
greatly diminished in the course of the present and ensuing years. I am not
enough acquainted with official details and estimates to fix the sum, which
will be annually saved to the United States, if this hope prove not abortive;
but supposing 1,500,000 dollars sufficient to defray the expense of a peace
establishment, (and I should hope it was more than doubly sufficient,) there
would remain a surplus of 4,417,227 dollars, which added to the 600,000 dollars
surplus, now said to exist, would constitute a fund of 5,000,000 of dollars for
the redemption of the national debt, amounting to about 80,000,000 of dollars,
which would redeem the debt in sixteen years, were the whole funded at 6 per
cent. But as one third of the original debt carries no interest, and the
interest thereon, which has been funded, carries an interest of 3 per cent.
only, five millions of dollars in specie would at the present price of 3 per
cents. and deferred 6 per cents. in the market, purchases 8,333,333 dollars,
consequently, if one half the national debt, or 40,000,000 consist in these
kinds of stock, that proportion would be redeemed in less than five years, from
this fund, if applied to the purchase of this description of the debt, before
the time arrives when the deferred 6 per cents. bear an interest. At the end of
five years we may very reasonably conclude, that the revenue, without a single
additional duty or tax, would, from the bare increase of commerce, and of
excised spirits made in the United States, produce at the least one million of
dollars more, in aid of the sinking fund. But without this additional aid, the
most common arithmetician may see, that the remaining 40,000,000 would be
redeemed in eight years time, making in all thirteen years for the complete
redemption of the whole debt. But upon the ground I have taken, it would be
redeemed in much less time, as will appear, Dollars. Sum paid the first year
6,000,000 Four years interest in 6,000,000 dollars, at 6 per cent. which may
now constitute an additional aid to the sinking fund, being saved by the first
payment, 1,440,000 Sum paid the second year, 6,000,000 and 360,000 dollars, the
interest on the sum redeemed last year, amounts to 6,360,000 Three years
interest on 6,360,000 at 6 per cent. per ann. 1,144,800 Sum paid the third year
6,360,000 dollars, and 381,600 dollars, the interest on the sum redeemed the
last year 6,741,600 Two years interest on 6741,600 dollars at 6 per cent.
808,992 Sum paid the fourth year, as before shown 7,146,096 One years interest
thereon 428,760 Sum paid the fifth year, as before shown 7,574,856 Remains to
be paid the sixth year 2,354,996 Dollars, 40,000,000

Thus it will appear that in less than eleven years by the proper application
of the present funds of the United States if they be really as productive as
they have been stated to be, we may, unless plunged into new expenses by new
wars, which heaven forbid! pay off the present debt of the United States,
without the smallest additional burden to the people; and without recourse to
the sale of the territory belonging to the United States; which may be regarded
as a precious mine of national wealth, which it would be highly imprudent to
alienate, or even to open, whilst the ordinary revenue of the States is
commensurate to the demands against them. Let it not be supposed, that, like a
miser, I would recommend this treasure to be perpetually locked up; it is the
improvident waste, and not the necessary use of it, that I propose to guard
against. For the Western Territory is to be considered, not only as a fund of
actual wealth, to the United States, but of population, and strength to the
Union. Yet an improvident use of it, may produce the very reverse of these
advantages, by substituting poverty for wealth; a depopulated country for one
populous; and weakness for strength.

1. The Western Territory is to be regarded as a national stock of wealth; it
may be compared to bullion, or coin deposited in the vaults of a bank, which,
although it produces no present profit, secures the credit of the institution,
and is ready to answer any emergency: with this advantage in favor of the
lands, that their value must increase with population, whereas the money in
bank not circulated, gains no interest. And with this disadvantage also,
respecting the lands, that when sold, both principal and interest are gone
forever; whereas the bullion may again return to the bank; but the price of the
lands can never be vested in any other subject with equal advantage. If then
Congress, instead of applying the annual revenue of the United States to the
redemption of the national debt, should sell the lands at a low value, would
not this be a most improvident sacrifice of a principal which could never be
renewed, by any application of the annual revenue, which of itself is
sufficient to answer the requisite purpose? For we are well apprised, that the
sale of lands at present when the market has been glutted from the land
offices of the several states, must necessarily be for a very inconsiderable
price, compared with their actual value, and that price which in the course of
a very few years they will unquestionably command; prudence then would dictate
that they be not offered for sale at the moment they are at the lowest ebb of
depreciation. Let us suppose the whole sold at once; to the full amount of the
debt, at the price given by those who purchased several millions of the late
Congress, which I think was a dollar per acre. -- 80,000,000, of acres! more
than all Virginia, Kentucky, and the desert between them! probably more than
Great Britain contains! more than one third of France, the nurse of 26,000,000
of people! and for what shall this immense terrritory be given? For a debt
which the present revenues of the United States can discharge in less than
eleven years; and for ten times the amount of which the same territory could
not be repurchased at the end of that period. What a horrid waste of national
wealth does this statement present to our view!

Again, if the lands be sold, as heretofore, in very large tracts, only, it
will either depreciate, or retard the sale of the remainder, or produce still
worse effects. For if it be sold in large tracts to speculators, who mean to
sell again, they must have an abatement in the price, that they may be able to
make their profit upon the speculation. -- Hence a double source of
depreciation; for by this means the quantity at market will be so much
increased, that the disposal of the remainder in the hands of government, must
depend upon the completion of the speculator's schemes, by which he may be
encouraged, and enabled to make a new speculation. The purchasers from the late
Congress are said to have completed their sales, and are probably ready for a
new speculation Those who purchased from them, paid a very considerable
advance, perhaps double or treble the real value, of the first purchase. Hence
another evil. The industrious farmer who wishes to settle, and to cultivate the
lands, cannot obtain them at prime cost; being unable to accomplish the
purchase of a larger tract than he means to occupy: poor men are therefore
wholly excluded from the market, which is only open to the rich who buy to sell
again -- or for other purposes that will be hereafter mentioned. If it be said
that poor men may unite themselves in companies, and thus make large purchases,
which they may divide among themselves, the answer is, that the rich can always
out-bid them, and will find it their interest to do so; and this will most
assuredly produce the effect.

2. A precipitate sale of the western lands will tend to depopulate the present
states in the union, and consequently weaken, instead of strengthening the
nation.

For when we recollect what has already happened by the settlement of Kentucky,
and the territory both south, and north-west of the Ohio, under all the
disadvantages, that have attended such settlements, we must immediately see,
that such a measure would operate as a drain from the Atlantic states, where
there is yet a very large portion of lands, uncultivated, which would in all
probability be improved, if there were not other lands, reputed of superior
quality, to be had cheaper, which serve as a temptation to the husbandman to
quit his present establishment: this will have the further effect of
depreciating the value of lands in those states; a circumstance which the land
holders therein, may consider as not unworthy of their attention. Nor can it be
denied, that instead of promoting and increasing population, it would only
promote a still more dispersed location, than already prevails among us: a
circumstance not very desirable in a country, where there is more than four
times the quantity of land necessary for the present number of inhabitants. The
improvements of agriculture, and the increase of population do not always go
hand in hand, with the extent of location. On the contrary, in a country not
overstocked with inhabitants, the improvements of agriculture increase with
population, and then in their turn contribute not a little to the advancement
of commerce, the acquisition of the comforts of life, and the increase of
population, "Nam sine Cerere et Baccho fugit Venus."

It is one thing therefore to encourage population and agriculture, and another
to settle an uninhabited country, at the expense of another, not yet
sufficiently populous. For experience proves, as I have already said, that
population, agriculture, and commerce minister to each other. If this be true,
the sale of the western lands, may be attended with very serious and pernicious
consequences, to the present states in the union, in their present state of
population, without any chance of retribution: for it is obvious, that the
application of that labor to the settlement of a remote territory, which might
have been advantageously employed in one more contigious to commerce, must
weaken the latter, without producing equal returns from the former; the
productions of the transmontani territory, whenever they have a a superfluity,
will find a vent through the mouth of the Missisippi or the St. Lawrence, and
their supplies will be derived from foreign countries through the same channels,
to the prejudice of the commerce of the present states in the union. The
remonstrances of Kentucky may show that this is the hope and expectation, of
the whole people west of the Allegheny. The question then is, whether the
Atlantic states would do wisely to pursue a measure, not only tending to
depreciate their own lands, but destructive to their population, and ruinous to
their commerce. Were these disadvantages balanced against the payment of the
national debt, from the present funds of the United States, I am inclined to
believe they would greatly preponderate. For, the national debt, as we have
seen, may in a few years be discharged, without any additional burdens on the
people: and no good citizen will complain of the present, if they be continued
for that purpose.

What I have said respecting the diminution of the commerce of the Atlantic
states, will equally show the diminution of revenue, arising from commerce, in
the same proportion; and this too without any retribution, nor shall we gain
much from the excise, in exchange for the revenue arising from commerce, if we
may judge from the product of the excise in those parts of the states which are
thinly inhabited: and should Congress have recourse to direct taxes, as the
proportion of them depends altogether upon the census, the inhabitants of the
Western Territory would pay no more than if they had remained in their former
settlements in the Atlantic states; but from the difficulties of collection
they may pay less: a circumstance not much in favor of the measure.

If, from what I have said, it appears that the sale of the western lands is
not a measure of necessity, for the redemption of the public debt; if it appear
that such a measure at this time, would be attended with an immense waste of
the national stock of wealth: if it would tend to depopulate and weaken the
Atlantic states: to lessen the value of lands therein; to retard the
improvement of agriculture; to divert commerce from her present advantageous
channels; and to lessen the revenue arising therefrom; there is yet another
point of view in which the subject may be placed, that may render the
expediency of enticing the inhabitants of the Atlantic states, (which first
wholly composed, and now principally compose the union) to migrate from thence,
and found new states, in a different part of the continent, still more
questionable. For, if the spirit of migration, already too high in most of the
states, be encouraged by the flattering prospect of purchasing valuable lands
at an under-rate, it is obvious that as their numbers increase in the newly
formed states, the numbers in the present states will diminish; hence, as
representation and population are inseparably connected by the constitution of
the United States, the representation of the present states in Congress will
decline, in proportion as that of the new states increases. The consequence is
obvious. -- Let those who are acquainted with the rapid population of Kentucky,
her almost instantaneous change from a desert district of Virginia to be a
member of the federal union, with a representation equal to the state of
Georgia, testify that this is not a groundless conclusion. But I shall be told
that European emigrants will settle this country, without draining the present
states of their inhabitants. If this be true, it calls for an additional
caution: a rapid population by people equally strangers to the language,
government, laws, and policy of this country, and to the habits of the people,
and of each other, cherishing perhaps inveterate prejudices on every subject,
and bound together by no common tie but that of government, would probably
realize in this western hemisphere the confusions which similar causes are said
to have produced at Babel. Could an union of government with such a variegated
people be desirable, or capable of being maintained? I think not. If America is
to be the asylum of the fugitives from Europe, there is land in abundance in
the several states, for their accommodation; and by being distributed among the
people of these states in small numbers, they may acquire an earlier
acquaintance with the principles of our government, laws, manners, and language
than could possibly be affected in a distinct settlement. One or two
generations would render us one people, or if some vestiges of difference
should still remain, they would have nothing formidable in their aspect.

There remains another light in which this measure may be viewed, that in this
enlightened age, when a belief in giants, hobgoblins, chimaeras, and other
monsters of a distempered brain is completely exploded, I am almost afraid to
mention, lest I should be supposed to have paid a visit lately to the cave of
Montesinos, and to have returned from thence as completely disordered in my
intellects, as the famous knight of La Mancha himself: But protesting most
solemnly that I have not visited any such place, nor, willingly, "Ate of that
insane root,
"That takes the reason prisoner."


I shall shortly observe, that the foundations of the modern aristocratic
families in the various parts of Europe, were laid in the immense grants of
lands, formerly made by princes to their favorites and adherents; which being
parcelled out among a dependant tenantry, have in process of time become
baronies, dukedoms, and principalities. If the territory of the United States
be granted, in like manner, to a few rich, and ambitious men, disposed to
aggrandize themselves and their posterity, the seeds of an aristocracy will be
sown, which it will require nothing but time, to bring to a most vigorous
maturity. If, for example, a fortunate speculator in the funds of the United
States should choose to realize his wealth, in the purchase of half a million,
or a million of acres of land, (and there are those, I am told, who can easily
accomplish such a purchase,) this property, transmitted unimpaired for a
century or two to his posterity, would probably exhibit in the descendant of a
script-monger, or a change-alley-broker, the possessor of an estate, equal to
that of a British peer, or a German prince; with as numerous a train of tenants
and dependants, at once the symbols and tools of his political influence and
consequence. I claim no merit for this fancy-piece, if it be called one; I
confess that I am indebted to three persons in the state of New York both for
the features, and the coloring. There, I am told, that three men, solely from
considerations of dependency, can influence as many thousands. -- I may be told
in triumph, that New York possesses one of the most democratic constitutions of
any state in the Union! Long may it preserve it, in spite of that latent poison
which threatens to convulse, if not destroy it! The only antidote will be found
in the division and subdivision of those manors, or landgravates, which now
confer upon their owners an influence, so incompatible with a true republican
government; and this can probably be effected in no other mode, than such as
has already been adopted in several of the states, viz. the abolition of
estates tail; of the preference to the male stock; and of the right of
primogeniture: and establishing, in lieu thereof, an equal partition of estates
among all the children, or nearest relations of persons intestate. -- And if
Congress have power to establish their regulations in the western territory of
the United States, (of which I see not much reason to doubt,) they ought to
constitute a part of the fundamental laws of that country, whenever it shall be
settled. Without some such precaution, I could prophecy; -- but, like
Cassandra, I should be disregarded.

Quitting then this unpleasant anticipation, I shall add a few words more on
the necessity of selling the western lands, if Congress proceed to adopt the
report of their committee for continuing the present duties until the year
1800, or 1802. In this case it will be evident from the statement in the first
part of this essay, that one half of the national debt may be paid before the
end of the latter period: consequently the reasons against selling the lands at
present are greatly strengthened thereby: and at the end of that period, there
can be still less necessity to throw away the lands to redeem a debt which the
existing funds would redeem in less than six years. In twenty years time,
perhaps, the increasing population of the United States may have so far settled
the lands within the limits of the several States, as to make it expedient to
open the land office of the United States, under certain restrictions and
limitations. For, I repeat, that there is a wide distinction between population
and location. In Connecticut, and perhaps in the other eastern states, this
distinction appears to have been well understood, and wisely attended to: lands
were not suffered to be promiscuously taken up, in every quarter of the
country, according to the caprice of the land-monger. They were laid off into
small townships, and a second township was never disposed of, until the former
was settled. Hence location and population went hand in hand there: very
different was the conduct of Virginia in her grants of lands. The consequence
is obvious -- Connecticut is a well peopled state, where property is divided
into small portions, yet is amply sufficient for the support of its
inhabitants: its agriculture is highly improved, and the conveniences of life
are plentifully distributed throughout the state, in nearly equal portions.
Virginia on the contrary, appears to be an immense desert, in which the
traveller here and there meets with some vestiges of population, which he
looses sight of again for miles together. Had the same plan been pursued there
that was in Connecticut, the population of the state would probably, for many
years to come, have been limited by the Allegheny mountains; nor would she have
resigned forty or fifty thousand of her inhabitants to a newly erected state,
because her territory was too extensive, even to support a safe communication
between its several parts. -- Congress, it is hoped, whenever they sell the
lands, will embrace the example of Connecticut: the Western Territory will in
that case become a real source of wealth and strength to the United States. The
following regulations will contribute to this end, if duly attended to.

1. Let the lands be divided, as in Connecticut, into small townships, not
exceeding five thousand, or at the utmost limits, ten thousand acres. Let them
be subdivided into lots not exceeding two hundred acres.

2. Let it be required that each lot shall be settled, and improved within a
limited time, or become forfeited to the United States.

3. Let the townships be numbered according to their proximity to the United
States now settled: let not a second township be sold, until the former is
disposed of, etc.

4. Let not more than one hundred townships, or one million of acres be sold in
any one year.

5. Let the lands in the several townships be surveyed, and the lots classed
according to their value. Let their valuation be published for six months at
least before the sale: let them be sold separately in lots, at public auction,
to the highest bidder, but not under the valuation.

6. Let no grant be made until the terms of sale, and of settlement and
improvement have been complied with.

If in addition to these regulations, the fundamental laws of the new states
shall subject lands to the payment of debts; abolish intails, the right of
priomgeniture, and the preference to males; and establish descents in
parcenary; the evils to be apprehended from the sale of the Western Territory
may be avoided; otherwise they will be realized.

COLUMBUS.
United States, January 30, 1795.

