AN ORATION, On BENEVOLENCE, DELIVERED BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF BLACK FRIARS, In
the City of NEW YORK, AT THEIR ANNIVERSARY FESTIVAL, On the 10th NOVEMBER, 1794.

By DE WIT CLINTON, Esquire.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE SOCIETY.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY FRIAR M'LEAN.

IN FRIARY, WEDNESDAY, November 12th, 1794.
On motion of Cardinel PELL. seconded by the Treasurer, it was Resolved,
THAT the Thanks of this Society be presented to Brother DE WIT CLINTON, for
the elegant Oration delivered by him to the Society at their last Anniversary
Festival; and that a Committee of three Members, be appointed to wait on him
and communicate the same, and request a Manuscript thereof for Publication.

Father Mitchell, Cardinal Richardson, and Friar John C. Ludlow were appointed
a Committee to carry the above Resolution into effect.

On motion, Resolved,

That Two Hundred Copies of Chancellor De Wit Clinton's Oration be printed, at
the Expense of the Society, for the Use of such Members of the Friary as may
apply for the same.

Extract from the Minutes, JOHN VAN REED, Sec'ry.

AN ORATION.
IT has been justly observed, that in proportion to the benefits which an
institution is calculated to produce, in that proportion is the extension of
its duration and its operative influence upon society. This remark, which does
equal honor to the sagacity of the human head and the benevolence of the human
heart, is abundantly verified by the experience of ages. In exploring the
historic page, we find that those institutions, which have been productive of
benefit to mankind, have like the pyramids of Egypt braved the ravages of time
and weathered the convulsions of Empires; while those establishments, however
strongly supported by the scepter of power or upheld by the hand of
superstition, which have rioted upon the industry and lived upon the blood of
our species, have quickly mouldered into dust. The Divine Religion of Jesus has
nearly seen the flight of eighteen centuries, and will last as long as time
itself; while the four great Monarchies and the mighty empire of Rome which
levelled man with the brute and violated all the rights of nature, have long
since felt the transitory state (...). The progressive amelioration of the
world has often been the theme of philosophic speculation and the subject of
prophetic vision; and in truth whether we view man in his passage from the
solitary to the social state, or consider him in the various modifications of
society, we will find sufficient reason to concur in the opinion and to taste
of the divine fountain of rapture, which springs from the union of the
intellect and the heart in favor of human happiness.

The progressive improvement of human affairs opens a prospect so grand and so
interesting, promises such permanence and such practicability, as naturally to
induce an enquiry into the most efficient mode of maturing it to perfection. As
the universal extension of the principle of benevolence presents itself as the
only method of accomplishing this great event; and as our fraternity rests its
principal merits upon, and has been uniformly and highly and honorably
distinguished for, the exercise of this sublime virtue, you will excuse me if I
presume to offer a few thoughts upon it; and when describing the nature and
effects of benevolence, I feel confident of experiencing the benefit of yours,
if I should fail in those flights of fancy -- that elevation of style and that
profundity of remark, which become a man speaking on a subject that unites in
its praise -- all the modes of imagination, all the faculties of the
understanding, and all the virtues of the heart.

In scentific discussions, it is considered satisfactory evidence of the
falsity of a doctrine to demonstrate that it leads to an absurdity; in like
manner, in questions of morals it is an insuperable objection to a system, to
prove that it produces mischief and depravity. The prevalence of evil has never
proceeded from a defect, but from a perversion of good original principles. The
father of the Universe has endowed us all with competent capacity to cultivate
virtue and enjoy felicity: And if we wander into the devious paths of vice and
taste of the bitter cup of misery, the fault is to be ascribed to ourselves. To
establish or refute a proposition in morals, we may then not only reason with
propriety from the phenomena of the mind, but we may enter into a wider field
of discussion and trace the consequences of a particular doctrine upon all the
relations of society and the modes of human action.

In contemplating the subject proposed, we at the first glance behold mankind
divided, not only in speculation but in action, into two great parties. The one
side espousing the cause of disinterested benevolence and the other declaring
that interest and selfishness govern the universe. A well regulated self-love
might unquestionably answer all the purposes of creation, and it is certainly
not fair promiscuously to class the advocates of this opinion with those who
espouse the system of misanthropy, especially as the general complexion of our
conduct receives its color and its glow from self-love: There is something
however extremely pleasing to a noble mind, independent of its benign influence
to view man as capable of disinterested benevolence: It elevates him in the
scale of being and breaks down the partition that seperates him from the order
of spirits; It places him on a lofty eminence, from which he can look down
without any other sigh than the sigh of pity, upon the perishable goods of
mortality.

He who supposes that all our actions are bottomed upon interest or vanity will
naturally conduct himself according to his opinion. If charity proceeds from
ostentation, patriotism from ambition and friendship from interest in others --
why should they not emanate from the same sources in himself. He will thus pass
through the world a stranger to all the endearing charities of life -- dead to
the noblest feelings of the soul and deaf to the enchanting voice of virtuous
pleasure. The delights of love will be viewed by him as an article of commerce
or an union of convenience -- the ties of friendship will be rendered
subservient to views of profit and vanity -- the good of country will be
sacrificed to the calls of ambition -- philanthrophy will give way to the most
detestable selfishness -- the world will receive its hue from his jaundiced eye
of suspicion -- and like an unfortunate traveller cast upon a desert coast, he
will live isolated from the delights of society -- useless to mankind, useless
to himself. If this doctrine has such a pernicious practical influence upon
individuals, the evil increases with tenfold fury when extended to nations.
From what source but from this, did the disposition of the Jews to exterminate
all the other nations of the earth proceed? The ancient Romans made use of the
same word Hostis to signify both stranger and enemy; and from one extremity of
the world to the other their chariot wheels of Empire rolled over the necks of
mankind drenched with the blood of millions. The modern system of warfare has
not so much softened its asperities and mitigated its ferocities, as the
enlightened ideas of humanity so generally diffused among nations. We are no
longer considered as savage beasts destined to tear and devour each other, but
as children of the same common father, connected by the ties of the same common
nature: The captured are now preserved from massacre and the conquered from
extirpation; but alas! humanity is reluctantly compelled to look upon the
present convulsions of the world, and to see with tear-suffused eyes a
departure from her principles -- to recognize with bleeding heart, the
spectacle of civilized nations endeavoring with more than diabolical fury to
starve and to exterminate each other.

There is a faculty of the soul which has received various denominations among
philosophers and which seems to be the offspring of the heart and the
understanding united: It has been termed the moral sense, the moral taste and
the moral instinct, and it consists in an instantaneous admiration or disgust
of moral beauty or deformity. From this principle of our nature which we
recognize in almost every action of our lives may be deduced various important
inferences in favor of disinterested benevolence and in honor of mankind. The
moment we hear of any vicious or cruel action we feel a sense of indignation;
and the very instant we are informed of a great or noble deed we feel the glow
of admiration and satisfaction: When we read of the persecutions of
superstition, of the ravages of war and of the desolating career of tyranny,
what are our feelings but the mingled emotions of indignation and regret? And
are we not instantaneously enraptured at the pious endeavors of the religious
-- the honorable exploits of the patriotic, and the magnanimous views of the
benevolent?

The operation of this principle in a great multitude, in defiance of the pomp
of power and the parade of victory, has been admirably described by a
celebrated Poet.

EVEN when proud Caesar 'midst triumphal cars,
The spoils of nations and the pomp of wars,
Ignobly vain and impotently great,
Showed Rome her Cato's figure drawn in state,
As her dead father's reverend image past,
The pomp was darkened and the day over cast,
The triumph ceased, tears gushed from every eye,
The world's great victor passed unheeded by;
Her last good man dejected Rome adored
And honored Caesar's less than Cato's sword.
The deduction is plain: There must exist in the soul a regard for the welfare
of mankind independent of interested views. To conceive a selfish scheme, we
must consider -- we must investigate -- we must combine ideas -- but the moral
sense like a flash of lightning bursts in upon us: We either instantly glow
with anger or lose ourselves in admiration: It is an emanation from the
divinity -- the Promethean fire brought down from Heaven -- the working of the
image of God within us.

It may be observed in answer to this, that our indignation arises from an
application of the case of the injured to ourselves and our admiration from a
mercenary view of obtaining favors from the subject of our panegyrics. I appeal
to every man, who has attended to the train of his thoughts or the process of
his feelings, whether any personal reference exists, whether the sentiment
excited is not entirely abstracted from self; but are there not many immoral
actions which injure none but the guilty agent himself? are not many committed
in such a mode and at such a distance that by all the rules of probability they
can never be extended to us -- and what benefit can we receive from venerating
the illustrious shades of the martyrs of liberty or heirs of genius? Has not
the cold hand of death placed us beyond their power?

Pure unadulterated nature can alone satisfactory clear up this important
question -- and to this we must resort as a clue to guide us through a
labyrinth of doubts and uncertainties. If the fanciful idea of placing a window
in every man's bosom could be realized, we could then see the secret workings
and motives which conspire to produce our actions -- and we could then
unquestionably tell whether benevolence exists unalloyed by selfishness or
whether man is really the creature of low and vicious sentiments, which bow him
down to the earth and render him little superior to the beasts of the field:
But as this is far beyond our reach, we must accommodate our researches to a
different mode of enquiry. Let us not then resort to the man, hackneyed in the
ways of the world, whose passions have been perverted by the struggles of
ambition and the conflicts of interest -- but let us visit nature in her
unsophisticated forms, where the refinements of society have not corrupted the
benevolent bias of the mind and effaced from the heart the impressions of
Heaven.

It is in the season of infancy that we must look for genuine nature; then the
character first opens, and shows itself; then the power of interest is feeble
and the artifices of ambition obvious. The inhabitant of the woods, who has
never mingled in the corruptions of society, exhibits amidst the awful
ferocities of his disposition some of the genuine characters of man, but in
contemplating him we must carefully distinguish between the vices which grow
out of the different stages of society and the inherent propensities of the
heart. Misfortune also serves to reduce us to the level of nature, and to
render us acquainted with ourselves; it has been well remarked by an acute
observer that the most unfeeling man he ever met with, was one whose whole life
was a series of fortunate events. To the recluse and the solitary we may also
with propriety look for the lessons of nature; here the collision of
intercourse has not worn off the feelings and destroyed the emotions of the
heart. In these various conditions and stations, we see the principle of
benevolence strongly operative; we find the mind thus unadulterated by a
commerce with the world, replete with the kindest wishes and most friendly
sentiments. The first emotions of the infant heart beat in unison with
friendship and benevolence. The hospitable savage, to relieve his forlorn
guest, will part with his last morsel and hazard the horrors of famine. The
child of affliction will often forget his own misfortunes in sympathising with
the distresses of others; and the recluse, on his first appearance in the
bustle of the world, fraught with the most benevolent sentiments, will alas,
too soon experience that his opinions are too pure for the corruptions of
society.

If the principle of benevolence is so pure so hallowed, how excellent must be
its practice! The power of dispensing good approaches the attributes of the
deity, and the pleasures resulting from the relief of the distressed are so
extatic and delightful as to form the most striking foretaste of the joys of
Heaven. -- The sun itself, with all ^^s cheering rays and vivifying influence,
is not so glorious a sight as the spectacle of a good man distributing his
bounty -- and to him we must look up as the truly great, for in the calm eye of
reason he stands pre-eminently towering above the victorious general or the
throned monarch. The state of office, the pomp of power, the splendour of wealth
or a long train of illustrious ancestors may not attend him, but what are these
compared to the pleasures of sensibility or the smiles of Heaven?

IS aught so fair
In all the dewy landscapes of the spring
In the bright eye of Hesper or the morn
In nature's fairest forms, is aught so fair
As virtuous friendship? as the candid blush
Of him who strives with fortune to be just,
The graceful tear that streams from others woes,
Or the mild luster of benevolence,
Where peace with ever blooming olive crowns
The gate: Where honor's liberal hands effuse
Unenvied treasures and the snowy wings
Of innocence and love protect the scene.
Benevolence seems to invest a man with magic charms; wherever he goes kind
wishes attend him: it forms a good criterion of the whole frame and temper of
his soul with which all the other virtues rise and will almost necessarily be
connected. "Tell me, says a feeling writer, of a compassionate man, you
represent to me a man of a thousand other good qualities, on whom I can depend,
whom I may safely trust with my wife, my children, my fortune and reputation!"

The draughts of life, according to the allegory of the Poets, proceed from the
vessels of good and evil that stand on each side of Jupiter and whenever they
are found pure and unmixed, they flow from the vessel on the left hand.
Admirable description of the miseries of life! Unalloyed felicity we never
experience, but affliction in all the forms of terror in all the channels of
bitterness, attacks us: It approaches us in the shape of disease and poverty,
presents itself in the dress of oppression and calumny, assails us in the loss
of friends and reputation, and menaces us in all the incalculable forms with
which imagination can array the victims of her influence. The prison, the house
of madness, the retreat of poverty, the horrid gibbet, and the blood streaming
scaffold, bear dreadful testimony to her mighty power. To restrain her baneful
influence and to draw the draughts of life from the vessel of good on the right
hand of Jupiter, are the objects of the benevolent man. In this grand
expedition of humanity, the immortal Howard established beyond doubt the being
and beauty of benevolence; he rose sublimely from the couch of affluence and
ease -- encountered the insolence of fools and the ridicule of misanthrophists
-- the dungeon's groans and the tyrant's frowns -- braved the horrors of
disease, the storms of heaven and the tempests of the ocean; and wherever he
went, chains fell from the hands of slavery and the tears of the prison were
changed into smiles -- the blessings of all good men followed his footsteps and
even despots, disarmed by the sublimity of his virtues, deigned to listen from
their thrones to the tale of sorrow and to stretch forth the lenient hand of
relief.

In the application of the benevolent principle to the conduct of nations, so
many pleasing ideas rush upon the mind as to hazard the conception of visionary
and chimerical speculations. To pave the way for the introduction of this
sublime virtue in the administration of the affairs of a nation, the will of
the community not the will of an individual ought to be the controling power:
The sentiments of the people are always right, whereas those of an individual,
especially in an elevated station, are too much under the government of
sinister impressions. Next to a good disposition to conduct right political
affairs may be ranked competent ability; The diffusion of knowledge is
therefore also requisite to produce this great improvement; which when
effected, the conduct of a nation to itself and to other nations will afford a
sight upon which celestial spirits will look with admiration.

In the first place, it will be the ardent object of the community to increase
the quantity of happiness, and secondly to diminish the influence of misery
among its members. With this view, schools of virtue and seminaries of learning
will be founded -- agriculture, commerce, and manufactures encouraged -- the
polite arts and the useful sciences patronised -- and the rights of nature and
the rights of religion respected: With this design, it will also be the object
of the Nation to assuage physical evils by the establishment of hospitals,
almshouses and public granaries, and to alleviate by proper correctives the
moral ills which prevail. The shackles of slavery will then fall to the ground
and the horrid instruments of capital punishment be only seen on the
descriptive canvas. -- The proud crest of oppression will be levelled to the
dust -- the chicanery of law banished from the seats of distributive justice --
and the long catalogue of crimes which disgraces our statute books considered
as the forgery of misanthrophists or as the invention of diabolical spirits.

After viewing this sublime prospect of a nation happy in itself, let us behold
the sublimer spectacle of all the nations of the world happy in each other.

No longer will the melancholy yew and the doleful cypress overshade the
martial field -- no longer will the voice of discord like Ate hot from hell cry
havoc and let loose the dogs of war -- no longer will the din of arms and the
clash of conflicting hosts "grate thunder" on the ear -- but benevolence
daughter of Heaven will compose the tempests of nations and extend the olive
branch of peace over the Universe.

The first anticipation that presents itself, is a Congress of Ambassadors from
all the nations of the world, to consult upon the ways and means of augmenting
the mass of human happiness; and let not this idea receive the contemptuous
sneer of high-pretending wisdom before it is brought to the touchstone of
examination, for it is only an extension of the confederacies of bordering
states, an amplification of the design of Henry the Great of France to unite
the views of the European Nations.

By this mighty congress of nations, a free commerce will be universally
established; trade will be left open to the channels which nature points out;
Duties and premiums and prohibitions will be no more; Commerce will seek the
regions of industry and skill, and the wants of mankind will be supplied upon
the basis of their virtues.

An university, for the illumination of the world, will also be founded; to
which as the storehouse of knowledge the learned of all nations will resort as
formerly they did to ancient Egypt. Here the European, the Asiatic, the
African, and the American Literati will assemble and communicate to each other,
the discoveries, the curiosities and the knowledge of their respective
continents; here the prejudices of country will vanish before the talisman of
merit; here the ground of emulation will be widened; and it will be no longer
contended whether a Frenchman or an Englishman but whether a Native of the
Eastern or Western Hemisphere shall bear away the palm of genius and the
trophies of knowledge.

Great improvements must also take place, which far surpass the momentum of
power that a single nation can produce, but will with facility proceed from
their united strength. The hand of art will change the face of the Universe;
Mountains, deserts, and oceans will feel its mighty force. It will not then be
debated whether hills shall be prostrated, but whether the Alps and the Andes
shall be levelled? Nor whether sterile fields shall be fertilised, but whether
the deserts of Africa shall feel the power of cultivation? Nor whether rivers
shall be joined, but whether the Caspian shall see the Mediterranean, and the
waves of the Pacific lave the Atlantic Shores?

FINIS.

