A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMICAL FEVER Which lately prevailed IN THE CITY OF
NEW YORK; WITH THE Different Proclamations, Reports and Letters of gov. Jay,
gov. Mifflin, The Health Committee of New York, etc. upon the Subject. TO WHICH
IS ADDED, AN ACCURATE LIST OF THE NAMES OF THOSE WHO HAVE DIED OF THE DISEASE,
FROM July 29, TO Nov. 1.

By M. L. DAVIS.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by MATTHEW L. DAVIS, No. 151 Water street. 1795.
(Copy Right Secured.)

TO THE PUBLIC
THE following sheets are submitted, in their rude state, to the candor of the
Public. Various imperfections will, doubtless, be found in them; but, it is
hoped, they will not be reviewed with a critical eye. The early period at which
they are published may be plead in their defense, if the arrangement is
condemned. The Editor is anxious to publish a more correct and extensive
account of the disease, and, for that purpose, respectfully solicits any
information that his fellow Citizens can afford him.

He is, with due Respect, The Public's very Obedient Servant, M. L. D.
New York, Nov. 1.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMICAL FEVER, etc.
WHEN I first determined on publishing the present pamphlet, it was my
intention to have presented the Public with a Work not inferior to the one
published by that indefatigable man, and meritorious Author, Mr. Matthew Carey,
of Philadelphia* and to accomplish this desirable object, I applied to several
medical friends to write a Dissertation upon the disease, with a statement of
such important facts as came within their knowledge, and promised to furnish
them with all that I could obtain. In this pleasing anticipation, however, I
have been much disappointed, for each and all declined undertaking the
business, for local reasons. I mention this circumstance as an apology for my
coming forward, I trust, before an indulgent Public. The great satisfaction
which many strangers may derive from perusing an accurate list of the deaths,
and thereby discovering, in a degree, whether or not, their friends and
connexions are still living, induced me to procure the statement which is
annexed to the Work.

It is not my intention to hazard any opinion whatever, upon the disease,
whether imported or originating in local causes; but simply to collect the
several letters and other publications which have appeared on the subject, and
which I conceive will be found any way interesting or satisfactory to the
reader. The proceedings of the Health Committee, the different letters, etc.
are arranged agreeable to the dates on which they appeared.

Perhaps it may be considered a duty incumbent on me to say something
concerning the situation of the city, previous to the introduction or
appearance of the disease: and in these remarks, as well as in any others I may
have occasion to offer, I shall be as laconic as the nature of the subject will
permit.

New York was, doubtless, one of the most increasing and flourishing cities in
the United States. Some idea may be formed of its rapid population, by
remarking, that in the year 1791 it contained about 4,700 families, and in May
1795 about 9,000. This statement is from the City Directory, which is annually
taken. Since the commencement of the present war between France and the
combined despots, the necessaries of life had progressively risen, till they
had arrived at an enormous price, and in many particulars beyond what was ever
remembered here before. Such is the effect the war had, and still continues to
have on America, at least this part of it, notwithstanding our boasted
neutrality: What is still more distressing, the rise of mechanical labor had
by no means been equal, or bore a just proportion to the former. The one had
risen, in many instances, an hundred per cent. while the other, generally
speaking, had not rise more than from twenty-five to thirty. The rent of houses
had also nearly doubled, particularly those which were situated in the most
public streets.

These circumstances rendered it difficult for people in moderate stations, to
do more than maintain and educate their families. The city, however, was fast
increasing in luxury and pride, those barriers to happiness; and many who
considered virtue and not numbers, the strength of a republic, dreaded the
future consequences. Splendour, pomp, and dissipation, were at a shameful
height. Money was in great demand: The interest frequently given was from two
to three per cent a month.

In consequence of the enormous price of rents, many families, particularly
among the Irish emigrants, were reduced to the necessity of living, or rather
existing, in damp cellars, and among this class of people it will be found that
the disorder was most prevalent, and operated most powerfully. I believe it may
be safely asserted, that a very large proportion of those, in tolerable
situations, who had proper medical aid in the early stages of the disorder, and
were regularly attended afterward, perfectly recovered in the course of ten or
fifteen days.

I shall now proceed to a few remarks on the general symptoms of the disease.

"THIS malady, in many instances, has been preceded by an unusual flow of
spirits, though for the most part a degree of stupor has been observed; some
hours after they are attacked with violent pains in the head, back and loins:
The bowels are extremely costive, seldom yielding but to powerful purgatives,
and the tongue soon becomes considerably foul. In some cases, the pulse is
strong and tense; the countenance flushed; the eyes greatly inflamed; the pains
more violent, and respiration very laborious. In others, and more particularly
those of a slender habit of body, the pulse is weak, though frequent; the face
rather pale and of a yellowish tinge; a constant desire for sleep; soreness
over the whole system, and extreme debility. About the third and fourth days
the symptoms become more violent; the tongue is dry and covered with a black
scurf; the appetite greatly impaired; respiration more difficult; the pulse
scarcely to be discerned; sudden startings, when in a dose, as though
affrighted; a sense of weight around the praecordia; the body more yellow, but
particularly the face and breast; the extremities cold; the stomach unable to
retain its contents, and what is thrown up in vomiting, has the appearance of
black coffee grounds; a hemorrhage of the fauces, and frequently a discharge of
blood with the stools, which were now perfectly black; convulsive motions of
the superior extremities, and shortly death terminated the scene. The body now
put on every appearance of immediate putrefaction.

In one person whom I had an opportunity of visiting, attacked in this alarming
manner, the lower extremities were almost black; the evacuations involuntary;
the parts to which blisters were applied, were seemingly mortified; the blood
oozed out of every part where it could find vent, and in fact he was a perfect
mass of putrefaction, before the vital functions were suspended MS. Of George
Davis.
."

It may not be improper to remark, that a very great diference of opinion
prevailed among the physicians, both as to the disease and the treatment of
(...) Another circumstance which engaged much of the public attention was the
appearance of an advertisement in the newspapers, against the mode of treating
the disease by the practitioners in general, and challenging them to defend
their practice. The author was Mr. Alexander Cuthill, tailor. Which of the
parties were right is not my province to determine; but to state facts is my
object. In some instances the doctors positively refused visiting a patient who
had been seen during his indisposition by Mr. Cuthill; and in others
discontinued their visits on finding that he also came to the house where the
sick person lay. I leave the public to draw what inference they please from
these facts.

A general opinion has prevailed, among medical characters in particular, that
the present epidemic has made its appearance in a greater or less degree, among
us during the autumns of the last three or four years. That a malignant fever
did rage here, during the months of September and Oct. of 1791, is a fact, and
on comparing the symptoms with those of the present disease, they will be found
not dissimilar. It is worthy of notice that the fever in 1791 first made its
appearance within a few yards of the spot where it has proved most fatal the
present season.

"About the middle of August, 1791, a contagious fever appeared in the city of
New York, which first discovered itself near Peck slip, a part of the city
thickly inhabited; its houses generally small, and badly ventulated: many of
the inhabitants were in indigent circumstances, which is a frequent cause of
the want of cleanliness. Here it raged a considerable time; it then began to
spread, as some attendants on the sick became affected, who lived in other
neighbourhoods. --

By this means it was carried to different families, and most generally could
be traced from this source. It likewise proved more particularly fatal near the
place where it first appeared, than in any other part. Thus, at length it
spread through the city, until about the middle of October, when the weather
growing a little cooler, the disease greatly abated, and in a short time nearly
disappeared. I have been informed by several physicians of reputation, who
reside and practice in the country, that many of the boatmen who frequented the
city from Long Island, and the upper part of Hudson's river, carried the
disease home, where it proved fatal to several Doctor William Moore, an eminent
physician of New York, informed me that a gentleman of Lime, in the state of
Connecticut, was on a visit to this city when he became a patient of his, in
whom the disease was evidently marked, attended with large vibices; he, however
recruited considerably before he left the city: on his passage to Lime he
relapsed, and died shortly after he reached home. The greater part of his
family caught the contagion, and soon became affected with a similar disease;
which proved fatal to his mother, and some other persons in the family.
.

At the same time in the south western part of the city, an intermittent and
remittent fever prevailed, together with a few cases of dysentery. This caused
much dispute among physicians as they generally named the disease from the
cases which they had an opportunity of seeing most prevalent. Some called it a
remittent, others billious; some typhus, putrid, or malignant; and others,
following Sydenham, febris, biliosa remittens.

In consequence of a few cases terminating suddenly fatal, together with the
very unjust, as well as ungenerous judgment of some physicians, in determining
every disease to be the putrid fever, fear spread from mind to mind like a
devouring famine, and terror, frequently more hideous than the disease itself,
wrought on the minds of the credulous and weak. This, in some cases, greatly
increased the malignity of the fever: in others again, even a slight head ache
caused them to despond, and threw them into a state of languor more easily
conceived than described; but without the real symptoms of the fever. Whether
this diagnostic was given through ignorance, or as a professional trick, in
order to gain applause, by making many and speedy cures, is uncertain; however,
it was nevertheless so considered. Thus some physicians obtained a credit in
curing the complaint, without possessing any real merit.

This disease, generally, in the first place, affected the person with a sense
of chilliness, alternating with gentle flushings and a sense of soreness of all
the muscles; the face appeared pale, the features shrunk, the body weary, as if
it had undergone some great fatigue, attended with yawnings and stretchings of
the extremities; a disinclination for any bodily exercise; and when any
exertion was made, it was attended with sluggishness and unweary sensations.
The pulse at this time was weak and frequent; the mental faculties were
likewise impaired, and frequently a small pain in the head, attended with
sighings and anorexy: respiration being anxious and rather small at this stage
of the disease.

In some cases the following symptoms took place without the patient's
knowledge of the former having past: they however, in general, preceded,
violent pains in the head, back, loins; a pulse more tense, full, and something
increased in fullness. (In one case the patient compared the pulsation of the
temporal arteries, to the striking of a hammer against his temples. In some a
delirium came on immediately after the cold stage, so that the persons affected
got out of their beds, and wandered about their rooms or houses. Sometimes
nausea and vomiting appeared early in the disease, which proved very
troublesome, and greatly debilitated the patient. Respiration was now rather
laborious than anxious; the skin dry and hot, belly most commonly costive,
though some had a gentle diarrhoea from the beginning of the disease; no
appetite, but a great desire for drink, particularly any united with vegetable
acids, as the acid of lemons, etc. the adnatae of the eyes, in some, were much
inflamed, so that the light became scarcely tolerable; the countenance, on the
first and second days, in many, appeared much flushed, attended continually
with a violent head ache, so as frequently to produce delirium, with
restlessness and watchings, which greatly exhausted the patient's strength; the
tongue was generally dry, and in the beginning of the disease covered with a
whitish scurf, and the patient complained much of anxiety, or a great sense of
weight at the praecordia; the excrementitious discharges, whether natural, or
produced by art, were very fetid and disagreeable.

About the third day the inflammatory symptoms greatly changed to those of a
putrid kind, or a remission took place; if the latter did not succeed, the
tongue became dry, and began to be covered with brown or black ^ordes; not long
after the teeth and lips put on the same appearance; respiration became now
anxious, with an increased prostration of strength: the vital functions at this
time were much more disturbed; watching, or a comatose state, now took place,
if it had not before appeared; and even those who did sleep, enjoyed it but for
a few moments, when they waked as if in a fright: the pulse became smaller,
weaker, and more frequent; thirst was greatly increased; nausea much more
intolerable, together with the sense of oppression at the stomach: those who
had not vomited before, had that direful symptom added now to the others; the
contents of the stomach, which were thrown up in the act of vomiting, were
generally of a fetid nature; the voice began to be changed; small petechiae
appeared about the neck and breast, when the body, and even the room, unless
well ventulated, had a cardaverous smell. The patient kept continually rolling
or turning in the bed, and frequently picking the bed-clothes. In some, the
bowels, at this stage of the disease, were very costive, so that recourse was
obliged to be had to artificial means, whenever it became necessary to evacuate
their contents: in others, a profuse diarrhoea considerably increased the
weakness of their debilitated bodies. Most generally on the fourth or fifth day
of the disease, with those to whom it proved fatal, all the last mentioned
symptoms were greatly increased, together with a cardaverous smelling sweat,
which would appear on the body, when the trunk was hot, and the extremities
cold: the pulse became more frequent, irregular, and sometimes intermittent:
the person would lay on his back, with his knees drawn up, and his body
appearing as if falling down in the bed; his voice low, and scarcely
perceptible: he was now senseless of persons standing around, or any of their
proceedings: the pulse in this stage of the disease was so weak as scarcely to
be felt; the extremities put on a livid appearance. From the comatose state,
which had already taken place, the patient could hardly be roused by the
strongest stimuli of sound and light, though in the beginning of the disease he
was scarcely able to bear the most gentle; and if he should be roused from the
situation, in a few moments the same would again succeed. The urine and stools
were frequently involuntarily discharged; a hiccup followed, if it had not
before taken place; and the person, in consequence of universal debility
producing inability to discharge the natural secretion in the bronchial
vessels, appeared as if choking with phlegm, or something pent up in the
trachea: convulsions, or subsultus tendinum, now affected the frame; the eyes
put on a glassy appearance, and death, in a short time, closed the scene.

This was the general course of the symptoms in those to whom the disease
proved fatal; but in some, they came on a little sooner, in others later: in
some the petechiae, and even maculae and ^^^ices, extended over the body before
death, though all showed evident signs of putrescency directly after.

In one person, on the afternoon of the second day, an entire intermission of
his symptoms took place; on the morning of the third, they returned with
increased violence, when a vomiting came on with apthae appearing in the mouth
and fauces. Upon taking a few drops of any thing in the stomach, vomiting would
immediately be produced, which terminated in hiccup; this continued a few
minutes; it would then subside until any thing was again swallowed, when the
same circumstances returned. Petechia appeared on his neck and breast the fifth
day, and as nothing could be retained on his stomach, he was supported with
glysters of broth for several days, to which, as there was no other way of
administering it, the red bark was added. The pulse in this person remained
good, until within a few hours of his death, when it began to diminish, weaken
and become intermittent. From this time it was remarked any thing would remain
on his stomach; the hiccup ceased, and death in a few hours closed the scene.
This was on the morning of the seventh day.

In some the disease made its appearance in a more gradual manner, without any
inflammatory symptoms attending it, and most commonly those were protracted
beyond the eleventh or fourteenth days, when a remission or intermission took
place, or the person sunk under the disease. There were some who recovered, as
well as those who perished, on whom petechial eruptions appeared; and the
stomach in many of those who survived was very much disordered.

Some had other accidental symptoms accompanying the disease, such as a dry
ickling cough, pains in different parts of the thorax, twith other catarrhal
and pneumonic symptoms; so that some physicians were induced to declare it a
simple inflammatory fever and treat it accordingly. In other patients a
billious yellowness appeared over the surface of the body, the vessels in the
adnatae of the eyes were filled with bile, and attended with the other symptoms
of Dr. Cullen's species of typhus, the icteroides.

Many of those who survived the disease were a long time troubled with
rheumatic pains of a chronic nature, or a small eruption over the surface of
their bodies, which seemed to be caused by the debilitated state in which the
disease had left them; and the eruption appeared to depend particularly on a
weakened action of the extreme vessels Dr. Addoms's dissertation on the
malignant fever which prevailed in the city of New York during the months Aug.
Sept. and Oct. 1791.
."

I have thought proper to quote the preceding account of the fever which
prevailed here in 1791, from Dr. J. S. Addoms' dissertation; and shall now
return to the object of this publication.

In Philadelphia, "It was some time before the disorder attracted public notice
Matthew Carey.
;" very opposite was the case in New York, for before the complaint made any
progress whatever, the Health Committee proceeded to the discharge of their
duty. The first death which created alarm was that of Dr. M. Treat, Health
officer of the port, on the 29th of July. By some it is believed he took the
infection by visiting a vessel from the West Indies, having a malignant fever
on board; by others (physicians) it is positively asserted that he did not die
of an imported disorder; but by all, I believe, it is allowed that he died of
the epidemic which has since proved so fatal to many.

The disorder first made its appearance in July, at the upper end of Water
street, near New slip, and here it continued for a very considerable time, not
spreading out of that street, a few instances excepted, until the month of
September, after which, in some degree, it prevailed throughout the city; but
ultimately proved most mortal in the street where it commenced. Near New slip
there had recently been opened a small street, called George street; it had
been much neglected; was very filthy, and principally inhabited by people in
indigent circumstances; not less than sixty persons were buried out of it,
within the small compass of twenty houses. The disease also proved very fatal
about the Fly market, and from thence, in Water street, to the Coffee house.
The alarm became pretty general in the beginning of September, and the citizens
at that period commenced removing into the country. The recent sufferings of
Philadelphia and Baltimore, occasioned a greater fear of infectious fevers than
would otherwise, probably, have existed. The hasty burials after death, was
also a cause of great dread; the mode was no less terrifying: For the speedy
removal of the dead, a hearse was provided, drawn by an horse, and attended by
two men. As soon as the breath was out of the body, these men were sent for;
they usually brought a coffin and tarred sheet with them, in which the corpse
was wrapped, put into the coffin, and drove off to Potter's Field, a place
purchased for the burial of strangers and the poor, and entered without the
attendance of single connection or friend to bemoan their loss. It is asserted,
and doubtless is a fact, that in many instances the hearse came for the sick,
while yet living, and that coffins have been in the house for some hours before
the death of the persons for whom they were destined. No excuse can be plead
for such proceedings, but the general consternation which prevailed.

The fever itself did not, in many instances, occasion more alarm than the
hearse; as a proof of this many cases might be enumerated of women fainting
away at the sight of it, and being sometime before they perfectly recovered;
and in others it has occasioned hysteria, and a fever succeeded. One striking
instance of the effect of fear, and which came within my own knowledge, was in
a young woman who for some days dreaded the disease: at length she was seized
with it, and a delirium in a day or two ensued; during the whole of her
indisposition, which was five or six days, she constantly complained against
the hearse and tarred sheet, and almost her last request when dying, was, that
the family would not suffer her to be buried in this manner.

About the middle of September, some persons, by what authority I know not,
undertook burning tar one night in the streets: This became a topic of
conversation, and among those of weak minds increased the alarm: in short, a
coincidence of circumstances like these doubtless operated to the disadvantage
of the city, as the rumor spread through the country, much exaggerated, and
thereby, in many instances prevented supplies from coming into town.

The sufferings of the poor were great; a Lazaretto was prepared for their
reception, and a physician and nurses appointed to attend them: but
unfortunately great prejudices prevailed against it, and many were of an
opinion that the patients did not receive proper attention, particularly from
the nurses: as I have not been able at this early period, to procure
satisfactory documents on the subject, I shall suspend any animadversions.

"The Lazaretto, or pesthouse at Belle Vue, a few miles from New York, on the
East River, has, though a healthy place, and under good regulations, been
considered by the people at large, as the house of death. -- So odious is the
very idea of being placed there, that there is high probability the objection
of mind attendant upon their getting into new quarters, and the anxiety and
fatigue consequent upon being moved thither, have contributed, in several
instances, to lessen their chance of recovery.

The governors of the City Hospital gave directions, in pursuance of there
being a Lazaretto provided for those sick of the yellow fever, that no case,
supposed to be of that, or any other infectious disease, should be admitted
into that charity. It was reported that several poor persons, who had been
recommended as patients to the Hospital, were considered by the physicians as
improper, by reason of suspected contagion, to be admitted into the house. In
consequence of rejection there, it has happened that men, like calves and other
live stock, have been put upon carts at the Hospital, and drawn thence in
succession to the doors of several of the members of the Health Committee, over
the stony roughness of the pavement, and under the scorching rays of a
noontide fun! a procedure which stirred up indignation, as well as alarm, in
the citizens who saw it.

The general anxiety, caused by a concurrence of fearful circumstances,
operated so powerfully upon many persons whose children were students of
Columbia College that applications for leave of absence, in order to remove to
the country, became very frequent. The students participated the alarm of their
parents and guardians, and became intent on departing. The greater part
discontinued their attendance on the lectures, by direction of their friends,
and the rest withdrew themselves by degrees, so that in a few days nobody
appeared on the ringing of the bell, and the professors gave up their labors
of tuition. There was never any formal adjournment of the College. The
prevailing sentiment of the board of professors was, "That no such thing ought
to take place, as not warranted by any real cause of alarm."

Much praise is due to the Health Committee for their attention to the
distresses of the poor, and it is not to be doubted, but some valuable citizens
were snatched from the jaws of death by their timely assistance. Mr. Frederick
Steymets, a member of this body, fell a victim to the disease, much lamented by
all who knew him. His attention in the discharge of his duty was unlimited, and
it is expected, will ever be remembered with gratitude by all good citizens.
Capt. Buchanan, who voluntarily offered his services to visit the sick, and
distribute such moneys as were put into his hands by the Committee, also died
of the epidemic: It is only necessary to remark that this worthy man fulfilled
his duty with promptitude, and that he afforded the poor and indigent all the
consolation and relief that was in his power; society has lost in him a
valuable member. There are many more whose services have been of equal
importance with those already enumerated; but among these I shall name one man
only; a man who sacrificed every kind of interest to assist and relieve the
distressed, and whose philanthrophy it is hoped will never be forgotten. I
refer to Mr. Levi Wayland; to enumerate his virtues would require more time
than can be well spared; I shall therefore only remark that he was a good
citizen, and a sincere friend: He died of the epidemic, in the 31st, year of
his age, on the 12th, of October.

Having given a sketch of the principle occurrences that took place during the
months of August, Sept. and Oct. I shall next proceed to arrange the
proclamations, letters, etc. of the governor, Health Committee, etc.

COMMITTEE OF HEALTH
SOLICITOUS to quiet any unfounded apprehension which may rest on the minds of
the citizens, with respect to the spread of any malignant disease, but at the
same time convinced of the necessity of a faithful detail of facts, as far as
they have come to their knowledge. When the public is addressed on this
subject, the Commit of Health think proper to declare, that in their opinion,
no circumstance has existed in this city which ought to have occasioned the
alarm which is said to have gone forth. It is true that a fever precisely like
one which has twice, in the course of four or five years been observed, in the
autumnal seasons, in this place, has again made its appearance. Some seafaring
men have fallen victims to it. It is suspected to have originated on board a
certain vessel which lay at Fitche's wharf, but of this there can be obtained
no decided evidence. Notwithstanding which, the vessel has been ordered off in
the stream. It is suspected also, but without decided evidence, that our late
worthy health officer fell a victim to some unguarded exposure, to an infected
corpse on board a vessel. Besides him, notwithstanding the most diligent
enquiry, we have obtained information of not more than eight deaths happening
among our citizens since the 20th of last month, from fevers, supposed in any
degree malignant. The number of persons killed by the imprudent use of cold
water, has been remarkable, and laborers and others actively employed, ought
to be frequently cautioned on this head. The Committee have taken the most
prompt and effectual measures to guard the health of their fellow citizens; a
house is prepared at Belle Vue for the reception of sick persons, who may be
suspected of infection, with very agreeable accomodations, subsistence, and
medical aid.

All vessels coming from Foreign countries, from which there is any reason to
apprehend the introduction of infectious fevers, are now obliged to remain
below Governor's Island, until visited by the health officer, and a regular
permit for their entry be granted. The citizens ought to consider it their duty
individually to report to the committee, any person who may attempt to evade
this precaution, that the penalty of the law may be enforced. The practitioners
of physic in the city, have been particularly requested to be early and
faithful in reporting any dangerous or suspicious case. A hearse is provided,
and may be readily obtained by an application to the chairman of the Committee,
or any one of the aldermen, for the early burial of the dead, whenever it shall
be thought necessary, a practice earnestly recommended during the hottest
season, it being a well established fact, that the body of a patient who during
life could give no infection, may yet, when a corpse, be suddenly rendered
capable of so doing in a great degree. The Committee are of opinion, from
taking into their consideration, the present state of the health of the city,
the uncommon degree of heat in the weather, and the lengthy period it is yet to
elapse, before the season arrives which is usually observed to check the
progress of autumnal diseases, that great care and circumspection are
necessary. Moderation, regularity and cleanliness, are especially recommended.

The cleanliness of the streets, yards, cellars and markets, and the removal of
all putrescent matter, are objects of very great importance, and ought to be
particularly attended to, especially in those parts of the city, which are
contiguous to our Eastern waters.

By order of the Committee, ( Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
August 8th, 1795.


On the 14th of August governor Jay issued a proclamation, forbidding all
vessels from the West Indies, etc. to approach nearer the city than Governor's
Island, until they had been visited by the health officer of the port, and
received a certificate from him, certifying that such vessel or vessels, were
entirely free from any infectious distempers and contagion.

The same proclamation contained the appointment of Dr. Pit Smith, in the
stead of Malachi Treat, health officer deceased; and also Andrew Van Tuyl esquire
in the stead of White Matlack, member of the Health Committee, absent; whereby
the Committee stood as follows --

John Broom, Isaac Stoutenbergh, John Campbell, Theophilus Beekman, Gabriel
Furman, Drs. Samuel Bard and Pit Smith, and Robert Bowne, Nicholas Carmer,
Robert Lenox, Nathaniel Hazard, George Jane-way, Andrew Van Tuyl, and Frederick
Steymets.

The Committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious diseases in this city, REPORT,
That they have not ceased to make the most diligent enquiries respecting the
epidemic which has of late appeared in this city; that a few cases of a
suspicious nature do still occur, but none which have come to their knowledge
(and they possess the best means of information) afford any reason to conclude
this disease to be more contagious than fevers at this season of the year
frequently are in their latter stages. That nurses, servants, friends and
attendants, very generally escape with impunity, and that after the most
attentive enquiry, they can hear of no more than fourteen deaths in this large
and populous city since their report of the 8th instant, which can be
attributed to this complaint.

By order, etc. ( Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
August 15th, 1795.


On the 15th of August different practitioners of medicine met in consultation:
The 17th the following notice appeared in the newspapers:

"On Saturday last, agreeable to notice, a number of physicians assembled at
the City Hall, who after some conversation on the state of health in this city,
were unanimously of opinion, that no CONTAGIOUS fever, in any particular
different from what this city has been accustomed to, for some years past, at
this season, exists at present."

The Committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious diseases in this city, REPORT,
That since their last report on the 15th inst. twelve persons have died of the
prevaling epidemic, which still continues limited to a particular district of
the city; out of which not above two or three cases have yet occurred, nor as
yet no instance of death has happened to any nurse or attendant; and they have
no information of more than twelve persons sick of the prevailing disease.

By order, etc. ( Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
August 21st, 1795.
The Committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious diseases in this city, REPORT,
That they cannot sufficiently regret the exaggerated accounts that have gone
abroad in the country respecting the state of health in this city: That they
can assure their fellow citizens in the country and neighboring states, that
they make the most diligent enquiries, and that their reports contain, the
whole truth, according to the best of their information.

That an epidemic fever does exist, in a small district of this city, is true,
as is usual at this season of the year, but it is equally true, as yet it has
exhibited no decided evidence of a specific contagion; or of a nature
peculiarly infectious, not more than four instances having occurred, where
either physician, nurse, or friend have even been suspected to have contracted
fever, and (excepting that of our late worthy health officer) not one who has
died in consequence of their attendance on the sick. That they have heard of
seven deaths since their report of the 21st instant; that they believe about
thirty may now be ill; that from accurate information, the whole number of
deaths, which daily occur in this city, are considerably short of what has been
usual in the same season of other years; and that the peculiar sensibility of
the public mind, arising from the late sufferings of Philadelphia, New Haven
and Baltimore, can alone account for the present apprehensions of our fellow
citizens and neighbors.

By order, etc. ( Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
August 24th, 1795.
The Committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious diseases in this city, REPORT,
That since their report of the 24th inst. twenty persons have died of the
present epidemic. The Committee are so fully persuaded that the disorder which
exists principally, if not altogether, along a part of the Eastern shore of
this city, is a local malady, that they have directed various measures to be
pursued for the removal of its probable sources.

The committee further report, that the number of sick have decreased since
their last report, and that two persons have died in the last twenty-four hours.

By order, etc. (Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman,
August 28th, 1795.
The Committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious diseases in this city, REPORT,
That the violence of the epidemic fever, which has of late afflicted the upper
part of Water-street and its vicinity, has so far abated, that few new cases
occur, and that those are manifestly of a less dangerous nature. That since
their report of the 28th instant, four persons have died in this city, and two
at the hospital at Belle Vue.

By order, etc. ( Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
August 30th, 1795.


After this period the reports of the Committee seldom contained more than the
number of deaths. I shall, therefore, in future omit them, excepting where they
occur with some remarks annexed.

To the Inspectors of the Health Office, and the Consulting Physician, and his
associates for his advice, etc.
Gentlemen,
Although I am confident that you will exercise all your vigilance in executing
the authority vested in you by law, for preventing the introduction of
infectious diseases into this commonwealth, I cannot forbear requesting your
opinion for public information, respecting the existence of a contagious
disorder in the city of New York, and upon the expediency of taking some
precaution to guard against its being brought hither. The nature of my official
trust, and the solicitude of our fellow citizens, on this interesting subject,
will sufficiciently excuse the trouble of the present application.

I am with great esteem, gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, (
Signed) THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Philadelphia, August 26th, 1795.
Health Office, Philadelphia, August 29th, 1795. Sir,
The Inspectors of the Board of Health, for the city and liberties of
Philadelphia, having received your letter of the 26th instant, and given it
every attention which the importance of its contents required, are fully of
opinion, that the prevalence of a contagious fever in New York, is sufficiently
substantiated by a number of letters from several merchants in that city, which
have been laid before them.

Though the Board of Health are fully sensible of the great inconvenience
consequent to a stoppage of all intercourse between New York and this city,
yet, they are confident the urgency of the case, and present anxiety of the
citizens will justify the proceeding.

Under these impressions they are free to leave the subject with you, being
well satisfied, you will take such steps as our exposed situation may require.

By order of the Board of Health, ( Signed) RICHARD TITTERMARY, Chair'n. (
Signed) J. KAIGHN, Secretary.


To Those. Mifflin, esquire gov. of the state of Pennsylvania.
THOMAS MIFFLIN esquire governor of Pennsylvania.
Sir,
Agreeably to your request contained in your communication of the 26th, to the
Health Department, the physicians appointed by law to consult and advise
respecting the necessary measures for preventing the introduction of contagious
diseases into the city of Philadelphia, had a meeting this day; they have
desired me to inform you, sir, that after carefully comparing the various
accounts, which have come to their knowledge respecting the existence of a
contagious disease in the city of New York, there does not appear to them
sufficient information to convince them that such contagious disease prevails
there at present, as would render it necessary to stop intercouse with that
city. They have, however, taken measures to inform themselves more particularly
respecting the disease said to prevail there, at this time, and expect an
answer to their enquiries by Monday or Tuesday next, when, should any thing
further of importance be communicated, they will without delay, give the
governor information thereof.

I am, Sir, your very obedient humble servant. ( Signed) SAMUEL DUFFIELD.
Philadelphia, August 29th, 1795.
In the name and by the authority of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (L. S.)
By Those. Mifflin, gov. of the said commonwealth. A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas the Board of Inspectors of the Health Office of Philadelphia have
reported to me, that it appears from authentic information to them exhibited,
that an infectious or contagious disease exists in the city of New York, in the
state of New York, and that there is reason also to believe, that a similar
disease exists in the town of Norfolk, in the state of Virginia, so that the
safety and health of the citizens of Philadelphia require a stoppage of
intercourse with the said infected places. Therefore, in pursuance of the duty
in such case on me enjoined by law, but with a sincere regret for the unhappy
occasion, I, the said Those. Mifflin, governor of the said commonwealth, have
deemed it expedient to issue this proclamation, hereby prohibiting for the term
of one month, or until such prohibition shall be by proclamation lawfully
revoked, all intercourse between the said city of Philadelphia, and the said
city of New York and the said town of Norfolk, and any place or places within
five miles thereof, respectively, as well by land as by water, under the
penalty of three hundred dollars, to be recovered from, and paid by each and
every person transgressing the said prohibition in the manner herein after
specified, agreeably to the terms and directions of the act of the General
Assembly, in such case made and provided: and to the intent, that suitable and
sufficient measures may be taken and pursued for carrying into effect the said
prohibition, I have further deemed it expedient hereby to request that as well
the mayor, aldermen, and other officers of the city, as the inspectors of the
Health Office of the port of Philadelphia, shall and will, with all possible
vigilance and lawful authority and power, guard the various avenues or
entrances into the said city of Philadelphia, by land and by water, so that any
person or persons having been in the said city of New York, or the said town of
Norfolk, within the space of ten days, and attempting to transgress the said
prohibition, by approaching nearer to the said city of Philadelphia, than five
miles, shall be forthwith remanded to the place or places where such person or
persons respectively came or shall be conveyed (at the discretion of the said
mayor and aldermen, or of the said inspectors) to the Hospital on Staten
Island, and there kept as long as the case may require. And all citizens,
particularly those who have been in any wise concerned, or shall be acquainted
with the intercourse between the said city of Philadelphia, and the said
infected places, are earnestly exhorted and enjoined to give to the mayor, or
some other magistrate of the said city, or to the inspectors of the Health
Office, the earliest information of any and every attempt, which shall be made
to transgress, or evade the prohibition aforesaid, in order that the offender
or offenders may be dealt with according to law.

Given under my hand, and the great seal of the state, at Philadelphia, this
thirty-first day of August, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and ninety five, and of the commonwealth the twentieth.

( Signed) THOMAS MIFFLIN.
By the governor. A. J. DALLAS, Sec'ry.

To Dr. Amasa Dingley, President of the College of Physicians, New York.
SIR,
When the Committee of Health, at the commencement of the present alarm,
addressed to their medical fellow citizens a letter, requesting their aid and
advice, in the execution of their trust, it was not only thought the most
prudent (because the most silent) but it was viewed and intended to be as
respectful a mode of consulting them as any that could be devised. It is,
therefore, with some astonishment, as well as sincere regret, they hear that
many if not most, of the medical characters of this city have been so far
offended at this procedure, as actually to resolve to withhold the information
and advice they have solicited, and which is so necessary to their successful
endeavors to serve their fellow citizens.

If this information is just, they presume it must be founded on a mistaken
opinion, that it was the intention of the Committee indelicately to interfere
with the attending physician in the examination or management of his patient --
a conduct which they have studiously avoided, and of which they believe no
instance can be produced, where the attending physician himself has given them
the necessary information: but where this information has been withheld, and
they have received from other quarters, well attested accounts of a dangerous
case, as the only means of information in their power, they have been
constrained to send and make the necessary enquiry, that they might at least
save their fellow citizens from the danger which in such cases would attend a
procrastinated funeral, and the neglect of proper precaution respecting the
bedding, clothing and chambers of the sick, and this explanation, will, they
make no doubt, with any candid man, acquit them of the charge of inattention or
disrespect. But if the information they have received is founded rather in the
peculiar sensibility of individuals, than in the impression their conduct has
made on the minds of medical gentlemen in general, then it exposes the
profession to the unmerited censure of having suffered too punctillious an
attention to etiqutte to have interfered with an important and essential duty.

At any rate, however, it is now, as it ever has been, the unanimous wish of
the Committee, cordially to unite with the medical gentlemen in their
endeavors to avert or lessen the misfortunes with which this city is
threatened, and to avail themselves of their united counsel and information;
they therefore have directed me to address to you this letter, and to request
you will communicate it to the society, over which you preside; that no
misunderstanding or trifling punctilio may lessen their utility, or in any wise
defeat their exertions, in the truly important objects of this institution.

I am respectfully, Sir, your most, Obedient humble Servant, By order etc. (
Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
Aug. 25th, 1795.
To J. Broom, esquire Chairman of the Health Committee.
Sir,
The College of Physicians of New York, respectfully acknowledge the receipt of
your letter, by order of the Committee; and it is, "with some astonishment, as
well as sincere regret," that they find an implication of censure in the said
letter, on "many if not most of the medical characters in this city," in your
supposing they had formed a resolution to withhold any necessary information
and advice from the Committee, and which might have been necessary for your
"successful endeavors to serve their fellow citizens."

Whether the suggestion, so injurious to the practitioners of this city has
arisen from the illiberal insinuations of the Dean of the Faculty of Physic of
New York, is a subject they deem highly worthy of the enquiry of the Committee,
as it must have been obvious that some of the measures recommended by the said
Dean, were calculated to defeat the important objects for which you were
instituted, as they must inevitably operate to the great injury of the
unfortunate patients to be removed, the distress and affliction of his friends,
and unfounded alarm of the public, and an infraction of the laws of
hospitality, and the social compact, without drawing the attention of the
citizens to the real sources of danger.

How far this implication may have been applicable to some medical characters
in this city, is not for them to investigate; but they conceive it a duty they
owe to themselves and to the public, to assure you, that no such dispositions
are to be found in their body; on the contrary, they have individually, after
the receipt of your first letter, communicated all the information, as well as
all the cases of a dangerous nature, to the Committee, which they judged
necessary and proper for them to know, in order for your making the most proper
arrangements for the preservation of the public health, and the alleviation of
the misfortunes of those of the poor, or others who might suffer dangerous
sickness.

They sincerely hope that such enquiries as the Committee may deem expedient to
be made, will on all future occasions be conducted with such candor, decorum,
and unequivocal information, as may not be injurious to the patient,
disrespectful to the physician, or lead to any unjustifiable alarm of the
public mind, at the same time preserve the dignity of the Committee.

They are happy, on all occasions, to avoid all those quarrels and disputes
which have so long disgraeed the Faculty of Physic of New York, and therefore
it is deemed highly inexpedient to enter into any theoretical account of the
present sickness. But from all the facts that have occurred under their
observation, they are not yet convinced that there is any thing essentially
different in the disease, now exciting such general alarm, from what has been
commonly observable at this season of the year.

They believe, and are compelled to observe, that the measures recommended by
the said Dean, relative to the arrangements of Belle Vue hospital, the
visitation of the unfortunate patients, the interment of the dead, and several
other particulars are of such a nature, as are highly interesting to the
reputation of this city; and it now becomes a serious question, whether it
would not be wise and prudent in the Committee to adopt new and more salutary
measures.

They cannot but hold in abhorrence every attempt at dictatorial usurpation;
that there is not a member of their body who has not been regularly licensed as
the law directs, and they flatter themselves that they are duly sensible of the
sacred nature of those obligations, which ought to govern their conduct as
practitioners; and at the same time they feel it an important and essential
duty to countenance every man or body of men, laboring for the public good.

They also find it necessary further to remark, that there are no points of
"etiquette," as you are pleased to term them, which have ever been suffered to
interfere "with an important and essential duty."

They most sincerely wish, "that no misunderstanding or trifling punctillio,"
may lessen the public utility of either institution, by obstructing the channel
of truth, but at the same time they think proper to suggest the propriety there
would be in recommending to the medical department, annexed to your body, a
more cautious expression of language on the nature of the supposed prevailing
epidemic; by these means the alarm will not be increased from the source of
ostensible authority.

They also assure the Committee of their readiness on all occasions, cordially
and unanimously to unite with the Committee of Health, in their endeavors to
avert or lessen the misfortunes with which this city may at any time be
threatened, by epidemics or other dangerous diseases.

I am, therefore, directed to address to you this letter, and to request you to
communicate it to the Committee, in which you have the honor to preside, and
request them to pay the most serious and candid attention to the aforementioned
facts.

I am respectfully, Sir, Your obedient humble servant, By order of the College
of Physicians of New York, ( Signed) CHARLES BUXTON, Sec'ry.
Sept. 2d, 1795.
To JOHN BROOM, esquire
SIR,
YOUR favor of the 25th inst. was communicated to the Medical Society on the
26th, when they had a pretty numerous meeting, and I am authorized to inform
you, that they unanimously disclaimed the idea of having taken offense at any
part of the conduct of the Health Committee, or of having resolved to withhold
any information or advice, which may aid them in the attainment of their
laudable views.

We have reason, sir, to believe, that the information that you allude to, has
originated with some characters who are out of the pale of the Medical Society,
and that if you have hitherto received few, or no communications from the
members of that body, it is because nothing has occurred to them, which they
have judged of sufficient importance to communicate.

You may rest assured, sir, that the Medical Society are heartily disposed to
cooperate with the gentlemen of the Health Committee in every measure which
may tend to avert or mitigate the calamities of their fellow citizens. I am,
Sir, with esteem and respect,

Your very humble Servant, (Signed) JOHN CHARLETON, Presi'dt Med. Soc. N. Y.
Aug. 28th, 1795.
Philadelphia, Sept. 4, 1795. SIR,
THE physicians appointed by law to consult and advise respecting the necessary
measures for preventing the introduction of contagious diseases into the city
of Philadelphia, met this day; and they request me to inform the governor,
that, by the answer they have received to their inquiries, alluded to in their
letter of the 29th ult. and from other information, they are happy to find,
that the disease, which has lately excited so much alarm, is rapidly subsiding
in the city of New York: And consequently, that they continue of the same
opinion as their last, respecting the stoppage of intercourse with that city.

I am, Sir, Your very obedient, humble servant, ( Signed) SAMUEL DUFFIELD.

Those. Mifflin, esquire gov. of the state of Pennsylvania.
Letter from his Excellency John Jay, governor of the state of New York, to
governor Mifflin, relative to suspending the intercourse between the cities of
Philadelphia and New York, on account of a malignant fever in the latter city.
New York, 19th Sept. 1795. Sir,
Your Excellency's proclamation of the 31st of last month, prohibiting all
intercourse between this city and Philadelphia, induced me to write the
following letters to the President of the Medical Society in this city.

New York, 4th Sept. 1795. Sir,
By a proclamation of the governor of Pennsylvania, dated the 31st day of last
month, all intercourse between this city and Philadelphia is prohibited for the
term of one month, or until that prohibition shall be revoked.

The reason assigned for this prohibition is thus expressed in the proclamation
-- Whereas the Board of Inspectors of the Health Office of Philadelphia, have
reported to me, that it appears from authentic information to them exhibited,
that an infectious or contagious disease exists in the city of New York, in the
State of New York, and that there is reason to believe that a similar disease
exists in the town of Norfolk, in the State of Virginia, so that the safety and
health of the citizens of Pennsylvania require a stoppage of intercourse with
the said infected places, Therefore, etc.

This proclamation, by exciting alarms and apprehensions throughout this and
the neighboring states, and in foreign countries, naturally tends to produce
embarrassments to the commerce of this city; and to interrupt that intercourse
with the country which is at all times necessary to the convenience and
interests of both. Hence it becomes important to examine and ascertain with
precision, whether any and what degree of credit is due to the information
alluded to in the abovementioned report of the inspectors of the Health Office
of Philadelphia. No infectious or contagious disease can exist and prevail in
this city, without the knowledge of the gentlemen who practice physic in it;
and as the greater part of them are members of the Medical Society over which
you preside, I request the favor of you to summon a meeting of the society,
and to lay before them this letter.

They will oblige me by reporting to me an accurate statement of such facts and
observations as may in their opinion be necessary to the forming a right
judgment relative to the existence, nature, and extent of the disease in
question.

If such a disease does really exist and prevail here, it should heartily be
admitted and made known, that the dangers resulting from it may be guarded
against. If, on the contrary, the reports concerning it are ill founded, care
should be taken to prevent their continuing to gain credit.

Although the truth of the frequent reports made and published by the Health
Committee has not been impeached, yet as the before mentioned proclamation
appears to be grounded on information more alarming than what those reports
afford, I think it advisable to enquire whether it is warranted by any facts
within the knowledge of the members of your society.

I have the honor to be, etc.

Dr. John Charleton, Presid't of the Med. Soc. in the city of New York.

To this letter I received the following answer.

SIR,
THE communication which you were pleased (through our President) last evening
to lay before the Medical Society, we consider of a nature the most serious and
important, and the information you desire we offer with great respect, and
under impressions the most scrupulously conscientious.

About six weeks ago, in a particular part of the city, being very low, and
having an eastern exposure, a fever has been observed to exist, marked by the
violence of those symptoms which are acknowledged to characterise those of the
malignant sort. This fever, in a short time, attacked a considerable number of
persons, in proportion to the space which it occupied, and proved fatal to more
than is usual with us, and which (previous to the salutary and heavy rains we
have lately had, and the consequent cloudy and cool weather) assumed an aspect
which called for, and justified every prudent exertion that could be made to
investigate its origin, and check its progress.

Unfortunately, however, the sensibility of the public mind, on a subject of
this nature, giving reality to apprehension, converted the necessary efforts
for security and prevention into sources of fear and terror. Hence probably
have arisen most of the exaggerated reports which at first alarmed our own
citizens, and being sent abroad, have excited the apprehensions of our
neighbors, and given origin to measures more timid as they respect themselves,
and more injurious to us, than the nature of the case in any wise justified.

The collective opinion of this society, as the result of attentive observation
is -- With regard to the contagious nature of this disease, most of the members
are of opinion that it is not contagious, and all agree that it is so little
so, as to afford no apprehension of its being communicated from man to man, out
of the sphere of its original and local atmosphere.

As to its origin, suspicions have been entertained by a few physicians, that
it may have been imported, whilst at the same time there are many among us who
consider it as little more than that species of fever which has more or less
prevailed in this city at the same season, for several years past, rendered, by
the extraordinary heat, and some local sources of malignity, more violent and
fatal than usual.

If the Board of Inspectors of the Health Office of Philadelphia have received
any information respecting the disease in question, other than that from the
Health Committee of this city, which they deemed authentic, we are extremely
sorry that they should have been influenced by it, from a persuasion that such
information was equally unfounded as unauthorised.

We assure your excellency that we have no disposition to disguise or conceal
facts, nor do we hesitate to declare our opinion, that the alarm which has gone
abroad, has been unreasonably great, and quite disproportionate to the actual
state of the disease, which, as we have already observed, has been confined to
a very inconsiderable portion of the city. It affords us great pleasure to be
able to inform your excellency, that this complaint is fast diminishing, and
that the general health of our city has been throughout the summer, and
continues at this moment, unusually good.

We have the honor to be, with sentiments of great respect, your Excellency's

Most Obedient Servants. By order of the Medical Society. (Signed) JOHN
CHARLETON, Presid't.
New York, Sept. 5, 1795.
His excellency John Jay, etc. etc.

The Committee of Health in this city was appointed for the express purpose of
guarding against the introduction and progress of infections distempers, and
they have manifested great vigilance and attention to the discharge of their
duty. As they possess the best means of information and will always communicate
it with accuracy and candor, I wrote the following letter to them:

New York, 6th Sept. 1795. Sir,
The alarming and exaggerated reports in circulation, that a dangerous and
infectious distemper prevails in this city, will be corroborated by the
proclamation of the governor of Pennsylvania; prohibiting all intercourse
between us and Philadelphia.

I think it prudent to obtain from you and others, and transmit to the governor
of that state, authentic and conclusive information relative to the question
whether any such distemper does exist and prevail here.

The reports which you have from time to time published, are for the most part
concise and summary; and it is not necessary that they should in common be
otherwise. On the present occasion it may be useful to report to me a more
particular and circumstantial statement.

I have the honor to be, Sir your most obedient humble servant.

John Broom, esquire chairman of the Health Committee.

In pursuance of this letter I received one from the chairman, enclosing the
report mentioned in it. They are as follow:

New York, Sept. 8th, 1795. SIR,
I took the earliest opportunity to lay your letter of the 6th inst. before the
Health Committee, when they made immediate arrangements to comply with your
excellency's wishes. This you will find contained in the enclosed report, which
after mature deliberation was adopted by the Committee; it is as particular and
circumstantial a statement as they have it in their power to make, and which, I
believe, is very near a real state of facts. I have the honor to be,

Your Excellency's most obedient, and humble servant.


SIR,
In answer to your excellency's letter of the 6th inst. requiring from us a
particular and circumstantial statement of such facts, relative to the disease
which has lately made its appearance in this city, or have come to our
knowledge. We beg leave to submit the following.

On the 20th day of July, Dr. Malachi Treat, the late health officer of this
port, visited the brig Zephyr from Port-au-Prince, on board of which he found
three persons ill of fever, and the corpse of one that died that morning. The
Doctor calls the fever in his report a billious remitting fever. The brig was
ordered to ride quarantine. On the 22d day of July. Doctor Treat was taken ill,
and died on the 30th of a fever marked by a yellow skin, hemorrhages, vomiting
of a black matter, resembling coffee grounds, and all such symptoms as
characterise billious fevers of the malignant kind. On the 25th day of July,
four persons from on board the ship William from Liverpool, which arrived here
several weeks before (all the crew having, previous to that day, and during the
voyage, been perfectly healthy) were taken ill of fever, attended with similar
symptoms, and all died within seven days.

The ship lay at a wharf at the foot of Dover street, in the south easterly
part of this city, which lies exceedingly low, is much of it made ground, has
an eastern exposure, and (from the streets having been raised about three years
ago, which threw the yards and lots into hollows of considerable depth) is
almost unavoidably liable to great collections of offal and filth of all kinds;
is a part of the town very much crowded by poor inhabitants, and contains a
great number of lodging houses in which seamen and strangers of the poorer
class commonly reside: and from all these causes, is unquestionably the most
unhealthy part of this city; and ever has suffered most from the regular
autumnal diseases as well as from any new and uncommon complaint. From all
which circumstances, we entertain no doubt, but that the seaman of the ship
William contracted the disease of which they died here, and did not introduce
it into this city. A little before, and immediately after the attack of the
seamen of the ship William, which first called the attention of this Committee,
several other persons in Water and Front streets, and in the neighborhood of
Dover street, were seized with fever, which especially in those cases which
proved mortal, was marked by severe vomitings, a yellow skin, hemorrhages, and
in some cases a vomiting black matter resembling coffee grounds, and which
generallly terminated within seven days; and proved fatal to more in proportion
to the number seized, than is usual in the ordinary complaints of this season,
in this city.

From that time the disease continued to spread in that neighborhood,
extending itself to a few houses lower down toward Peck's slip, to one or two
in Pearl street and Cherry street, but principally upwards, toward the ship
yards; the number of deaths increasing slowly until the 9th of August, from
which, to the 11th inclusive, thirteen died; from that day the number of deaths
reported to us have gradually decreased, so that nine only are reported to have
died within the last five days; and in all, from the 30th of July to this day,
eighty-nine deaths have been reported to this Committee: forty-four persons in
all have been sent to Belle Vue Hospital, of which the greatest number have
been seamen and strangers, who have arrived in this city, sick of various
complaints, and of this number, several in the very last stages of their
disease; twenty have died; sixteen have been discharged cured, and eight
remains in the house, most of them convalescent.

The number of deaths includes all the cases which to our knowledge have
happened between the 26th of July and the 7th of September inclusive, either in
this city, at the New York hospital, or at the hospital at Belle Vue, arising
from fever in the least approaching to the character of this disease.

And as this Committee have made every exertion in their power to obtain the
necessary information, they do not hesitate to say, that this statement is
sufficiently correct to afford the basis of every public measure, which may be
thought necessary for our own safety, or for the security of our neighbors.

By order, etc. (Signed) JOHN BROOM, Chairman.
Sept. 8th, 1795.
This report, and the one from the Medical Society, have been communicated to
the mayor and corporation of the city, to whom, on the 6th instant I wrote the
following letter.

New York, 6th Sept. 1795. SIR,
The suspension of all intercourse between this city and Philadelphia is
inconvenient to them, as well as injurious to us. The information which induced
their Health Office to apply to their governor for this suspension, was
doubtless such as in their opinion justified that measure. There nevertheless
is reason to believe that more credit was inadvertently given to it, than it
deserved.

Whether a contagious disease does exist and prevail in this city, is a
question to which a satisfactory answer can only be formed from correct
statements of well authenticated facts, and the opinions of men well informed
and meriting confidence.

On the present occasion, I think it advisable to obtain such statements and
opinions, and to transmit them to the governor of Pennsylvania.

If it should appear from them that the usual intercourse between this city and
Philadelphia may be restored without any danger to the latter, the prohibition
which suspends it, will of course be revoked.

I have requested and received from the Medical Society in this city their
report on this subject, and when to this is added the late publication of the
Medical gentlemen who compose the society called the College of Physicians, the
sentiments of the faculty relative to it will be ascertained.

As the Common Council of the city is composed of magistrates and other members
from the different wards and as a dangerous infectious distemper cannot be
presumed to prevail here, without exciting their notice and attention; I
request from them a statement of such information as they may possess, together
with their opinion relative to this interesting subject.

These documents, with the report of the Health Committee, will afford to the
governor of Pennsylvania the best and most authentic evidence that the nature
of the case will admit of; and such as cannot fail to reduce the many
exaggerated reports that are in circulation, to the standard of truth.

I have the honor to be, With great respect and esteem, Sir, your most
obedient and humble servant.

The hon. Richard Varick, esquire mayor of the city of New York.

In answer to this letter I received one from the mayor, enclosing an extract
from the minutes of the Board on this subject. They are as follow.

New York, Sep. 8th, 1795. Sir,
I have the honor to inform your excellency, that on this day I laid before the
Common Council of this city your letter of the 6th inst. together with the copy
of the report of the Medical Society of this city, on the subject of the
disease said to exist in this city, which accompanied it; and also a copy of
the report of the Health Committee of this date, to your excellency on the same
subject.

In answer to your letter I am requested by the Common Council to inform you,
that they have duly considered those reports, and that they do believe that the
facts contained in them are, according to the best information they have been
able to obtain, correct and true; and further, that from the information
received by the individual members of the Board, it is their opinion that a
much greater degree of general health prevails in this city at present, than is
usual at this season of the year.

A certified copy of the resolution of the Board upon that subject, I do
enclose to your excellency.

I have the honor to be, With great respect and esteem, Your obedient Servant.

City of New York. ss. At a Common Council held on Tuesday, the eighth day of
September, 1795,
Present, Richard Varick, esquire, mayor. esquires, Aldermen.
Gabriel Furman, John Campbell, Theophilus Beekman, Wynant Van Zandt, Isaac
Stoutenbergh, Andrew Van Tuyl, Nicholas Bayard,
Assistants.
Garrit Harsin, George Janeway, Frederick Stymets, Mangle Minthorn, Nicholas
Carmer,

The mayor laid before the board a letter from his excellency the governor, of
the 6th inst. on the subject of the proclamation issued by the governor of
Pennsylvania, suspending all intercourse between this city and Philadelphia,
and the said letter, together with a report made to his excellency on the 5th
inst. by the Medical Society in this city, and also a report made to his
excellency by the Health Committee of this city, on this day, were respectively
read and duly considered, and thereupon resolved, that Mr. Mayor be requested
to inform his excellency the governor in answer to his letter, that this Board
do verily believe that the facts contained in the said respective reports are,
according to the best information this Board have been able from time to time
to obtain, correct and true. And further, that from the information received by
the individual members of this Board, it is the opinion of this Board that a
much greater degree of general health prevails in this city at present, than is
usual at this season of the year.

Extract from the minutes, ROBT. BENSON, Clerk.

Your excellency will find herewith enclosed a paper containing a letter from
the President of a society of medical gentlemen in this city, called the
College of Physicians, to the Chairman of the Committee of Health.

Thus, Sir, I have laid before you, and submit to your consideration, a
collection of facts and opinions, which merit credit and respect.

I flatter myself it will appear to your excellency, from these documents, that
it is not necessary to suspend the intercourse between this city and
Philadelphia, and therefore that the prohibition in question will be revoked.

I have the honor to be with great respect, Your excellency's Most obedient and
humble Servant, JOHN JAY.

His excellency Thomas Mifflin, esquire governor of Pennsylvania.
Governor Mifflin's answer.
Sir,
On the receipt of your excellency's letter of the 9th inst. I referred the
statement, which it contains to the consideration of the Board of inspectors
and the Board of Physicians, appointed by law, to prevent the introduction of
infectious diseases into this commonwealth; and I have now the honor to enclose
copies of my letter and their report for your information.

It is a source of sincere regret to every citizen of Philadelphia, that the
recent intelligence from New York renders the existence of a contagious disease
in that city no longer a matter of doubt or apprehension. We are confident,
therefore, that while we cherish every sentiment of a just and liberal
sympathy, the citizens of New York cannot disapprove our using those
precautions, which are necessary to prevent the extension of so great a
calmity. It could certainly be no alleviation of their sufferings, that the
inhabitants of Philadelphia should be exposed to the same affliction; and your
excellency will readily allow, that every embarrassment, as well foreign as
domestic, that may be the effect of a suspension of the intercourse between the
two cities, will operate equally against both. This consideration of interest
as well as every motive of duty, justice and humanity, will prompt me to seize
the earliest moment, in which the prohibition contained in my proclamation may
be safely revoked; and I shall esteem any information that your excellency may
be pleased from time to time to communicate on the subject, not only as
deserving the highest confidence and attention, but as a mark of personal favor.

With sentiments of sincere respect and esteem, I have the honor to be, Sir,
your excellency's Most obedient humble Servant, THOMAS MIFFLIN.

To his excellency John Jay, esquire gov. of the state of New York.
Report of the Board of Health, in answer to the governor's letter of (...)
inst. in consequence of the letter from governor Jay, relative to the malignant
fever now prevailing in New York.
Health Office, Philadelphia, Sep. 16th, 1795. Sir,
In our communication to your excellency of the 4th inst. we had the honor to
inform you, that the inspectors of the Health Office proposed a further joint
meeting with the Board of consulting physicians, on the Wednesday following; We
accordingly met this day; the result of our consultations we have now to detail
to your excellency. And first we shall notice the following passage in your
letter. "That governor Jay may be apprised of the facts on which your opinions
and reports have been founded, you will be pleased to furnish me with a
particular statement, to accompany my answer to his letter."

Previously to our advising the intercourse between the two cities to be
stopped, we have received information by a number of oral and written
testimonies, that a dangerous and malignant fever existed in the city of New
York. It will hardly be expected we should mention the names of those persons
from whom we received information, either verbal or written; to give up the
names of those we conversed with on the subject could answer no good purpose:
and in respect to mentioning the writers of letters, or extracts of letters,
from whom we derived a considerable share of information, would we conceive be
an useless as well as unpardonable breach of confidence. Suffice it to say, the
information was such as on which we conceived we could safely depend, and in
this body of evidence it may not be amiss to mention it comprised the reports
of the Health Committee of New York, and letters from their port physician.

These united testimonies tended to establish that the late Health Officer of
the port, Dr. Treat, who confessedly resided in a healthy part of the city, on
the 20th of July visited the brig Zephyr, just arrived from Port an Prince, on
board of whom was the corpse of a man who had died that day, as also three
persons sick of a fever, all three of whom died in a few days after; that Dr.
Treat was taken ill about the 2^d, and died on or about the 30th of the same
month, of a fever; the symptoms of which was of the most malignant kind, and
such as is characteristic of what is commonly called the yellow fever; that
shortly after the part of the crew of the ship William from Liverpool were
taken with a fever apparently of the same nature, and all died (in a statement
since made by the Health Committee of New York and communicated to your
excellency by governor Jay, we have to lament the omission of a most material
circumstance; it is whether or not the brig Zephyr had any communication with
the William; they only tell us she was ordered to perform quarantine) our
private information goes to show that there actually was a communication
between those vessels; if this information is well founded, the contagion may
be readily traced from the Zephyr to the William.

From about this time a fever of the same nature with that of which Doctor
Treat and part of the crews of these vessels died, was observed to break out in
a particular district of that city, confined within a small space and
continuing to increase insomuch that in the course of the month of August we
are told about eighty persons (some augment this number greatly) died of the
same kind of fever within that district only: if this statement may be depended
on, and we think it corroborated by the documents transmitted by governor Jay,
we have no hesitation in saying, that the citizens of Philadelphia had cause
for serious alarm, for it is much doubted if a greater number died in
Philadelphia during the same month, of the disorder which prevailed in, and
afterward proved so calamitous to our city, during the summer and autumn of
1793.

In both cities the disorder appears to have broke out about the same time of
the year, and is remarkable for a similarity of progress, except that in the
present month it has as yet less spread over the city of New York than it did
with us: but may not this be ascribed to the plentifully rains, a cool and
favorable state of the atmosphere and other natural causes which have prevailed
this season in a remarkable degree (the reverse of which was the case in the
summer of 1793) than to a less degree of malignancy in the disorder: besides if
the constitutions and habits of the citizens of New York are indisposed to
imbibe the infection, are we sure the Philadelphians are not predisposed to
take it, and would it become us as guardians of the city's health to try the
experiment for the sake of conviction: rather would it not be more prudent to
make use of every reasonable means the most likely to avert an impending
calamity; the answer is obvious.

It is of small moment to the point in question, whether the disorder was
imported, or originated in the city from local causes; it is sufficient to
prove it contagious; and that it is so under certain situations and
circumstances few will deny, who attentively consider the foregoing statement.
Dr. Treat received the contagion from visiting the brig Zephyr, and the crew of
the William received it from the same vessel, from whence it was imbibed by the
citizens of New York, more immediately contiguous to its original sources of
contagion, and predisposed to take the infection.

From the above statement we think it will be readily admitted that the
disorder now prevalent in the city of New York, is of the same nature with that
which prevailed in Philadelphia in the year 1793, and that in certain
situations and circumstances it is also contagious: if these facts are
admitted, we think they will sufficiently justify the measures we recommended.

Thus we have given to your excellency the principal facts, on which were
founded our opinions and reports, and our reasons for their justification.

In respect to the Proclamation prohibiting the intercourse between the two
cities, we have to inform you that it was the unanimous opinion of the joint
Boards, that there does not now appear any reason for revoking the said
Proclamation; on the contrary, considering the prevailing hot weather, and the
recent advices from New York, it was our unanimous opinion, that the
Proclamation should not only be continued; but that it ought to be strictly
carried into effect.

We are very respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient servants. By order of the
Board of Health. ( Signed) ROBERT SMITH, Chairman. ( Signed) JOHN KAIGHN,
Sec'ry.


Thomas Mifflin, esquire gov. of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Sir,
We have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 8th instant, and are
happy to have it in our power to inform the governor, that from the best
information we have been able to obtain, the fever, which has for some time
past prevailed in New York, is greatly mitigated, and from the late propitious
change in the atmosphere, plentiful rains, we may entertain a reasonable hope
of that fatal malady being soon dissipated altogether.

We are however unanimously of opinion, that the disorder has not so far
subsided, as to justify a revocation of the proclamation suspending the
intercourse for the preesnt.

We are respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient Servants, By order of the Board
of Health, ROBERT SMITH, Chairman. JOHN KAIGHN, Secretary,


Thomas Mifflin, esquire governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.


In September, the following gentlemen were appointed in the city of Albany to
prevent the introduction of the epidemic into that place, Ebert Willet, Abraham
Eights, Leonard Gansevoort, jun. Jeremiah Lansing, Elisha Kane, Henry I.
Bogert, Stephen Lush, Thomas Mather, Barnet Van Alen, Sanders Lansing, Garret
Van Sante, and Jonathan N. Bleecker.

On the 21st day of Sept. governor Mifflin issued his second proclamation,
prohibiting the intercourse between the city of Philadelphia and the city of N.
York.

On the 7th of Oct. the governor of Virginia, by proclamation ordered all
vessels from New York to perform quarantine.

SIR,
TWO years have not elapsed since a correspondence took place between us, on a
subject, the most distressing ever know to Americans. The dreadful calamity
with which our city was then visited, alarmed the United States, from one
extreme to the other. We became the objects of the benevolence of many of our
neighbors, and we recollect with the most lively gratitude, the part which the
city of New York took in our affliction, and the generous assistance we
received from thence. We lament that you are now suffering under a similar
visitation, and we feel the most poignant distress for your calamitous
situation.

Under the influence of these sensations the sum of seven thousand dollars has
been collected among my fellow citizens, which I have the pleasure of
forwarding to you, at their desire, in the enclosed draft on the Bank of New
York, requesting that you will be pleased to cause it to applied to the use of
the poor and distressed of your city.

May a gracious providence continue the favorable change which appears already
to have taken place, and shortly put a period to your sufferings, by restoring
your citizens to that happy state of health which they have been accustomed to
enjoy.

With sentiments of personal regard and esteem.

I am Sir, your most, Obedient humble Servant, MATTHEW CLARKSON.
Philadelphia, Oct. 3d, 1795.
Richard Varick, esquire mayor of the city of New York.
New York, Oct. 6, 1795. SIR,
I had the honor (by yesterdays post) of receiving your favor of the 3d inst.
covering a draft on the Bank of New York in my favor for 7000 dollars, to be
applied to the use of the poor and distressed of this city, in their present
afflictions.

On the last evening I communicated the contents of your letter to the Health
Committee, and on this day to the Common Council of the city; they heard it
with heartfelt satisfaction, and prompted by inclination as well as duty, I do
with great pleasure, at their express request, in behalf of our afflicted
fellow citizens, present to you, Sir, and the citizens of the city of
Philadelphia, whom you have the honor to represent, our most respectful
acknowledgements for the benevolent feelings and consoling sympathy which you
express for our hapless situation, and which you and they have so fully
manifested by the very liberal donations you have been pleased to transmit to
us on this occasion. You may be assured, Sir, your benevolences will be
faithfully applied, and will excite in your favor the repeated prayers and
blessings of many a mourning father, disconsolate widow and helpless orphan.

I sincerely lament that at so early a period after a calamitous and
distressing pestilence had in some measure desolated the city of Philadelphia,
and excited toward her, in her afflicted state, the tear of sympathy and the
hand of benevolence of her neighbors, the Almighty Ruler of heaven and earth
should have found too just cause to remind us, that we also are beings
dependent on his sovereign will, and that we have not requited him with
gratitude for the many very signal blessings and unparalleled prosperity we
have enjoyed since the late revolution, and our return to our dwellings; and by
this distressing visitation, to impress on our minds, that under him human
beings are dependent on each other, by making us in turn the objects of the
commiseration and benevolence of our sympathising neighbors.

I fervently hope and wish that you, sir, and your respected fellow citizens,
may never again witness such distressing scenes as you have lately experienced;
and that the affliction which has now come to the doors of my fellow citizens,
may be sanctified to the survivors, and teach us, that unless supported by the
Divine Hand the things of this life, which we so highly prize, are very vanity,
and life itself a mere vapor.

We were very sanguine in our expectations, about 4 weeks ago, considering the
then general state of health in this city, beyond all former seasons, that the
epidemic which was then confined to a small district of the city, and which
since has caused so much alarm and distress, and deprived us of some valuable
citizens, would have been confined there and finally subsided; but the warm
weather and fears of many, and want of caution in others, has caused it to
spread from that quarter somewhat northward and principally eastward to the
ship yards, where it has been most fatal among the poor emigrants, who lived
and died in filth and dirt; and although the cool air of the close of Sept. had
much diminished the mortality, and had given us reason to hope that the
judgment would be speedily removed, it has again, by the uncommonly warm
weather, or perhaps unknown causes, become very alarming, and has taken off a
few individuals, I suppose, not exceeding 30 or 40 in the whole, south-west of
the Fly market and Crown street, and west of Broad street, continued into the
Bowery, exclusive of the Hospital.

The number of deaths has however, again decreased from 29 on Sunday evening,
to 22 on Monday, and 17 on this evening (the whole number now being 525) and we
have reason to hope and expect, from the small number of new cases which have
come to the knowledge of the Health Committee on the last evening, that, with
the blessing of heaven, the disease will soon subside, and permit our
affrighted fugitive fellow citizens, who are scattered in every quarter around
us, to return to their dwellings in safety, and again open the intercourse
between us, and our more happy neighbors; the want of which has in a very
great degree enhanced our misfortunes.

Accept our unfeigned thanks, Sir, for the interesting and friendly part you
have taken in our days of calamity and distress; and believe me to be with
sentiments of great personal respect and esteem,

Sir, your very humble servant, RICHARD VARICK.

The hon. Math. Clarkson, esquire mayor of the city of Philadelphia.
SIR,
It is with the sincerest pleasure, that I find myself justified in restoring
the intercourse between the cities of Philadelphia and New York, in consequence
of the enclosed report of the inspectors of our Health Office.

Permit me, sir, to convey the cordial congratulations of the citizens of
Pennsylvania to you and our fellow citizens of New York, upon the change which
has taken place in the health of your city; and to assure you that nothing
could equal the sympathy which we felt, during the continuance of the calamity
that has afflicted you, but the joy that we experience on its cessation.

With sentiments of great respect and esteem,

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your Excellency's most obedient, Humble servant,
THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Philadelphia, Oct. 21st, 1795.
To his Excellency John Jay, esquire gov. of the state of New York.
COMMITTEE OF HEALTH.
Fellow Citizens,
But three persons have died on the last four days in this city, and but three
at Belle Vue since the 27th of October, of fever in any degree resembling our
late epidemic.

The alarming situation in which this city has lately been, is calculated to
excite the most serious reflections -- to inspire feelings of veneration for
that all controling Power who in the midst of such judgment numbers mercy! --
We trust that it has been under a sentiment of grateful dependence on him, that
we have been encouraged to fulfill the duties you had entrusted: And we trust
that while congratulations are repeated upon returning seasons of health, all
hearts may be disposed to improve to moral and virtuous purposes both the
threatening and felicitating dispensations of heaven. Your Committee at this
period cheerfully recognize those principles of undeviating veracity, which
during the increasing terror of their fellow citizens, directed their daily
reports respecting the progress of disease. It is with great satisfaction that
they have found it evinced by their experience, that such exact details as they
have made to the public, instead of increasing those terrors, have tended, in a
great measure, to subdue them; and the accomplishment of this is of immense
importance to public happiness and convenience; fear mitigates its objects.
During the existence of a calamity of this kind, circumstances will be ever
exaggerated, by the timidity and credulity of individuals.

It is to be lamented, however, that falsehoods have been propagated from the
basest, meanest, and the most despicable motives; by some as an apology for
their panic apprehensious, by others, from the sensibilities of self interest,
and to gratify a sordid lust of gain. Lies have been propagated for the sake of
the wonderful, and the excitement of surprise, by persons ungenerously
forgetful of the extensive mischiefs naturally originating from this source --
despair, desertion, poverty, famine and death!

Perhaps an ill-judged tenderness for their reputations has prevented the
publication of the names of some offenders. Had the falsehood repeated with
great confidence in the country had any proper foundation, our city would long
since have been nearly desolated.

We turn with pleasure to the recollection of circumstances more creditable to
hmanity; and to acknowledge the liberality of those of our fellow citizens who
have contributed to alleviate the distresses of the sick and suffering poor.
The generous inteferences of sympathy from Philadelphia, and some neighboring
villages, demand our lasting gratitude: Such instances of mutual good will and
beneficence remain grateful memorials of the fraternity of a free and virtuous
people.

From these resources, 8837 dols. have been received; and your Committee feel a
responsibility in the faithful and just distribution. Its proper objects being
numerous, and often probably not within the sphere of individual knowledge,
each of the members of the Committee is associated with two respectable
citizens in seeking out the sick, and relieving those to whom their charity is
directed.

Circumstances have not been wanting to show the happy influence of temperance,
cleanliness, and cold upon the late epidemic. But while we rejoice that
benevolent nature has given power to these agents to set bounds to its ravages,
let us recollect that they are assiduously to be employed. We feel it incumbent
on us to remind our fellow citizens of this truth, particularly those who are
returning from the country. Houses which have contained the sick, should be
carefully ventulated; and things that have been employed by them, that cannot
conveniently be cleansed by water, should be subjected freely to the action of
cold.

It is not impossible that neglect in those particulars may occasion a few
solitary instances of this disease until we have experienced intense frost. For
though we flatter ourselves it is extinguished as an epidemic, and our streets
free from all infection, we have before us the experience of other places to
impress the necessity of such precautions.

Among the arrangements made by the Committee to prevent the spread of
infectious disease they consider early interments and the use of the hearse, as
one of the most important. Satisfactory proofs of its utility might be
detailed. It is to be wished that the good sense of the community might be
exerted to conquer any prejudice which may remain in opposition to a practice
of burial so much more convenient than the common mode, and so much more safe.

The present state of Belle Vue hospital is pleasing; not only from it we
anticipate the speedy extinction of all disease therein, but from the happy and
comfortable situation of the sick, and from the satisfaction expressed by them
with respect to their medical aid and attendance. But three new patients have
been received during the last ten days. There are now thirteen sick in the
hospital, twelve of whom are considered as out of all danger. Since its first
establishment, eighty nine persons have been discharged, cured; the deaths have
been published with our daily reports.

It is with great satisfaction that we remark that although some of the people
have been slightly affected with the epidemic no one has died.

Much to the injury of the unfortunate persons who have been sent to this
place, its circumstances have been grossly misrepresented. The sick have in
consequence, in numerous instances, sought this asylum with hearts aching with
anxiety and despair.

A senior consulting physician was early appointed to visit it occasionally
from this city. From its first establishment, one, and since the 24th of Sept.
two, physicians have constantly resided within its walls. A new building has
been erected during the sickness, and no expense has been spared to render the
sick commodious and happy. A Committee from this Board have made frequent
visits and examination of its circumstances, and from time to time have
witnessed with pleasure its improving state.

A more vigilant, humane, or attentive man was never appointed purveyor to an
hospital, than our late worthy member Mr. Frederick Steymets, whose death
reminds us of the loss of our other friend and associate, Dr. M. Treat, who
there is reason to suspect, was also a victim to the discharge of faithful
duty. The public will join with us in deploring the loss of such worthy and
respectable members of society.

Before we dismiss the subject of the hospital, it is but just that we
acknowledge our sense of the merit of Dr. Alexander Anderson, and Dr. M'Farlin,
resident physicians at Belle Vue. The former of these gentlemen engaged with
zeal and virtue, at early period and under discouraging circumstances, in their
arduous duty.
Both for their persevering attention, humanity and fidelity to the sick, they
have deserved well of their country.

The Committee being employed in arranging expenditures, and in the settlements
of accounts, request that all persons having demands upon them, present the
same to alderman Furman, 106, Broad Way, on or before the 20th instant.

JOHN BROOM, Chairman, GABRIEL FURMAN, Alderman, ANDREW VAN TUYL, do. JOHN
CAMPBELL, do. ROBERT LENOX, do. THEOPHILUS BEEKMAN, do. ROBERT BOWNE, NICHOLAS
CARMER, Dr. WILLIAM P. SMITH, ISAACSTOUTENBURGH, GEORGE JANEWAY, NATHANIEL
HAZRD.

N. B. Dr. Samuel Bard, absent from this city on business.





A LIST of the NAMES of those who have DIED of the EPIDEMIC, from July 29, to
Nov. 1, 1795.
A
ABEEL, David G. physician, Nassau street Abeel, Mrs. wife of Garet, Cherry
street Abrinckthy, William, Oliver st. Accularius, Henry, baker, Skinner str.
Adamson George, Water do. Adams, Mary, daughter of Mr. Dodds, Water str. Adams,
Mrs. Addison, William, staymaker, Cliff street Abbertson, --, Belle Vue
Anderson Mr. Water street Anderson Mrs. wife of William, Water street Angus,
Walter, labourer, Catharine str. Allen, Gilbert, house carpenter, Catharine
str. Armor, William, stone cutter, Lombard str. Aston, David, shoemaker, Water
str. A woman, Otswego market.
B
Baker, Jeremiah, Front street Ba^^^y, John, barber, Cherry do. Bains,
Brightman, dyer, do. Bains --, son of Brightman, do. Bains, Susannah, Belle Vue
Baird, Mrs. wife of R. shoemaker, Lombard str. Banner, James, Partition do.
Baines, Robert, grocer, Catharine str. Barbary, a young woman, Cherry str.
Bartrom, Eunice, Belle Vue Bassy, James, Belle Vue Barnaby, John, sailor Cherry
st. Beekman, Wm. dock builder, Oliver street Betsy, at Mr. Marshall's ship
carpenter, Water street Berrian, Mr. ship carpenter, do. Berthou, Constant,
French teacher, Vesey street Bertine Samuel, Belle Vue Berry, Andrew, do.
Beckworth, Jonathan, mason, East George street. Billings, Noyes, clerk, Front
str. Bleecker, John, merchant, Cherry street. Blake, Mary, negro, Roosevelt st.
Blake, Mrs. Church do. Blow, Robt. laborer, Skinner st. Blithe, Rev. Mr.
Baptist minister, Pearl street. Bowman, Sam. sailor, Water st. Boss, Wm.
silversmith, do. Bonnet, Mrs. Susan, Pine str. Bown, Elias, city marshall
Bolin, Noah A. Belle Vue Boil, Mary, Division street Boil, Patrick, Harman
do. Bowen, Samuel, Water do. Boyd, Julia, Belle Vue Boston, Matthew Bolton,
Mrs. Pearl street. Bolton, Nicholas, do. Buckley, Mrs. Water do. Barnet, Peter,
jun. Catharine st. Buchanan, Mrs. wife of John, Cherry street Buchanan, John,
do. Bucker, Mrs. wife of John, Water street. Burling, Mr. stone cutter, Thames
str. Burlington, Brukford, Belle Vue Bukman, William, Cherry str. Buckley,
Elijah, tailor, Batavia lane Buckley, Biddy, Belle Vue Burger, Mrs. wife of
John, Skinner street Brain, J. H. shoemaker, Pearl st. Briggs, Sarah, negro,
Water str. Button, John, Cherry do. Bruster, Mrs. Water do. Bruncan, Anthony,
Front do. Brown, Mr. Catharine do. Brown, Mr. grocer, Bowery lane Brown, Han.
widow, Rutger st. Brown, Matthew, Water do. Brown, Mary, Belle Vue Brown, John,
brewer, Cheapside Bragg, John, hardware merch't. Water street Bryson, Robert,
tallow chandler, Rose str. Brodie, Wm. notary pub. Greenwich str. Brooks, Mr.
physician, Cherry st. Byrne, Nich. mulatto, Belle Vue Campbell, Donald, Harman
st. Campbell, James, carpenter, Barclay str. Campbell, Nathaniel, Belle Vue
Camp, John, merchant, Frankfort str. Cannon. William Casey, Thomas, Water str.
Casey Rose, do. Casey, Fanny, Augustus str. Carmichael, James, Front do. Cadel,
Mary, Belle Vue Cady, Samuel silversmith, Fly market. Carpenter, John, boarding
house, Front st. Carpenter, A. Rose str. Carpenter, James, tailor, Harman str.
Carman, Benjamin, hatter, Water str. Cameron, Valentine, Cherry str. Compton,
Matthias, carpenter, Belle Vue Cook, Sarah, Cherry str. Cook, Catharine, Oliver
do. Cook, Mr. Connon, Dan. carpenter, Charles str. Cock, James, Peck slip Cock,
Ephraim, grocer, do. Camidinue, John, shoemaker, Pearl str. Commardinger,
Andrew, printer, do. Coals, Ann, Peck slip. Coals, Mr. tailor, do. Cottle,
John, Belle Vue Cossey, Mr. Beekman str. Concklin, Mrs. wife of John, George
str. Concklin, widow, Cherry str. Connoly, John, tallow chandler, Rutger str.
Copping, Francis, East George st. Colon, Mary, Chapel str. Conden, Margaret,
George str. Conden, Margaret, daughter of Margaret, George str. Connick, Dan.
clerk, William st. Conroy, Mrs wife of Peter, Roosevelt str. Coe, John, carman,
George str. Cox, Eliz. East George str. Cox, widow Amelia, do. Courtney George
Christie, John, tavernkeeper, Water str. Christie, James, son of John, do.
Christie, Mary, widow, do. Chambers, Rob. shoemaker, Rosevelt str. Chapman,
Daniel, William do. Chevalier, Mons. French teacher, Cliff str. Charne, John,
Harman str. Church, William, Belle Vue Chidowson, Mr. laborer, Water st. Clark,
Jas. stone cutter, Vesey st. Clark, Mary, City Hospital Clapp, John, Belle Vue
Clancey, James, barber, Peck slip Clancey, Wm. laborer, James st. Clancey,
James, ship chandler, Cherry str. Clancey, Those. nailor, Thames st. Crawford,
Susan, wife of Those. Roosevelt str. Crawford, Thomas, Belle Vue Crawford, Mary,
Roosevelt str. Craran, John, custom house guager, Church str. Curry, James
cooper, Cherry str. Cunningham, Miles, currier, Gold str. Cumming, Those.
cooper, Roosevelt str. Cuff, a slave, James str.
D
Dalton, James, Cherry street. Dalton, Mary, wife of James, do. Dalton, Mary,
daughter of James, Cherry str. Dater, Jacob, house carpenter, Chatham str.
Daniel, Samuel, Pearl do. Davis, Phebe, wife of Wm. sailor, William str. Davis,
Mrs. wife of John, tailor, Catharine str. Davis, Elizabeth, widow, Lombard str.
Davis, Geo. mason, Hester do. Davenport, Josh. seaman, Greenwich str. Day,
James, Water str. De Wit, Wm. baker, Belle Vue Dealing, Ann, widow, Oliver st.
Dennis, a mulatto, Ferry str. Dickinson, Betsy, Belle Vue Disonway, David,
Water str. Dixon, James, Cheapside. Dixon, John, Belle Vue Dixon, Eliza, widow,
Cheapside Dalben, Steph. tavern, Water st. Donnoville, Susan, wife of Paul,
ship carpenter, Pearl str. Douglass, Mrs. Catharine Augustus str. Douglass,
miss, Augustus str. Doody, John, Belle Vue Doyle, Mrs. wife of Moses, Lombard
str. Duffie, Sarah, Alms house Dutch, John, George str. Dutch, John's wife, do.
Duncan, Wm. accountant, Belle Vue Dunscomb, Daniel, a son of Daniel, Cherry
str. Dunscomb, Tedford, son of Daniel, Cherry str. Dunscomb, Mrs. wife of
Daniel, Cherry str. Duhoose, Sarah, wife of John, Lombard str. Dubois,
Elizabeth, Golden hill Drocut, William, Dover str. Drawbridge, Mr. merch't,
Cherry str. Drowley, James, merchant, do. Drummond, J. tailor, James st.
Dwishel, Elizabeth, Gold str. Dyell, Francis, laborer, James st. Dyer, Ephraim,
Cherry str.
E
Eagle, Margaret, Belle Vue Eden, Polly, Water str. Egbert, Mr. Division str.
Egleston, Sally, Cherry do. Ellison, James, Belle Vue, Ellicot Arthur,
accountant, Front st. England, Elizabeth, Belle Vue England, Richard, do.
Eustice, Mrs. wife of Charles, Water str. Ewen, Samuel.
F
Fairley, Wm. grocer, Wall str. Fanny, a negro, Poor house Fargo, Mr. East
George str. Fargo, Mrs. do. Farden, Wm. carpenter, Golden hill Farrol, James,
Belle Vue Farley, John, clerk, Warren str. Farrington, Mary, seamstress, Water
str. Fee, Jacob, painter, Magazine st. Fitch, Edward, sailor, Belle Vue Finch,
Mr. Pearl str. Finly, John, do. Fenton, Joseph, Belle Vue Fish, Cornls.
merchant Water st. Ferguson, Ann, Lombard do. Fosdick, William, Belle Vue
Fogarthy, John, Cherry str. Folly, Wm. James do. Fosley, Eric, Belle Vue.
Fountain, James, Barclay str. Flagen, Ann C. Rutger do. Flanagan, Patrick,
Belle Vue Flaig, Rob. accountant, Pearl st. Food, John, house carpenter, do.
Fletcher, Thomas, stone cutter, Lombard str. Francis, Melchior, grocer, Pearl
do. Fray, Ann, Belle Vue French, John, Belle Vue Freeman, Mrs. wife of Silas,
Cheapside str. Ferris, Josias, East George do.
G
Galloway John, Water str. Gale, Joseph, New slip Galer, John, Water str.
Garvin, John, bookbinder, Belle Vue Garland, Mrs. wife of George, Fly market
Gattey, Elizabeth, wife of Henry, Water str. Gauman, Samuel, Lumber do.
Gautier, Cornelius, Barclay do. Gautier, Mrs. wise of Samuel, James str.
Gardner, L. jun. Eagle do. Gardner, Ruth, Pearl do. Gardner, Mrs. wise of Noah,
Water str. Gardner, Moses, shoemaker Fletcher st. Gardner, Wm. Belle Vue Garey,
Mary, wid. Roosevelt st. Gedney, Mrs. wise of John, Roosevelt str. George, a
sailor, Crane wharf George, a mulatto, Dover str. George, a negro, Belle Vue
Gilmore, Miss, Pearl str. Gilson, Mr. toyman Golligar, Henry, sailor, Henry
str. Goddard, True Love, Rose str. Godbey, Wm. near the Bridewell Goodwin,
Joseph, Belle Vue Gooram, Nancy, do. Gutherie, Robert, do. Graham, Mr. Water
str. Grantz, Eliza, Belle Vue Grancey, Geo. Catharine str. Gray, Joshua Grant,
Allen, Belle Vue Grant, John, carman, Broad st. Grant, Edward, Rutger do. Gray,
Elizabeth, Water do. Green, Sam. clerk, Dover do. Green, Mary, Cherry do.
Green, Ally, Belle Vue Griswold, Tim. sailor, Crane wh. Griffiths, Edward,
cooper, Rosevelt str. Glover, Mr. Pearl do. Glover, John, carpenter, do.
Glover, Mrs. wife of John, do. Glover John, jun. son of John, do. Glover, Wm.
Belle Vue Gleen, Wm. Division str.
H
Heart, Mrs, Rose street Heart, James, grocer, Cherry do. Heart, James, Roosevelt
do. Heart, Samuel, Broad Way Hare, Mrs. wife of Sam. Lombard str. Hannah, Mrs
Water do. Hannah, Mary, do. Hannibal, a negro, Peck slip Halliday, Mrs. wife of
John, Water str. Hamilton Wm. grocer, Beekman st. Hambleton, Mrs. Bunker's hill
Hambleton, Charles, labourer, Skinner str. Hannah, a slave Hathaway, John, Wm.
str. Harraway. James, blacksmith, Cheapside str. Harraway, Catharine, Belle Vue
Harris, Mary, James st. Harris, Elizabeth, Beekman do. Hauxhurst, Daniel
Herring, John, carman. Rector st Herring, John, Belle Vue Hewit, Capt. John,
Liberty str. Heyer, Walter, jun. Pearl do. Heymer, George, Belle Vue Herton,
Sarah, Water str. Heyer, Walter, clerk, Pearl str. Holmes, John, Belle Vue
Holmes, Eve, negro, New slip Hoyt, Abigail, Fitche's wharf Horton, Isaac,
grocer, Fly market Houston, Wm. stone cutter. Lombard street Holdcop, Mrs. wife
of Thomas, Fly market Hodges, Robert, carpenter, Lombard street How, John,
Bowery Higginbottom, Mr. Belle Vue Hill, James, Water str. Hill, John G. clerk,
do. Hoagland, John, Pearl str. Howel, Catharine, widow, do. Hoyer, Pet.
carpenter, New marked Hunt, Eden, tavern, Water str. Hugh, Mrs. wife of Samuel,
Mulberry str. Hudson, Frederick, Bancker st. Hin^^cue, Casper, Greenwich st.
Hunter, Peter, Batavia lane Hutchins, Mr. tailor, Liberty st. Hutchinson, Fred.
Bancker str. Hume, Hen. laborer, Harman st. Humes, Robert, Henry str. Hurtin,
John, tailor, Water str. Hubbs, Daniel, Catharine str. Huggeford, Dr. J.
Beekman str. Huggeford, Peter, apothecary, Pearl str.
I
I^ers, Hez. rope maker, Bayard st.
J
Jackson, William, City hospital Jackson, Hannah, wid. Hague st. Jackson, Mrs.
wife of John, Ferry street Jackson, a negro man, ship yards James, Thomas V.
merchant, Water str. Jenkins, Mr. merchant, do. Jenkins, Aron, carman, Warren
st Jefferson, Robert. George st. Jeffery, Rachel, Water str. Jessop, Silas,
carpenter, Cheapside Jeremiah, a sailor, Belle Vue John, --, clerk to Mr.
Ferguson, Water str. John, --, George str. Jones, Mrs. wife of Arthur, George
str. Jones, Those. brewer, Cheapside Jones, Mrs. wife of Those. do. Jones,
Rebecca, Belle Vue Jones, Matthew, Roosevelt str. Johnson, Mrs. Fly market
Johnson, Jane, Water str. Johnson, Joshua, schoolmaster, Lombard str. Johnston,
Josh. near ship yards Johnston, John, shoemaker Cliff st. Johnston, Mary,
Bancker do. Johnston, John. grocer, Liber. st. Johnston, Lawrence, schoolmast.
Fair str.
K
Kane, Mr. Belle Vue Kelly, Richard, do. Kelly, Those. labourer, Lomb. st.
Kellioye, Hugh, Belle Vue Keen, Mary Kennedy, John, huckster, Cliff st.
Kessiah, laboring wom. Dover st. King, George, Belle Vue Kipp, Ann, daughter of
Abm. Water str. Knapp, Jos. tavern, James do.
L
Lackling, James, Belle Vue Lamb, (...) James str. Lawrence, Margaret, Pearl
do. Lawrance, Mrs. wife of Joseph, Cherry str. Lee, Mrs. wife of Wm. Magazine
st. Lee, James, merchant Ferry str. Lewis, Joseph, Pearl do. Lewis, Capt.
Leake, Wm. culler, Water st. Ledyard, Wm. clerk, do. Leaycraft, Mrs. do. Le
Veillard, Mr. merchant, Front street Little, Hugh, Orchard str. Livingston,
Mrs. George str. Lilburn, Ann, near ship yards Loosy, Mr. Roosevelt str.
Lockhar, Patrick, Belle Vue Long, Mr. Burling slip Low, John, tailor, Water
str. Loudon, Saml. jun. printer, do. Lovely, Thomas, Belle Vue Luder, Ann, Rose
str. Lynch, John, Water str. Lynch, Sarah, wife of John, Chestnut str. Lion,
Jas. labourer, Nicholas st. Lion, Gilbert, Belle Vue
M
Mabee, John, carman, Pump str. Mann, Richard Mason, Mrs. James str. Matthews,
James, Murray str. Manning, John, Belle Vue Martain, Mrs. huckster, Peck st.
Maynard, Phineas, Eagle str. Maxwell, Arthur, Belle Vue Martin, William, do.
Magitter, Harmanus, Church st. Masterton, J. shoemaker, Fair st. M'Alpin,
Catharine, Batavia lane M'Auly, John, lab'rer, Barclay st. M'Auly, Rob't, do.
Augustus st. M'Carvin, Daniel, Belle Vue M'Carr, J. laborer, Catharine st.
M'Canna, Arthur, do. George st. M'Crea, Mrs. wife of Archibald, Cherry str.
M'Conell, Susannah, Belle Vue M'Cullen, J. laborer, Lombard st. M'Cullen, J
c'rpent'r, Thames st. M'Cormick. Phil. sailor, Front st. M'Donell, Wm. baker,
Cherry st. M'Donald, Malcom, laborer, Rutger str. M'Donald, Ann, Front str.
M'Dowel, Conway, Cherry str. M'Dougal, Neal, tailor, Water st. M'Gillings,
John, Beekman slip M'Gregor, J. laborer, Orange st. M'Gunnigal, Pat. do.
Skinner st. M'Gumican, Mary, Belle Vue M'Kenzie, Charles, George st. M'Kenzie,
Eleanor, do. M'Kenzie, Alexander, do. M'Kenzie, Mary, do. M'Kenzie, C. do.
M'Kenzie, Isabella, Bell Vue M'Kinley, Catharine, Lumber st. M'Kinley,
Alexander, Belle Vue M'Kinnon, Catharine, George st. M'Laren, Bernard, Belle
Vue M'Murry, Jane, do. M'Nabb, Mr. grocer, Cross st. M'Nabb, Mr. sawyer, Water
st. M'Natty, Peter, Peck slip M'Neil, Mrs. Lumber str. M'Quay, Barney, Belle
Vue M'Quire, Philip, George str. Meeks, Betty, Belle Vue Mien, Andrew, sailor,
Water st. Miller, John, sawyer, Moore str. Miller, Mary, Lombard str. Miller,
James, Belle Vue Miller, Alexander, do. Miller, Mr. shoemaker, Water st.
Miller, Miss, Water str. Mitchel, Michael, Pearl str. Mitchel, Wm. rigger,
George st. Minchal, Robert, Belle Vue Mine, Mary, do. Morris, Mr. laborer,
Ferry st. Moote, Mr. Water st. Mott, Wm. merchant, Pearl st. Mott, Richard. do.
Water st. Mooney, John, ropemaker, do. Moore, Ann, widow, Cherry st. Morrough,
Robt. Maiden lane Morrough, Joshua, Belle Vue Montgomery, Henry, do. Mullen,
John, pilot, do. Mulberry, Mr. do. Muleneaux, Mrs. Munn, Robert, clerk, Water
st. Murren, Robert, Urime str. Murdock, Wm. George str. Murph, John, Belle Vue
Murphy, Mr. barber, Fair str. Murphy, James, labourer, do. Myers, Mary, widow,
Cath. str.
N
Nash, James, shipwright Nation, Miss, Cheapside Nelly, at Mr. Wright's, Pearl
st. Nelson, James, Belle Vue Nicholas, Wm. cabinetmaker, Hague str. Nicholas, a
sailor, Crane wharf Nichols, Capt. John Wm. st. Nichols, Moses, Fly market
Niel, Mich. labourer, Cheapside Nixon, Mr. City hospital Norton, Eliz. widow,
Cherry st.
O
Ogilvie, Anth. painter, Oliver st. Ogilvie, widow, Front do. Ogilvie, Mr.
house carp. Geo. st. Ogilvie, Isaac. sailor, Water do. Ogorman, Mrs. George do.
Ohew, Thomas, Dover do. Orr, James, Banker do. Oswald, Col. E. Wm str.
P
Packharness, John, Cherry str. Pain, James, custom house officer, Fair str.
Pain Jasper, Belle Vue Pain, E. Water street Parker, Asher. tailor, Golden
hill. Parker, Mrs. wife of James, Water str. Parks, Those. Belle Vue Palmer,
Abijah, porter Parcells, Nancy, Cherry str. Parcells, Mr. ship carpenter,
Division str. Parrot, Stephen, Water str. Patterson, Mrs. Bancker str.
Patterson, Simon, cooper, Fayette street Patrick, --, stone cutter, Golden hill
Peebles, Sarah, Fair str. Peebles, John, Belle Vue Pearchan, Mrs. wife of
Justice, Oliver st. Pearse, Mrs. Catharine str. Penny, Charles, junr. painter,
Little Catharine str. Penny, Richard, blacksmith, Harman str. Penniker, Wm.
ship carpenter, Lumber str. Pettit, Mrs. wife of Pet. Lombard str. Plumer,
Richard Belle Vue Platt, Sam. Catharine str. Pomeroy, Andrew, Pearl str. Post,
Mrs. junr. Water str. Potter, Geo. tavern, Water str. Powell, Samuel, George
do. Provoost, James Pury, Steph. blacksmith, Cheapside
Q
Quick, James, Warren str.
R
Ramsay, James, Belle Vue Ramage, Mrs. wife of Thomas, James street. Ranger,
John, grocer, Cherry st. Ray, James, barber, Catharinest. Ray, Hannah, Cherry
do. Reeve, James, boatman, Coffee house slip Reeves, Barnab, grocer, New slip
Reeves, Hannah, wid. of do. do. Reid, Thomas, Belle Vue Repose, Zachariah, do.
Reach, John, sadler, Water str. Renwell, Those. Lombard do. Richards, Wm.
merchant Richards, Ann, Water str. Richmond, Wm. mason, do. Ricker, Nancy, a
black woman Ridder, Ann, Batavia lane Roberts, Mrs wife of Those. do. Robertson,
Jno. tailor, Water st. Rose, Sarah Ross, Edw. labourer, Harman st. Rooper, Mrs.
Cherry do. Rooper, Andrew, Belle Vue Roosevelt, Mrs. wife of Oliver, painter,
Cherry str. Rogers, Isaiah, schoolmaster, Lombard str. Rogers, Owen, George do.
Rogers, Polly, Cherry do. Royal, Pat. labourer, Division st. Rosin, James B.
Pearl do. Rhodes, James, merch. Water st. Rhodes, John, do. do. Russel,
Francis, mason, Peck st. Russel, Susannah, do. Rudd, Joseph, Water str. Ryin,
Edw. labourer, Water st.
S
Sands, Mary, wife of Thomas, George str. Sands, Thomas, George do. Sands,
Phebe, daugh. of Tho. do. Sands, Ann, wife of Robert, Oliver str. Sanders, Mrs
Jacob do. Sanders, Thomas, Catharine do. Satully, John, Belle Vue Sarah, --,
Belle Vue Santag, John, Front str. 2 Sailors, ship, William a Sailor of the
brig Eliza Seaman, Sam. tailor, Ferry str. Seaman, Mrs. Peck slip Seaman,
Robert, Belle Vue Secker, Rebecca, do. Scott, John, clerk, Water str. Scott,
Wm. Pearl do. Scott, Wm. Harman do. Shaw, Isaac, near Belvidere Shaw, Mr.
clerk, Wall str. Schemmel, Mrs Ferry do. Shute, Frederick, George str. Shute,
Mr Cherry do. Showel, Mr do. Skinner, Abraham, do. Sline, John, shipwright
Water st. Sline, Ann, widow, New slip Sim, George, grocer, Cross st. Simmonton,
Rob. Catharine str. Skilling, Mrs wife of Samuel, Cherry str. Skaats, R.
carman, Church st. Smith, Elihu Smith, Mrs Belle Vue Smith, Mary, do Smith, Wm.
do Smith, Catharine, Water street Smith, Mr Fitche's wharf Smith, Mrs Liberty
street Smith, Mrs Water street Smith, Mrs Front do. Smith, Michael, barber,
Cherry st. Smith, Mrs Catharine street Smith, Dan grocer, Water do. Smith,
Julia, Oliver street Smith, Ann, widow, do. Smith, Rob. carman, Charlotte st.
Smith, Zella, widow, Cherry st. Smith, Mrs wife of Robert, Oliver street Smith,
Jer. grocer. Coent^es slip Sneddegrass, Mrs wife of James, George street Stout,
Wm. Corlear's hook Stobo, William, James str. Spranger, John, ship carpenter,
Cheapside Spranger, Mary, Cherry str. Squires, Frank, bell ringer, do.
Stafford, Nicholas, Belle Vue Stackhouse, Mrs wife of Timothy, Bowery Stewart,
Abigail, Belle Vue Stevenson, Samuel, do. Stratton, William, cabinet maker,
Chestnut str. Suffield, Capt Aaron, Water st. Tappan, Mrs wife of Neal, Water
street Tailor, Marg't, widow, James st. Teer, Mrs Front street Thistle, Samuel,
Belle Vue Thomas, John, ditto Thomas, Nancy, ditto Thomas, Robert, tailor,
Roosevelt street Thompson, John, blacksmith, Lombard street Thomberg, Agnes,
Belle Vue Thorp, Jas. merchant, Water st. Tillinghast, Charles, deputy
collector, Cherry street Tidd, Ann, Oliver street Treat, Malachi, physician of
the port, William street Towers, Partholomew, Belle Vue Tragg, Ann, do. Trader,
Mrs wife of Hen. Rose st Til^greene, --, bark Neptune Tinny, Jeremiah, Belle
Vue Town, Mrs Rhinelander's yard Tool, James, Belle Vue Totter, Neal,
shoemaker, Water Tompkins, Eliza, Belle Vue Twist, Wm. do. Tute, Wm. Bowery
lane Tweed, Philip, Rutger str. Tydgaat, Jacob, Beekman do.
U
Underwood, Eliza, Pine str.
V
Vannerman, Anthony Vandenenden, James, merchant, Front str. Vallen, William,
Belle Vue Van Dyck, Mary, Rutger str. Van Gordon, John, Belle Vue Van Pelt,
Christ. East Geo. str. Van Wagenen, wife of Hubert, Beekman slip Varian Mr
Vincent George, Water str.
W
Wall, Thomas, Belle Vue Walsh, Mrs wife of James, carman, Roosevelt street
Walsh, Richard, stone cutter, do. Wayland, Levi, printer, Water st. Warner,
Thomas, Ann street Watson, James, jun. near battery Weag, Matthew, City
hospital Weeks, Mrs wife of Nicholas, carpenter, Cherry street Weeks,
Elizabeth, Water street Weeks, Jesse, Roosevelt street Webb, Not. apothecary,
Pearl st. Webster, Lewis, Belle Vue Wells, Hor. silversmith, Pearl st. Welsh,
Barbary, Gold do. West, Those. upholst. Water st. West, Mrs. do. Wench of Rev
Freeman, Cherry str. Wickee, Wm. Belle Vue Wiley Mrs Cherry str. Wiliams,
Richd. Front str. Williams, Ephraim, Belle Vue Williams, Mr tailor Divis. str.
William, a sailor, Water str Willet, Samuel, labourer, Har^ st Willis,
Prissilla, Cherry str Wilson, Wm. carpen. Cheapside Winnon, Han. wife of Dan.
Pinest Wise, Capt Thomas, ship Hope Whaley, Sarah, wid. Cherry st. Wheaton,
Ann, Roosevelt st. Wheeler Silas, carpenter, near tea water pump Wheeler,
James, merchant, Liberty st Whetmore, Mrs George str. White, Mrs wife of Paul,
sailor, Cheapside Whiten, Mrs do. Whitman, John, laborer, Catharine street
Whiteleg, Mary, wife of Wm. Front street Whild, Molly, Harman str. Wood, Henry,
carpenter Vesey street Wood, Jeremiah, tanner, Ferry st. Wood, Richard, Belle
Vue Woodware, Wm. Belle Vue Wright, Ellis, butcher, James st Wright, Mr joiner,
Bowery
Y
Youles, George, Belle Vue Young, Jas. carpenter, Charlotte st Young, John,
Dover street
Z
Zeller, Sam. East George street.
FINIS.

