TO THE PUBLIC.
(...) ^roposed by the Author, about two years ago, to be published by
Subscription; entitled, "The Young Mill-wright and Miller's Guide," -- At the
price of one Dollar and an half; met with the expected encourage^^^^ (...)ong
as the Subscription was kept open: But, reflecting on the uncertainty, to what
length an^ work of this kind might run, he ceased to admit Subscriptions; until
he should be better able, from its actual (...) Plates to be engraved, to
estimate the real expense of the Publication. This being now done, the ^^thor
finds it necessary to add half a Dollar to the proposed price; which, he
flatters himself, his former Subscribers (...) too much, his Work, from the
accession of new matter, and extension of the old, being nearly do^bled in
size, and consequently will be nearly doubled in the Expense of publication

(...) with the advice of men, well informed in the Branches on which he
treats, submits the product of many years study and reflection, and of two
years of actual application to the Work, to the Generosity and public Spirit of
(...)ymen. -- Conceiving from the narrow Sale of Scientific Works, that without
the aid of Subscription, A^^hors are seldom indemnified, especially if the
Expense of publication be enhanced by Engravings: And he hopes such (...) is
not improperly asked, as he does not know of any correspondent Treatise extant,
in the English, o(...) any other language.

From the following sketch of the Design, and from the matter treated of, a
Judgment may be formed of its pretensions to public Utility, and consequently,
whether it merits public Encouragement.

THE DESIGN O^ THE WORK -- is
1st. TO give a regular System of Mechanics, and Hydraulics, adapted to common
capacities and education, ^^^bling Mill-wright^ and Millers, to understand with
ease the principles and powers of Water in its ac^^^^ upon Wheels, in it
various modes of application.

And here it will be attempted to show, the several defects and mistakes, of
some established Theories, whi^^ besides leading to error in Practice, produce
useless Expense, and to substitute some new principles better agreeing with
experiment and practice.

2d. To simplify the rules for applying the Theories to practice, in
ascertaining the power of water on all the approved constructions of Wheels,
according to the given quantity, and fall from one foot to thirty-six, in
proportioni^^ the Millstone, to the power of the Mill-seat, and in
proportioning the Gears to the motion of the Water-w^^^^ communicating the
proper motion to the Millstone, or other parts of the Mill-system.

3d. From these again, to form a set of Tables, wherein those not much used ^
^^lculation, will (...) the relative, proportions of the Mill-wheels, suited to
the given falls of water, as before mentioned; and also, of the Millstones, to
the power of the Seat.

4th. To describe and give directions, for erecting and using all the Author's
late improvements in Mill-work, tending to lessen labor, and consequently
Expense, and to perfect the Manufacture of Flour.

5th. To explain the art of Manufacturing Flour in all its parts, as at present
understood, and practiced by the most ingenious and skillful Millers.

6th. To give from Thomas Ellicot, Millright Whose noted genius and abilities,
and long experience of 38 years practice, in building Mills, and draughting
(...)s for others to build by, cannot fail in rendering this part of the Work
useful.
, the exact demensions of wheels, and the parts dependent on them of a complete
flour mill; and also, directions for their construction.

PRINCIPAL ^ART(...) OF THE CONTENTS.
PART I. -- MECHANICS.
Articles --
1. MOTION considered as the Foundation of Mechanics. 2. Gravity and Elasticity
the first moving Principles of all Mechanics. 3. The Power of Elasticity
unknown. 4. Of Motion and its Properties. 5. General Laws of Motion. 6. Of the
Momentum or Force of Bodies in Motion, and the Difference between the Force of
Elastic (...) non-elastic Bodies -- Demonstration that their Effects produced,
are as the Squares of (and not as the^^ Simple) Velocities. 7. Laws of the
Motion and Force of falling Bodies -- A Table of their Motion. 8. Laws of the
Motion of Bodies descending inclined Plains and curved Surfaces. 9. Motion of
Projectiles. 10. Laws of circular Motion and central Forces. 11. General Laws
of Mechanical Powers. 12. General Rule for computing the Powers of any Engine.
13. Rule for computing the Power of a Compound of Levers, applicable to
Mill-wheels. 14. Power and Velocity, in inverse Proportion to each other --
Therefore, 15. Demonstration, that no real Power can be gained by large Wheels
in Mills. 16. Ditto, that no Power can be gained by double Gears to turn
Millstones. 17. Of the Pullies. 18. Wheel and Axle. 19. Inclined Plain. 20.
Wedge and Screw, their great Powers computed. 21. Of Friction, the Loss of
Power ^^ewn to be to overcome Inertia, and not Friction. 22. Of Fly-wheels,
their Principles and where useful. 23. Laws of Friction, means for re^ucing it
-- Rollers applied to reduce it. 24. Of the Maximum Velocity and load for
Engines, by the old Theories. 25. The old established Theory investigated by a
Scale, and its Error shown. 26. Scale and Experiments made for discovering true
Theories. 27. A Scale on a new Plan, by which a true Theory is discovered, that
agrees with Practice, for the Motion and Lo^d of Engines, so as to produce the
greatest Effect. 28. A Scale of the Proper Velocity, of the Circumferences of
Overshot Wheels, according to their Diameter, to produce the best Effect, with
a steady Motion, and of the proper Head of Water suitable to their Motion.
HYDRAULICS.
29. Laws of spouting Fluids. 30. That the Force of Bodies in Motion, to
produce Effects, are as the Squares of their Velocities, with both Fluids and
Solids, demonstrated. 31. The Hydrostatic Paradox explained. 32. Theorem or
Rule for finding the Velocity of Water spouting under any Head. 33. Rule for
calculating the Effect of any Gate of Water, under any Head, acting on a Wheel
by Impulse. 34. Demonstration that the Effects of Water acting on Wheels by
Gravity, is as their perpendicular Descents directly. 35. Demonstration that
Water acts with its whole Power, in the whole of its perpendicular Descent on
an Overshot Wheel, without Loss, on account of its not being on the End of the
Lever, in its whole Descent, as some have supposed. 36. Laws of the Friction of
Water issuing through an Aperture. 37. Pressure of the Atmosphere, the cause of
Water rising in Pumps, etc. Ditto, the Principles by which W^ter rises in
Water-spouts at Sea. 38. Common kind of Pumps for raising Water, explained. 39.
Of conveying Water over Hills, ^^der Valleys, etc. or under Ground, to
Mill-wheels. 40. A Paradoxical Mill, that will no^ love empty, explained, the
Principles of which often take place in Part, to the great Injury of a Mill.
41. A Breast or Pitch-back wheel does not run before the Gravity of the Water,
after the Stroke, if there be too much Head, as does the overshot -- Theory of
the Motion of Breast-wheels, Rule for finding it. 42. A new and simple Rule for
measuring the Power of Water acting by Gravity -- Power of 16 cubic Feet of
Water per Second, acting by Five different Applications, on a Wheel,
calculated, and their Di(...) shown -- A Table of Powers per Second, of
different Quantities of Water, under different Falls. 43. Rule for finding the
Circumference and Area of a Stone, from its Diameter, and the Number of
superficial Feet passed in a given Time -- Table of the Falls of Water, Head
above the Gates, and Diameter and Motion of the Wheels, number of Cogs and
Rounds in the G^^^^, and S^^^^ and Motion of the Stones (and Power it required
to turn several of them) of 18 good Mills in Practice -- And Observations on
said Table, that confirms the Theories in this Work established. 44. Rule for
finding the Size of the Millstone to suit the Power of the Seat -- Table of
the Area of different sized Stones, and Power required to drive them, and the
Quantity they will grind. 45. Directions for digging Canals through rocky
Ground, in the cheapest Manner, to convey the Water to the Mill. 46. Theorem
for determining their Size, to suit the Size or Number of the Millstones they
are to drive. 47. Of Air-pipes, to prevent long tight Trunks from bursting. 48.
The ingenious James Smeaton's Experiments on the Effect of Water acting on
undershot and overshot Wheels. 49. Ditto, on the Power of Wind on windmill
Sails -- All which confirm the Theories.
PART II. -- THE YOUNG MILL-WRIGHT 's GUIDE.
50. Of Undershot Mills, with a Table calculated, containing the Motion of the
Water and Wheels, and Proportion of the Gears suitable to any Head, from one to
twenty-five Feet, both double and single Gear, the Quantity of Water required
to turn them, and the Size of the Gate, and Size of the Canal. 51. Of Tub
Mills, with a Table calculated, showing the Diameter of the Wheels to suit any
size Stone, from four to six Feet, the Quantity of Water required to turn them,
Size of the Gates and Canals, for all Heads of Water, from eight to twenty
Feet. 52. Of Breast and Pitch-back Wheels, with Tables complete for them, from
six to fifteen Feet fall. 53. Of Overshot Mills, with Tables for them, dividing
the Fall between Head and Wheel, to suit each other, with all the Proportions
of the Gears, etc. complete, suitable for all Seats, from 10 to 36 Feet fall.
54. Rules for calculating the Motion of Wheels, and Number of Cogs to produce
the desired Motion. 55. Rules for finding the Pitch Circles, with a Table
calculated, showing the Diameter of Pitch Circles, in measures of the Pitch,
for all Wheels from 6 to 136 Cogs. 56. Rules for measuring Garners, Hoppers,
etc. and for making them to hold any given Quantity. 57. Of the different kind
of Gears, Spur, Face, and bevel Gears. 58. Of matching Wheels, to make them
Wear even and well. 59. Theories of Rolling Screens and Fans for cleaning the
Grain, improved Application of them. 60. Of Gudgeons, the Cause of their
heating and getting Loose* with the Remedies therefore.
PART III. -- OF THE PATENTED IMPROVEMENTS IN MERCHANT AND OTHER MILLS.
61. General Account of the Improvements. 62. Description of the Machines. 63.
Application of the Machines in the Process of manufacturing Flour, grinding
Parcels, Gris(...) Ships, etc. 64. Construction of the several Machines
particularly directed. 65. Of the Utility of the Machines. 66. Bills of
Materials, both Wood and Iron, etc. to be prepared for building them.
PART IV. -- THE YOUNG MILLER 's GUIDE.
67. The Principles on which grinding is performed, explained. 68. Of the
Draught necessary to be given to Millstones. 69. Directions for facing,
furrowing, hanging new Millstones, 70. Ditto, for regulating the Feed and Water
suitable to each other in grinding. 71. Ditto, for judging of the grinding by
feeling the Meal, etc. 72. Ditto, for dressing and sharpening the Stones when
dull. 73. Reasoning and Experiments concerning the most proper Degree of
fineness for Flour to make the best Bread and yield the most Profit to the
Miller. 74. Of Garlic, directions for dressing the Stones to grind Wheat mixed
with it, and of separating it from the grain, and manufacturing grain mixed
with it. Of the quality of the Millstone to suit the quality of the wheat. 75.
Of Bolting, and Directions for keeping the Business of the Mill in good Order,
the whole explained by Figures, where necessary.
PART V. -- THE PRACTICAL MILL-WRIGHT.
-- By Thomas Ellicott.
Articles --
1. Of Undershot Wheels, Directions for laying on the Water, and proportioning
their Parts to suit the Fall of Water and Size of the Millstone. 2. Draughts of
Fore Bay, and Directions for making them Durable, 3. Practical Experiments, for
ascertaining the Proportion of the Velocity of the Wheel to that of the Water.
4. A Table for Undershot Wheels for all Falls from three to twenty Feet, and
Stones from four to six Feet. 5. Directions for building Breast Mills, and
proportioning their Parts to the Fall and Stone, and forgearing them to give
the Stone the proper Motion. 6. Of Pitch-back Mills, their Principles,
Constructions, and Dimensions. 7. Of Overshot Mills, their Principles,
Construction, Dimension, Head above them, etc. 8. A Mill-wright's Table for
Overshot Wheels, applicable to Breast and Pitch-back, containing the Proportion
of the Gears to suit all Wheels from 12 to 30 Feet, and all size Stones from 4
to 6 Feet. 9. Particular Directions for building Water-wheels, Cog-wheels,
Shafts, Head-blocks, etc. etc. 10. Of the right Time for cutting Cogs, and best
Method for seasoning them. 11. Directions for making Wall^^ers and Trundles,
fixing and hanging them. 12. Directions for laying t(...)ed-stone, sin^ing the
Rhyne in the Runner. 13. Directions for hanging and balancing the Stone, and
preparing for grinding. 14. Of grinding Sand, and facing and furrowing the
Stones, in order for Merchant work. 15. Bills of Scantling for a Husk frame,
and Water and Cog-wheels, etc. 16. Bill of the Dimension of all the Irons for a
complete Merchant-mill. The ^hole explained by neat Copperplate engravings.
APPE^DIX.
AN attempt to show the Rules or regular Steps that are necessary, and have
been taken, in the Discove^ (...) several useful Improvements -- intended to
excite others to take the like Steps, and make further Improve^^^^^

EXEMPLIFIED, 1. In improving the Art of Threshing Grain. 2. -- Cleaning ditto.
-- Distillation of Spirits. -- Vending Smoke from Rooms by Chimneys. -- Warming
Rooms by Fire, and saving of Fuel. -- Preventing Ships from sinking at Sea, in
certain Cases. -- Preserving sundry Things from Putrefaction and Fermentation.


CERTIFICATE.
WE have so far perused the manuscript copy, of a work, proposed to be
published by Oliver Evans, entitled, The Young Mill-wright and Miller's Guide,
as to be satisfied that it will be useful, and instructive in general, and to
Mill-wrights and Millers in particular: And therefore we think it merits, and
hope it will meet with encouragement from the Public.

DAVD. RITTENHOUSE, R. PATTERSON, J. B. BORDLEY, GEO. CLYMER, ALEXR. ANDERSON,
T. MATLACK, THOSE. TOWN, Mill-wright.


TERMS TO SUBSCRIBERS.
I. THIS Work shall be printed on a good Paper, with a neat Type, to contain
between three and four hundred Pages, in Octavo, and be illustrated with not
less than Twenty elegant Copperplates, neatly engraved, and will be neatly
bound and lettered.

II. The Price to Subscribers will be Two Dollars, one to be paid at the Time
of subscribing, the other on Delivery of the Book. -- Those subscribing for
twelve Copies, or collecting twelve Subscriptions, to have one gratis. --
Should any Copies remain after supplying the Subscribers, the Price will be Two
Dollars and Fifty Cents.

III. The Subscribers names shall be prefixed to the Work, as Patrons of
American Arts and Sciences, this being an American Production.

IV. The Books shall be delivered to subscribers residing in Philadelphia*
(...)and for those at a distance, will be deposited with the Persons who
received the Subscriptions.

Subscriptions will be received by the Author. at No. 215, North Se^ond Street,
by Thomas Dobson, William Young, Matthew Carey, Joseph Crukshank, Booksellers,
Philadelphia: John Webster* Post^^ster, Wilmington; Levy Hollingsworth, Elkton;
John Ri^e, Baltimore; George Gregg, Flour Inspector* George-Town; Ellis Price,
Printer, Alexandria; John Moody, Flour Inspector, Richmond* Robert Evans, Flour
Inspector at Petersburg; Samuel Campbell, New York; and Samuel Reynolds,
Mill-wright, Albany.

N. B. A Person receiving Subscriptions, will call in a few Days.


