THE FEMALE CHARACTER VINDICATED, OR, AN ANSWER TO THE SCURRILOUS INVECTIVES OF
FASHIONABLE GENTLEMEN.

"Malicious Slander never would have leisure
"To search, with prying eves, for faults abroad,
"If all like me, considered their own hearts,
"And wept the sorrows which they found at home!"
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS BRADFORD. 1795.

THE FEMALE CHARACTER VINDICATED.
INJUDICIOUS censure rarely effects reformation -- the shafts of ridicule are
formidable to the votories of folly -- but unless aimed by accurate judgment
and pointed by skill, prove not only unavailing and futile, but also wound the
interest of humanity: Wit rolled forth without discretion, often, nay always,
precipitates the author into base invective and scurrilous slander. It is
really to be lamented, that in every age our best satirical writers have
indulged themselves in this, and laid aside all candor, modesty, and justice,
in treating of the fair sex, and have uniformly degraded their brilliant
effusions of wit and humor, with the tartest sneers of malignity. The morose
moralist, the snarling cynic, and bigoted enthusiast, all concur in
maintaining opinions unfavourable to the fairer half of the human race. How
base, how degrading in a gentleman, to indulge himself in inhumanity where he
knows no opposition will be made! The blackest dye is infinitely too white to
draw his portrait -- he dares not step forth and asperse characters where he
knows he will be bravely opposed -- but sneaks, with the assassin, and stabs
the unarmed -- he is bold and intrepid where no danger appears -- he is basely
inhuman where his opponent cannot resist -- such is the character of every
coward -- Recoil O humanity at the scene! Weep O true and virtuous valor! In
the era when bodily strength was the sole virtue and criterion of merit, then
I grant women were justly considered as inferior -- but now, when it is the
mental accomplishments that form the man -- now, when real merit is the
criterion of greatness, why should the artillery of sarcasm be levelled at the
citadel of semale excellence? Who can read the writings of Swift upon this
subject, without perceiving his feelings raised, even to perfect abhorrence?
Who can realize the satires of the immortal Young, as sentiments really candid,
without lamenting his irrecoverable disgrace? In his Night thoughts, he draws
the character of his wife and daughter with the pencil of perfection, and
reflects honor on the whole sex. In his Satires on Women, he descends to
scurrility and invective, and (pardon the expression) holds forth ideas
familiar only to the debauchee -- how does reason, how does charity recoil at
viewing a man of profound sense, of consummate erudition, and of renowned
piety, exposing those unjustly who cannot vindicate their cause. It really
shows the want of true greatness for a man, when h^ has exaulted his fund of
ideas, to sink to this last refort of dupe, and make those who are the grand
link in the social chain, the objects of indiscriminate censure. Be^^re men of
character indulge themselves in th^s, they should accurately investigate the
cause of the difference between the tw^^^^xes, and prove that they are
natu^ally more depraved, inferior, and unworthy our friendly intercourse. The
cause of the disparity between the two sexes, appears so obvious to need but
little explication; which I conceive to exist wholly in the degree and method
of their education. -- "'It Is education forms the tender mind."

That the ladies are as capable of erudition as the men, cannot be denied by
those capable of observation -- only visit a common English school -- does not
incontestible experience declare, that there the ladies make the most accurate
and rapid progress? It is futile and ridiculous to assert, that the ladies are
capable of a certain degree of education only -- and that a degree far below
the abilities of men -- with more apparent propriety it may be asserted of him
who roves the desert with the less savage brute.

The education of the females has been such as could scarcely fail to debase
the mind, and at the same time to inflate it with vanity. Romances generally
constitute the whole of their library, which, as to improvement, are empty as
the wind, they are good when kept in proper bounds but tend to engross the
whole attention, vitiate the taste, and render ^he peruser as full of
self-importance as though she was the very character before and to whom all
adoration and apparent devotion should be paid. The ladies have had no
incitement to noble undertakings -- custom has long declared that the
cultivation of the mental powers is not their especial business -- a liberal
education has been uniformly denied them -- and when attempted, has rendered
them the objects of mirth and raillery -- the cold hand of prejudice has
closely sealed every door of the temple of Fame against them -- (...) in spite
of these disadvantages, many have shone with superior luster -- many have
proved themselves capable of swaying the scepter of empires -- many have awoke
to extacy the harmonious lyre. America can boast of three, unrivalled in the
annals of history -- England shines with a Seward, a Chapone, a Moore, and a
Row -- and France, perhaps never nurtured a more sublime moralist or a keener
satirest than her boasted Montague.

But this is not the ground, declaimers against semale excellence wish to tread
on -- they know it to be difficultly tenable -- they sneak into the corner of
error -- rally round the standard of slander, and level their artillery with
more than manly courage at semale weakness, vices, and vanities. While we touch
at some of their delightful topics, we shall spurn every thing really obscene,
and just remark, that in this the female character stands infinitely above the
long catalogue of often failing yet always persuaded debauchees. We shall
consider two things which are generally the subjects of satire, and render the
fair, in the eyes of our too-refined gentlemen, the objects of contempt, viz.
Dress and Detraction. Our modern declaimers cry out, Oh dress, thou first, thou
vilest fruit of man's apostasy? Such a declamation really looks well coming
from a gentleman who is a beau in its full extent. This is precept and example
going hand in hand.

But even supposing it were true that the ladies are more careful to furbish
and dress their persons than to improve their minds -- have they not a
reasonable, nay, a just excuse? Are not beauty and show of wealth what every
one of us worship: The character of a gentlemen is formed from his conduct and
mental abilities -- a lady's most frequently from her appearance -- a gentleman
attracts the attention of the ladi^s by his character, his station in life, his
proposal -- a lady draws the attention of a gentleman altogether by her beauty,
joined with modest conduct -- mental accomplishments are not looked for in her
to a great degree -- a lady cannot live independent, and custom says she must
not choose until she be chosen -- it must therefore be right for her to use
those means by which custom says she will most probably be chosen. Suppose a
lady pays little or no attention to dress, reads all day, talks of Saturn's
belt, Herschel's aerology, osteology, dioptics, and politics, who will ever be
her suitor? So powerful are the effects of custom in this, that unless a lady
dresses neatly, and in some degree according to her ability, she would attract
but very few or no admirers of our sex, and would sigh out an existence of
comfortless celibacy.

The next crime, in point of turpidity and frequency, with which the ladies
have been charged, is merciless detraction. In this, as in dress, precept and
example coincide. Perhaps in this very act the declaimer, by stigmatizing the
whole sex for the conduct of a very few, exhibits as true a specimen of
detraction as could possibly be adduced. The cup of life is surely sufficiently
bitter without additional gall. Who but must execrate the wretch who poisons
enjoyment with the bane of scandal. The slanderer destroys all confidence in
friendship, kindles the flame of discord, and transmutes our fairest hopes of
harmonious society into the direful discord of infernals. To this detestable
vice we are all prone; it is connate with human nature; and who can affirm that
the ladies with the greatest pleasure sip this with their tea, and not also
believe that the gentlemen drink it in full draughts with their grog.

Sympathy is an universal characteristic of the fair -- their feelings are more
tender, and their solt affections more easily moved; and does not this run
directly counter to detraction? -- Why then brand them alone with that
propensity from which their natures appear more averse than those of men: And
are the ladies really more prone to this than men? Or is it merely because
they, for want of other subjects for conversation, have more frequently to talk
of characters? Gentlemen have a variety of subjects both public and private,
which afford topics for conversation, of which the ladies are altogether
deprived -- the topics of their conversation are little more extensive than the
circle of their acquaitance. Some ladies, I must confess, are shamefully prone
to detraction; but must the whole sex be stigmatized for the frailties of a
few: Where is the sect, even among sacred denominations, where the whole,
according to this test of merit, might not be stigmatized with the most
opprobrious epithets -- Although my acquaintance with mankind is but small, yet
even in detraction, as many might be chosen among men of its votaries, as
amongst the fair. Then with the same propriety may our sex be branded with
this, of all crimes the most detestable.

I sincerely believe the reason why our sex indulge themselves in such base
invective against the ladies, is because we are conscious that our vices in
swearing, drinking, etc. of which they are clear, and which debase us below the
level with the brute, vastly overrun the catalogne of female frailties, not
only in the baseness of the act, but also in the subsequent evilness of the
consequences; and therefore, in order to strike a parallel with the other sex,
we must invent new vices for them -- make those peculiar of which we equally
partake -- and paint small ones with the brightest dye. Is this generous? Is it
not glaring inhumanity? Does it bespeak that candor and attachment to truth
which should always characterize the noble mind -- the man of sense -- the
truly refined gentleman?

FINIS.

