THE DUTY OF MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL TO PREACH THE TRUTH; ILLUSTRATED IN A
SERMON: DELIVERED AT THE ORDINATION OF THE REV. EDWARD DORR GRIFFIN, A. M. TO
THE PASTORAL CHARGE OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN NEW-HARTFORD. JUNE 4th, A. D.
1795.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, D. D.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1795.

An Ordination Sermon.
JOHN xviii. 37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


THESE are the words of our blessed Savior. In them he informs us, that one
end of his incarnation and ministry was, that by bearing witness to the truth,
he might communicate the knowledge of it. The same is doubtless the end of the
ordinary ministry of the gospel, and should be the object aimed at by every
Minister. From our text therefore I deduce this doctrine.

The great duty of the Ministers of the Gospel is, to preach the truth.

Under this doctrine I purpose,

I. To show what truth ministers of the gospel ought to preach.

II. To mention some reasons in confirmation of the doctrine.

I. I am to show what truth a minister of the gospel ought to preach. Truth is
very extensive and of various kinds. There is truth in every science, in
mathematics, philosophy, history, etc. It will not be pretended, that
mathematical and philosophical truth is the proper subject of the evangelical
ministry. Nor is historical truth, any further than it illustrates the gospel,
by exhibiting the facts of it, or other important facts relating to the works
and the character of God.

The truth then intended in the doctrine is primarily evangelical truth, and
secondarily all other truth which relates to the gospel and tends to illustrate
it; as all truth relating to God and his character, especially his moral
perfections; all truth relating to his supreme, universal and sovereign
government; all truth relating to his law, its requirements and threatenings;
relating to sin, its nature and evil; relating to ourselves, our present fallen
state, and the ruin consequent on the fall; particularly our native and total
depravity, our actual sins and the various aggravations of them; our demerit as
sinners; our dependence on the mere mercy and sovereign grace of God; our own
moral inability to bring ourselves to repentance and holiness of heart and
life, and our absolute insufficiency to make satisfaction for our sins; the
necessity of an atonement and one of infinite value, correspondent to the
demerit of our sin; the character of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, his
divinity, his humanity, his offices, his sufferings in our stead, and his
readiness to save sinners of every description, who come to him for this
purpose; the conditions of his salvation, the privileges and rewards of it, and
the inevitable consequences of a rejection of it.

This is a very brief summary of the truths, which every minister of the gospel
is obligated to preach and inculcate.

II. I am to mention some reasons in confirmation of this doctrine.

The following reasons show, that ministers of the gospel are obliged to preach
the truth or the real doctrines of scripture.

1. The truth was the subject of the preaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. He
certainly is a proper example in this, as well as in his common conduct. He was
a perfect preacher. Therefore he is to be imitated by all other preachers. And
he in our text, informs us not only that he preached the truth, but that this
was one great end of his incarnation and ministry.

2. The same was the subject of the preaching of the apostles and prophets. 2
Cor. iv. 2. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of
the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Chap. xiii. 8. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Gal.
iv. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? 1 Timothy
ii. 7. Whereunto I am ordained a preacher and an apostle -- a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and verity; i. e. in faith and truth.

The great business of the prophets was to declare the word of God, which is
the truth, as it was immediately taught them, or as they were by God directed
to repeat former revelations. The great business of the apostles was to preach
the gospel, which is the system of divine truth given to the church and to the
world, in the last and most perfect dispensation. Both the prophets and
apostles were inspired by the infallible spirit of God which guided them into
all necessary truth, and preserved them, in their official proceedings, from
every thing inconsistent with it. Under the influence of this spirit they
preached the truth and that only.

3. The knowledge of the truth is necessary to true religion. It is necessary
both to the affections and to the practice of it.

(1) The knowledge of the truth is necessary to true religious affections. --
The knowledge of the true God is necessary to the true love of God. That love
of God, which implies true virtue and real holiness, is the love of the true
God and of the true and real character of God. To love any other than the true
character of God, is as really to love a false God as to love Jupiter or Dagon.
For instance to love God as a perfectly holy and wise God, is a holy affection;
but to love him as one who tolerates and connives at sin and saves all at last,
whatever their lives and characters be in this world, is a wrong and sinful
affection. To love God as a benevolent being, aiming at his own glory
consisting in the good and happiness of the intellectual system, is a right and
holy affection. But to love him in the idea, that he is aiming at some partial,
private good, or our own particular good only, is no exercise of true virtue,
but a mere love of ourselves or of some party. Therefore we must have the
knowledge of the truth in this important particular, and just ideas of the
divine character, in order to the exercise of true virtue and religion in the
love of God.

Similar observations may be made concerning the divine law. If we believe that
it forbids and condemns some sins only, and in that view love it, there is in
that love no true religion, but irreligion. If we believe it forbids all sin
and love it in that view, that is true virtue and religion. If we love the
divine law, because we believe it denounces some small temporary punishment,
and cannot bear it, as threatening an endless punishment, we hereby show, that
we are not friends, but enemies to the law and the truth.

We must believe, that there is a God, or we cannot love him at all. We must
believe, that Jesus Christ is the Savior, or we cannot receive and trust in
him as our Savior. We must believe the scriptures, or how shall we receive and
comply with them? We must believe that we are sinners, or we can never repent.
We must believe the atonement, or we shall never depend on it, nor seek
forgiveness and salvation on the ground of it. And so with respect to every
other truth of the gospel. We can have no right exercise or affection in view
of any truth, unless we know and believe that truth.

(2) The knowledge of the truth is necessary to all genuine religious practice.
-- Genuine practice implies genuine affections, and is founded on them.
Therefore without repeating, it is sufficient to say, that the knowledge of the
truth is necessary to genuine religious practice, for the same reasons, that it
is necessary to genuine religious affections.

Having thus briefly illustrated the doctrine, and having mentioned some
reasons in confirmation of it, I proceed to several inferences, which were
indeed principally intended, in the choice of this subject.

1. Hence we see the groundlessness of a sentiment holden and advanced by many
in these days, that it is of no importance what a man's religious creed or
sentiments are, provided he be an honest man and sincere in his religion. --
Let us examine this sentiment.

By an honest man in this proposition must be meant, either one who is honest
and just in matters of property; or one who in his religion professes and acts
as he thinks If the latter be meant, then an honest man and one who is sincere
in his religion are the very same; and then the proposition now under
consideration is this, that it is of no importance what a man's religious
sentiments are, provided that in his religion he believes as he professes and
does what he believes to be right. But this any man may do, let his religion be
what it will. A Papist, a Mohammedan or a Pagan may be equally sincere in this
sense, as the best Christian: and if this sincerity be all which is necessary
in religion; then all kinds of religions, as to that which is essential to true
religion and the benefits of it, are perfectly alike; and of course it is a
matter of indifferency which we embrace and which we reject, if we embrace any.
But this cannot be reconciled with either scripture or reason. Many of the
ancient worshippers of Dagon and Baal, and of the gods many and lords many, so
called, were very sincere and in good earnest in their worship; yet they are
every where condemned in scripture, as they are also by the voice of reason.

But perhaps it will be said, that in the proposition, that it is of no
importance what a man's religious sentiments are, provided he be an honest man
and sincere in his religion; by honesty is meant moral honesty, or justice to
man in matters of property. If this be intended, then the proposition is this,
that justice to men together with the forementioned sincerity, is the whole of
religion. But we see by what has been said already, that the forementioned
sincerity is no part of true religion, and that in this respect it is just
nothing at all. Therefore if justice to men with this sincerity be the whole of
religion; as this sincerity is no part of true religion, the whole of it must
center in mere justice to men. But this cannot be reconciled with either
scripture or reason. The scripture requires us to render not only unto Caesar
the things which are Cesar's, but also unto God, the things which are God's:
and the Jews in the time of the prophet Malachi, were severely reproved for
having robbed God. Mal. ii. 8. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But
ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Yea, the
scripture requires us to love the Lord our God with all our heart. And it is
perfectly rational, that if he be supremely great, good and glorious; if he be
our Creator, our chief and constant benefactor; he should be the object of our
first and chief regard. So that justice to men and a mere moral life, are so
far from the whole of religion, that they are not the principal part of it.

That it is of no importance what a man's religious sentiments are, is so far
from the truth, that nothing is more manifest, than that those sentiments must
daily influence his religious feelings and affections, and consequently his
practice. If a man believe, that he is dependant on divine grace for a
renovation, sanctification and forgiveness, this naturally tends to humble him.
But if he believe, that he is in no need of divine grace in any of these
respects, he must necessarily feel so far self-sufficient, so far independent,
and consequently must be spiritually proud and self-righteous. If he believe
the necessity of the atonement of Christ; this powerfully persuades him to look
thither and to place his dependence there. If he believe not the necessity of
the atonement, we may be sure he will depend on some other foundation. If he
believe, that God will pardon, and is by his own infinite goodness bound to
pardon, any sinner in consequence of his repentance merely, without a Mediator;
he will certainly neglect Christ as the Mediator. But if he believe, that a
Mediator is absolutely necessary, and that there is no other name but that of
Christ, given under heaven among men, whereby we can be saved, what can more
strongly urge him to receive and trust in Christ? Thus as a man thinks in his
heart, so is he; such is his real character; and no man can commonly be
expected to be better than his principles.

2. Hence we see the mistake of those who hold, that we need not know much of
the doctrines of christianity; that it is not useful either for the purpose of
conviction to sinners or edification to saints, that such knowledge rather
tends to stifle and prevent both conviction and edification; that we may be
just as good christians without that knowledge as with it; yea better, because
it rather obstructs christian experience and exercise, and quenches christian
zeal and fervor.

But on candid examination it will be found, that this is a great mistake; and
that the knowledge of divine truth is of a most happy tendency both to the
conviction of sinners and the edification of saints. Certainly the knowledge of
the existence and character of God, of his holiness and his will, of his law
and of our violations of it, of the righteousness and goodness of the law, of
the punishment and evil of sin, of the grace of the gospel and of our neglect
of that grace, most directly tends to produce and increase conviction. Indeed
genuine conviction cannot exist without knowledge of this kind; and whatever
fear or terror, without the knowledge of the truth, exists in any man's mind,
which some call conviction, is mere enthusiasm and not genuine conviction.

The knowledge of the truth is equally useful and necessary to edification as
to conviction. The necessity of it to this, I before endeavored to illustrate.
How can we love God, if we know him not? or believe in Christ, without the
knowledge or him? and so in every instance of christian exercise. And the more
we know of God, the more opportunity and the greater motives we have, to love,
fear and serve him. The more we know of his glorious majesty and sovereignty,
^he grea^^^ motive we have to adore, praise and submit to him. The more the
christian knows of the divine law, the more will he naturally delight in it
after the inward man. The more he knows of Christ, his grace, sufficiency and
fullness, the more will he rejoice and trust in him. And so with respect to all
divine truth. Just as a man, who has a taste for music, or poetry, or the fine
arts in general, is more delighted, the more he is instructed in those arts,
and his taste for them and for their peculiar and most delightful excellencies,
is the more increased.

So that there is no foundation for the imagination, that the knowledge of
christian doctrines tends to obstruct either conviction or edification. Indeed
that kind of conviction and edification, which is not built on the foundation
of the truth, but of imagination, is obstructed by the knowledge of the truth
and will naturally be abolished by it. And the sooner such conviction and
edification are abolished, the better, as they are not favorable to true
religion, but to enthusiasm and false relgion, which so far as they obtain,
lead astray from the footsteps of the flock, and this straying may be fatal to
the soul.

3. Hence we infer the duty of all, who live under the light of the gospel,
diligently to study the doctrines of it and of the whole word of God. -- This
is the way to know more of God, of his law, of his will, of Christ and of the
free and infinite grace of God, and the way to greater joy in them and
conformity to them. This is the way to know more of our own vileness as
sinners, and to be more humble in the view of it. This is the way to know more
of our duty and of the motives to the performance of it. But the knowledge of
all these objects tends most directly to our edification in the christian life.

4. Especially are ministers of the gospel under obligation to the careful
study of its doctrines. Their principal business, as has been attempted to be
illustrated, is to preach and teach the truth. But how shall they be able to
teach the truth, if they be ignorant of it themselves? And the knowledge of it
is to be obtained in no other way, than by a diligent study of the scriptures.

Besides, they ought to seek their own edification. They are at least under
equal obligation to this, as other men. Nay, their obligation is greater, in
proportion to their greater advantages for edification, and the greater
advantage which their own edification gives them, to promote that of others.

Yet not only are some ministers too negligent of this duty of thoroughly
studying the doctrines of scripture; but some designedly avoid it. They mean to
preach practically and not to puzzle their people with deep doctrines. No doubt
that preaching which is truly practical, is the best and most useful. But that
a minister may preach practically and most usefully, it is not necessary, that
he be ignorant of the doctrines of the gospel; nor is it necessary, that he
should not preach those doctrines. That is the most practical preaching, which
most happily conduces to promote christian experience and practice* and that
preaching most happily conduces to promote these, which is founded on the truth
and which urges all the motives and arguments, which the truth affords, to
excite to christian experience and practice; and any other arguments that these
are not proper to be urged, nor do they on the whole lead to christian
experience and practice, but to enthusiasm, and ultimately to irreligion and
infidelity.

Some seem to conceive, that it is a minister's duty to exhort only, and urge
and press his hearers to become and to live as christians. But are these
exhortations to be pressed with motives drawn from the truth or from falsehood?
The latter will not be pretended; and as there is no medium in the case, they
must be pressed with arguments drawn from the truth only. And in order to this
the truth must be known, must be searched out by study, and must be taught;
which is the very thing for which I plead. The mind cannot be rationally
persuaded by any other means, than by arguments drawn from the truth; nor
indeed ought it.

Therefore for a minister to neglect his studies, on this principle, that the
knowledge of divine truth is not necessary or useful to enable him to preach
practically and usefully, is to proceed on ground that will by no means support
him. The only truly practical and useful preaching is that which is founded on
the truth and is enforced with arguments drawn from it; and to such preaching a
knowledge and diligent study of the truths and doctrines of the gospel, are
necessary.

For a minister to neglect the study of those truths from indolence, is still
worse; it is inexcusable. Ministers are bound to be at least as industrious as
other men, and many arguments might be mentioned why they should, if their
health admit, be still more industrious.

But it is to be feared, that some neglect study on a still different
principle. They are afraid, that if they study thoroughly and attend to what
has been or may be said on certain important subjects, they shall be convinced,
that those doctrines are true, which in some places are extremely unpopular.
Therefore they do not wish to be convinced of their truth, and will not attend
to them, lest they should be convinced; or lest they should be under a
necessity of giving their opinion concerning them, and thus expose themselves
to the censure of one party or the other, either the advocates or the opposers
of those doctrines. For this reason they will not read those books, in which
those doctrines are contained, nor converse much with those persons, who hold
them. And if they be asked their opinion, they make this apology for not giving
it, that they have not read the books, nor examined the arguments relating to
those doctrines: and of set purpose they avoid to do either.

Now can this be justified? What is this but shutting their eyes against the
light? And how can this be done with a good conscience? Are we not commanded to
prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good? -- Besides; this conduct
argues a want of liberality of sentiment, and a contractedness, which it is
presumed, they who act in this manner, would not wish to have imputed to them.
A man of true liberality of sentiment and feeling, is willing to hear both
sides of every important question, and is not afraid that he shall receive too
much light.

5. Hence we learn, that it is the duty of ministers of the gospel, to preach
the truth plainly and in a manner that is intelligible to their people in
general. -- I have endeavored to show, that it is their principal duty to
preach the truth: but to preach it in obscure and unintelligible terms is not
very different from not preaching it at all. The words of the apostle Paul are
worthy of notice in this case, 1 Cor. xiv. 19. In the church I had rather speak
five words with my understanding, that with my voice I might teach others also,
than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Nor ought we to be deterred from
preaching any essential truth, by the consideration, that it is unpopular.
Every truth of the gospel in its proper connection is opposed to the carnal
heart, and with carnal men will be unpopular. Therefore if we proceed on this
ground, we must suppress every truth.

Indeed some preachers, it is confessed, act an imprudent part. They declare
the most offensive truths in the most offensive terms, and in those terms,
against which their hearers or many of them are greatly prejudiced, and which
they really misunderstand, having been long accustomed to affix to them a wrong
meaning. This is not to teach the truth; but it is the way to prevent the
knowledge of it; and the way not to do good but hurt. There are two extremes in
this, as in other cases. One is not to declare important and useful truth
faithfully: the other is to declare it, either in words not understood in the
sense, in which they are used by the speaker, or before the hearers are
prepared to receive it, by having learnt other truths necessary previously to
be known.

6. It is the sentiment and doctrine of some, that on all disputable points,
ministers should preach in scripture language; that this would be a happy way
to avoid all disputes in religion: that all public formulas, creeds,
confessions and doctrines of faith, should be drawn up in scripture language
entirely; that thus christians would be agreed, and dissentions, parties and
separations would be at an end. -- Let us consider this matter. -- It is said
that on disputable points ministers should preach in scripture language only.
But all the peculiar and the most important doctrines of the gospel are
disputable. And shall ministers do nothing toward teaching those doctrines,
beside reading the scriptures to their people? All who can read, as all, or
almost all among us can, may read them for themselves. Yet the sentiment now
under consideration will come to this, that ministers are to do nothing toward
public instruction, beside publicly reading the scriptures. For if they must
use scripture language only on all the most important subjects, why not on all
the less important? What advantage is there in deviating from the words of
scripture in the latter case, more than in the former? And if one word, which
is not scriptural, may be used in the pulpit, why not another? and where shall
we fix the limits.

Besides this sentiment will not only exclude from the pulpit all words and
phrases, which are not used in scripture; but it will confine us to use the
words of scripture in the very same order in which they stand in scripture. The
design of using the mere language of scripture is, to alter not the sense of it
and to avoid all disputes concerning that sense and concerning the doctrines of
christianity. But though we use the words of scripture only, (...) if we shift
their arrangement, we may alter their sense entirely; and this not only by
altering the arrangement of the words of particular sentences; but by selecting
and arranging sentences themselves. So that mere using scripture words and
phrases, whether in preaching or in our public formulas, will not answer the
end intended, unless we preserve the exact order, as well as the words of
scripture; that is, unless we merely read the scripture.

Some sensible of this consequence of their doctrine, have avowed it with
regard to public formulas. But to be consistent, they must avow it with regard
to all teaching in religion, and must hold, that there should be no religious
instruction, beside the reading of the scriptures.

In defense of this doctrine it has been said, that the language of scripture
was chosen by omniscience, and is therefore the best possible; that it is in
vain therefore to attempt to mend or explain it by words of our own choosing;
that we might as well attempt to mend any other of the works of God. But all
this goes on the ground of the impropriety of our using any other means of
religious instruction, than the reading of the scriptures; a ground on which
those who use this reasoning, will not dare to rest their cause.

As to the alleged absurdity of explaining the language of scripture, which is
said to be equal to an attempt to mend or improve the other works of God; I
observe, that in a certain sense we may and do daily improve the works of God.
No man imagines that there is any impiety or absurdity in clearing and
cultivating his lands, or in grinding his grain into meal and making it into
bread. Yet there is as much of both impiety and absurdity in either of these,
as in explaining by the use of other words, such texts as these, The plowers
have plowed on my back and made long their furrows; and He that believes on me
as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.

Though the language of scripture was doubtless the best possible on the whole;
yet this does not prove but that other words may be used in a variety of
instances, which will better explain the meaning of scripture, at least to many
particular persons or societies of men, than the words of scripture themselves.
A word or phrase which is very determinate in one place or nation, may be very
ambiguous in another. Nor was it possible for omniscience itself to make a
selection of words, which would not be liable to this inconvenience in the
present state of mankind, any more than it was possible for omniscience to give
a revelation, which could not be abused and perverted by depraved men. Now,
when a word or phrase of scripture is become ambiguous in a particular age or
country, there is no absurdity in supposing, that this word or phrase should be
explained by other words or phrases, which in that age and country are not so
ambiguous; though with respect to all ages and all countries, the last supposed
words and phrases may not be so clear and useful, as those, which they are used
in a particular time and place to explain.

7. Hence we infer that ministers are not bound to preach plain things only. --
This is the idea of some; and that ministers ought never to meddle with things
which are not plain. -- But unless this be so explained, as to be nothing but
what all will grant, it can never be supported. If by plain things, be meant
things which are already plain and well known to the hearers, then a minister
is never to teach his people any thing; and he is bound to preach so to them,
that they shall not, under his preaching, make the least improvement in
christian knowledge; which is absurd and what no man will undertake to support.
But if by plain things be meant, things which are capable of being made plain
to the hearers, or which, if they will be attentive and candid, may, by the
evidence of reason or revelation, be made to appear to be credible and manifest
truths; it is granted, that in this sense a minister must preach plain things
only. But the proposition thus explained, comes to nothing.

8. Also hence we see the absurdity of parents refusing to teach their children
any particular sentiments in religion, even those which they themselves
believe; and leaving them to judge for themselves, without any such
instruction. This is advocated and practiced by some, on the pretenses, that
their children have a right of private judgment in religion and a liberty of
conscience; that teaching them any particular religious sentiments would
curtail this liberty, would shackle their judgment and their genius, and would
prevent improvement. But these reasons, if they prove any thing, prove too
much, and so confute themselves. Children grown to a proper age have a right to
judge for themselves in politics, as well as religion. They have a right to
judge, whether monarchy or democracy, whether a free or a despotic government
be the best. Also they have a right to judge for themselves in morals, whether
it be best and obligatory on them, to be temperate and prudent, and to observe
truth and justice in their intercourse with their fellow-men. Yet no man will
be though it to curtail his son's right of private judgment or his liberty of
conscience, by teaching him the principles of true civil liberty, or the moral
duties of temperance, prudence and justice. Nay, our children at a proper age,
have a right to judge for themselves what business to follow in life and in
what manner to carry it on. Yet no man scruples to bring up his son to some
particular business. Nor does any man imagine, that he curtails the liberty of
his son, by educating him for a scholar, an husbandman or a mechanic. Nor is it
ever thought that if parents educate their children to some particular
business, they cramp their genius or prevent improvement. On the principle
which I am considering, a parent must never teach his son any thing. Though he
wish to have him an husbandman, he must never teach him the use of the plough
or scythe; though he wish to have him a carpenter, he must never teach the use
of the saw or chisel; though he wish to have him a scholar, he must never teach
him to read or write: for the son has the same right of private judgment
concerning the best mode of reading and writing, and of using any kind of
utensils, which he has to judge in matters of religion; and teaching him any of
the things just mentioned would be as likely to prevent improvement by cramping
his genius, as teaching him the principles of christianity.

As these ideas of the education of children are contrary to reason, they are
equally contrary to scripture. That commands us to train up a child in the way
he should go, with encouragement that when he is old, he shall not depart from
it, and to bring up our children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Some allow indeed, that children are to be taught that the scriptures are the
word of God; but are not to be taught the particular doctrines contained in the
scriptures; that as to the meaning and contents of the scriptures, they are to
judge entirely for themselves. But why are they not to be taught, as well that
the scriptures contain such and such particular doctrines, as that the
scriptures themselves are the word of God? They have the same right of private
judgment in the one of these cases as the other. To teach our children, that
the scriptures are the word of God, and not to teach them any of the particular
doctrines of scripture, is like carefully teaching them that a certain volume
contains the laws of our country; but at the same time cautiously avoiding to
teach them any of the laws which are contained in that volume: or teaching
them, that husbandry is the best business of life; yet not teaching them any
thing in particular concerning husbandry.

9. If ministers be bound to teach the truths and doctrines of the gospel;
people are bound to attend, to hear and learn those truths. If ministers be
bound to take great pains to teach, people are bound to take correspondent
pains to learn and to acquire knowledge. These duties mutually imply each
other, and it is absurd to separate them.

For the same reasons people are bound to seek for a minister who will instruct
them: and divine grace* though essential to the character of a good minister of
Jesus Christ, is not sufficient to constitute that character. It is necessary
that he be "able to teach others also."

I shall now close this discourse with an address, first to the pastor elect,
and then to the church and society in this place.

1. To the pastor elect --

MY DEAR SIR,

I have endeavored to represent the importance and necessity of preaching the
truth; and have done it with a special reference to you. We who are in the
ministry are always liable to temptation, as in other respects, so in
faithfully preaching the truth. And the very circumstance, which in itself is
so agreeable, that there is so great and cordial an unanimity among this
people, with respect to your settlement among them, may increase your
temptation. It may make you more remiss in your studies and more negligent in
faithfully declaring the truth. It may put you off your guard, and thus you may
expose yourself and expose the cause of truth. It may be an occasion of a
presumptuous conduct or mode of preaching; or on the other hand, it may be the
occasion of making you excessively compliant, so as to suppress important and
useful truth, in order to preserve the present peace and unanimity. I beseech
you to avoid all these, to hold fast the form of sound words once delivered to
the saints, and not to be seduced from them by any temptation. Yet preach the
truth prudently and with circumspection. All things that are lawful, are not
expedient. Beware of preaching so as to be misunderstood by the use of terms,
to which your people have affixed ideas different from your own. Dwell not
perpetually on a few favorite topics. All evangelical truth is divine; all is
useful.

That you may thus preach, read extensively. "Beware of the man who reads but
one book," is an old and sensible observation. By reading extensively you will
see not only what truth others have taught, but what errors they have taught,
and the reasons with which they have endeavored to support those errors. Thus
you will know how the better to guard against those errors, and to illustrate
the contrary truth.

You are to teach the truth not only in the pulpit, but day by day in your walk
and conversation. Thus not only you will show, that you believe what you
preach, but you will add force to it.

You, as well as ministers in general, will have great need of prudence in all
your conduct, and of keeping the entire mastry of yourself. He that rules his
spirit, is greater than he that takes a city. In cases of opposition (and you
may have opposition, notwithstanding the present happy appearance) the greatest
danger is from ourselves. If we do not keep under our passions and feelings,
our enemies will not fail to take the advantage of us. This therefore, in case
of opposition, you are to expect; and the consequence may be fatal to your
comfort and usefulness in this place, and detrimental to the cause of truth in
general. But if agreeably to our Lord's direction, you be wise as a serpent and
harmless as a dove; if you preach the truth faithfully and feel and live
accordingly, you may hope for a blessing on your ministry. But however this may
be, you will be accepted and approved by the great shepherd of the sheep, who
will say to you at last, Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou have
been faithful over a few things; be thou ruler over many things; enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord.

2. I am to address myself in a very few words to this church and society.

MEN and BRETHREN,

You have heard what has been said to your pastor elect and the exhortation to
him, to preach the truth. If he be bound to preach the truth, you are bound to
hear, receive and obey it. If he shall faithfully preach it, he will be
accepted by his God and Judge, whether you hear or forbear. You are now to have
another pastor set over you in the Lord. This is one of the gifts which Christ
has received and which he dispenses in consequence of his ascension: and you
are accountable for the manner in which you shall improve by this gift. Your
pastor is to be a watchman on this part of the walls of Jerusalem, to give
warning to you. If he shall faithfully warn you and you shall not hear nor
regard, your blood will be on your own heads. But if you shall hear and comply,
you shall live. Therefore take heed how you hear. Incline your ear and come
unto Christ. Hear and your souls shall live; and he will make with you an
everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of David.

THE END.
The Charge given by the REV. SIMON WATERMAN, Pastor of the Church in PLYMOUTH.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ, having suffered on the cross, and thereby purchased the
church with his own blood: before his ascension into Heaven, gave gifts to men,
as apostles, and prophets, and evangelists, and pastors, and teachers: for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry and edification of the
church.

The apostles who were the first ministers of Christ, were called,
commissioned, and furnished, for the work to which they were called, in an
extraordinary and supernatural way: and in this their extraordinary character
of apostles, they left no successors: for since the gift of inspiration, and
the power of miracles have ceased; the only order of public teachers in the
christian church, is that of pastors, elders, or bishops; appellations, names
and titles, evidently synonimous, and in the new testament, given indifferently
to officers of the same order and rank in Christ's visible kingdom.

The business of these officers is, to oversee, and feed the church of God;
giving themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word: and
according to our Savior's promise they will continue, in a regular succession,
to the end of time.

The work to which ministers of the gospel are called, is of great, very great
importance. The honor of God; the advancement of the Redeemers kingdom, the
salvation of their own souls and that of others, are events closely connected
with their employment, and greatly depend on the manner in which they fulfill
it. As stewards they must give account of their stewardship. They watch for
souls, one of which is of more worth than all the world beside; and they must
account for every soul committed to their keeping. These considerations led
Paul to say, who is sufficient for these things? and these considerations will
show us the propriety, and expediency, of that practice which has obtained,
ever since the apostles days, to the present time; the practice of charging
those who are inducted into the sacred office, and about to enter upon the work
of the gospel ministry; to take heed, and fulfill the ministry they have
received in the Lord.

The apostles charged those whom they ordained pastors of churches; charged
them before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, to take heed
to themselves, and to all the flock, over which the holy ghost had made them
bishops.

And as we the elders of those churches, which being invited, are here present
by their delegates; have been witnesses of the solemn transaction which has
now taken place, and assisted therein: it becomes us, to remind ourselves and
one another, of the obligations we are under, by our ordination vows, to be
faithful to God, and to those precious immortals, committed to our keeping.

Particularly, in humble imitation of the inspired apostles, who were the first
ministers of Christ, it behooves us to charge this our brother, and fellow
labourer in Christ's vineyard; who has to day, publicly dedicated himself to
the service of God; in the gospel of his Son; and by prayer and the laying on
of our hands, been ordained and constituted Bishop of this church of God in
New-Hartford: it is incumbent on us, to charge him faithfully to do the work of
an evangelist, and fulfill every part of that ministry he has received of the
Lord. Hitherto the speaker had addressed himself to the congregation at large:
he now turned and addressed himself particularly to the newly ordained elder.


We do therefore, before God who made the world, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the world in righteousness, at his second appearing,
and before the elect angels, many of whom have, (probably) been spectators of
the solemn transactions of this day, and will be witnesses to all your
ministerial conduct in future life -- before these, we charge thee, EDWARD DORR
GRIFFIN, most carefully to keep, and faithfully to use, that which is now
committed to thy trust. Take heed unto thyself; take heed unto thy doctrine,
and take heed to all this flock of God over which the holy ghost has made you
overseer.

Many souls are committed to your pastoral care. See what a multitude are
waiting for you to show them the way of salvation, and lead them to realms of
unfading bliss! You watch for souls; and if one of these is lost through your
ignorance, carelessness or inattention; the blood of that soul will be required
at your hands: and what can you give in exchange for it? Be thou therefore, a
wise and faithful steward; and give to every one his portion of meat in due
season. Feed the sheep, and feed the lambs of this flock of God, with the
sincere milk of the word, and with strong meat, as they are able to bear;
taking the oversight of them, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, and
not as being a lord over God's heritage; but as an example of believers, in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

In the bible you will find the duty of a christian minister, clearly pointed
out: therefore, thou man of God! acquaint thyself more and more, with these
lively oracles; give attendance to reading; search the scriptures daily; study
the duties of your office; and give yourself to prayer for an understanding
heart, that you may know what the mind of the spirit is, and what the Lord
would have you do: meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them,
that thy profiting may appear unto all.

He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work: But a Bishop
must be blameless as the steward of God; not self-willed; not soon angry; not
given to wine; no striker; not given to filthy lucre; not contentious, not
covetous; but given to hospitality; a lover of good men; patient, sober, just,
holy, temperate, vigilant, of good behavior in all respects, and of good
report among all men: apt to teach; and able by sound doctrine, both to exhort,
and to convince gainsayers.

Take heed therefore unto thyself -- to thy life and conversation. Flee every
foolish and hurtful lust, and avoid profane and foolish talking, and such
jesting as is not convenient; yea, carefully shun every thing which may reflect
blame on the ministry, or give occasion for any to despise thee. Show thyself a
pattern of good works; and let your conversation at all times be as becomes
the gospel of Christ. Follow righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience
and meekness; let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works; constantly practice whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, and whatsoever is virtuous, and worthy praise. Keep
your body under, and bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when you have
preached to others, you yourself, should be cast away.

Take heed also unto thy doctrine, and in your preaching show uncorruptness,
gravity, sincerity and sound speech which cannot be condemned. Renounce the
hidden things of dishonesty; walk not in craftiness, nor handle the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commend yourself to every man's
conscience in the sight of God. Take heed what you preach. Be not ashamed of
the gospel of Christ, but preach the peculiar and distinguishing doctrines of
christianity -- preach the unsearchable riches of a crucified and risen Savior
-- preach the divinity, the humanity, and the atonement of Christ, and point
sinners to him, as the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.
Preach also the apostasy of the human race, and wickedness of the human heart
-- the necessity of regeneration, and sovereignty of divine grace: Shun not to
delcare the whole counsel of God: but preach the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth. A dispensation of the gospel is committed unto thee; and
woe unto thee, EDWARD DORR, if thou preach not the gospel.

Furthermore, take heed how you preach; and show yourself a workman, who
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, and choosing out
the most acceptable words in which to convey truth, to the hearts and
consciences of your hearers. Be wise to win souls, and espouse them to Christ.
Preach like a dying man, to dying men. Be fervent in spirit -- the cause is
good, be zealous in it; and both by the terrors of the Lord, and the extreme
sufferings of an incarnate God, beseech sinners to become reconciled to God.
Point out to them their danger, and open to them the way of safety, and urge
them to escape for their lives. Be instant, in season and out of season:
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine: teaching publicly
and from house to house, repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. Warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded; and be
gentle unto all men; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. Let
your preaching be, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, as if you spoke in
an unknown tongue; but in a plain, familiar style, easy to be understood; that
so the ignorant and unlearned, may be instructed and edified: and cease not to
warn every one night and day with tears, warn the wicked of their
transgressions and sins, warn them to flee from wrath to come. By thus taking
heed unto thyself, and to thy doctrine, and continuing in them, thou shall both
save thyself, and them that hear thee.

Again, pray with and for this people: -- bear them on your heart continually;
and, without ceasing, make mention of them always in your prayers. You will
also from time to time, bless this people in the name of the Lord. And that you
may know their state, and be able to adapt your labors to their particular
circumstances, it will be necessary for you to visit them, as you have
opportunity, as well in health as in sickness, and both in prosperity and in
adversity; and, as prudence shall direct, converse with them about their
temporal, and about their spiritual concerns.

Moreover, we charge thee to administer the seals of the new Testament, Baptism
and the Lord's Supper; but to such, and to none but such, as are duly
qualified, according to the laws of Christ's visible kingdom. Attentively
observe all things whatsoever he has commanded; and neither add to, nor
diminish from his written word; but taking that for your guide, carefully
distinguish between the unclean, and the clean; and put a difference between
the holy and profane. Beware you do not give that which is holy unto dogs;
neither offend the generation of God's children, for whom Christ died.

We charge thee also to exercise gospel discipline, according to the authority
Christ has given his ministers, as officers in his kingdom; which authority is
given them, not for the destruction, but for the edification of the members of
his body, the church. Therefore, reprove, rebuke, admonish, and reject as
occasion shall require. But do nothing by partiality; and yet, of some have
compassion, making a difference; others save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire.

Finally, The ministerial office, which, in all its parts, is now committed to
thee; the same do thou also commit to faithful men. And that you may not
partake of other men's sins, but keep thyself pure; lay hands suddenly on no
man, nor be instrumental of introducing any into the gospel ministry, but such
as are of good report, sound in the faith with respect to the essential
doctrines of christianity, and in a judgment of charity real friends to Christ.

We give thee charge, brother, as we ourselves have been charged, in the sight
of God, who quickens all things, and before Jesus Christ, who in the presence
of Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession -- before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, we charge thee, to keep that which is committed to thy trust. You are
now a minister of Christ, and steward of the mysteries of God: and every motive
which ought to influence a rational mind, allures, and constrains you to be a
good minister and faithful steward. They that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars for ever and ever. And he which converteth a sinner from the error of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. What
encouraging prospects! What animating considerations, for the messengers of the
Lord of Hosts, the ambassadors for Christ! Be thou a faithful laborer in your
Lord and master's vineyard; and when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall
receive a crown of glory that fades not away. To him who is able to keep you
from falling, we commend you; and to the word of his grace we commend the dear
people of your charge: may they be your rejoicing, and you theirs, in the day
of Christ.

And to the only wise GOD our SAVIOR, be GLORY and MAJESTY, DOMINION and
POWER, both now, and ever; AMEN.

The Right Hand of Fellowship given by the Rev. RUFUS HAWLEY, Pastor of the
Church in Northington.
MEN, BRETHREN, and FATHERS,
WHILST with much anxiety and concern, we have beheld the destitute and broken
state of some other churches and societies: and have feared lest the Boar out
of the wood should waste them, and the wild beast of the field devour them; it
gives us no small degree of joy and satisfaction to find, that you have, in so
much unanimity, made choice of one to take the charge of your souls, that he
has cheerfully accepted of your invitation; and that he has this day been
solemnly consecrated and set apart to the sacred work of the ministry among
you; so that we may now say unto you, Behold your Pastor!

And this venerable council having assigned me a part in the solemn
transactions of this day, suffer me on the present occasion, to urge you to the
most strenuous, united, and unremiting endeavors, still to maintain and
preserve perfect unity and peace among yourselves. Live in peace, and the God
of love and peace shall dwell with you, and bless you. Therefore be advised by
all means, to guard against all malice, guile, hypocrisy, envy, all evil
speaking, and party spirit, and as new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby. And may the God of peace yet dwell among
you, and feed and cherish you with the fatness of his house, even of his holy
temple.

And Dear SIR,

We do now with pleasure, and humble thankfulness to the Lord Jesus Christ, the
great head of the church, welcome you as a labourer into his harvest; bidding
you God's speed; wishing you grace to be faithful, mercy to be successful, and
that the peace of God may rest upon you. -- God having betrusted you with the
keys of doctrine and of discipline, and sent you forth as a shepherd, to guard,
lead and feed his flock; investing you with the same authority wherewith he
has clothed us. Wherefore we do with freedom and willingness acknowledge and
receive you as one of us; in confirmation of which, I give you my right hand,
as a testimony that we esteem you a brother, and fellow labourer together with
us in the ministry of the gospel, which we have received of the Lord.

And we being members of the same body, and having the same work to prosecute,
should be very careful not to think more highly than we ought to think; but
behave with meekness and fraternal affection one toward another, so that faith
may not be had with respect of persons.

Rev. Brother, it does not become us to be strangers, but we should be
fellow-citizens in the household of God, for we are built upon the foundation
of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone.

And as we are laborers together with God, we engage to watch for your good;
and we shall expect the same from you. And we promise to pray for you, that you
may be made a faithful minister of the New Testament, rightly dividing the word
of truth, and giving to every one a portion in due season; so that many souls
by your instrumentality may be brought home to Christ.

And while we engage thus to pray for you, we ask in return, your prayers for
us, that God would give us all grace to be faithful in our stewardship, and
enable us to take heed to the ministry which we have received of him, and so
fulfill it, that at last we may shine as the firmament, and as the stars for
ever and ever. -- AMEN.


