Feast of Merriment.

A New American Jester. BEING A MOST CURIOUS COLLECTION OF Witty Jests -- Merry
Stories -- Smart Repartees -- Droll Adventures -- Funny Jokes -- Wise Sayings
-- Anecdotes -- Waggeres -- Whims -- Puns -- Bon Mots -- and Laughable Tricks,
Many of which were never before published.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED A CLEVER COLLECTION OF CURIOUS EPITAPHS, HUMOROUS EPIGRAMS
-- AMOROUS AND FACETIOUS SONGS -- CONUNDRUMS -- TOASTS -- SENTIMENTS, etc. etc

Compiled principally for the Amusement of long Winter Evenings -- to expel
Care -- drown Grief -- create Mirth -- and give the Reader a light Heart and
cheerful Countenance.

By Well-Fed Domine Double-Chin, Esquire

Burlington, printed by I. Neale, for NEALE AND KAMMERER, JUN. No. 24, North
Third Street, Philadelphia. 1795.

TO THE READER.
SAGE old Solomon very wisely remarked that there is a time for all things; and
notwithstanding his authority many will admit there should be a time for
merriment. In this valuable book, which is the very essence and quintessence of
all mirth and joviality, you will find much genuine wit, but nothing that can
have a prejudicial influence upon your mind. It matters little who you are,
whether old or young, snarling or good-natured, pretty or ugly, crooked or
straight, dimple-chined or copper-nosed, a tinker or a nabob; whoever you are
it will most assuredly excite your laughter. For if your lips are even made of
foal-leather, if your eyes flash the vengeance of Diogenes who lived in a tub,
yet the paroxisms of giggling will seize you as unawares as a bum-bailiff; and
if your ribs are not made out of crow-bars you must certainly put them a little
in motion.

Why should you be resolved to be hipp'd or in the dumps? Why should you
proclaim war against yourself and tear your wig or gouge out your eyes in a fit
of desperation, least you should freeze or starve to death in this world? If
you are in such a mopish habit you will here find a most powerful antidote to
chase away the fumes of melancholy. Then, if you are sad do not suffer
misfortune to thrust her pitchforks of despair into you, for, as the song says,
as light heart and a thin pair of breeches will carry us through the world,
brave boys.

As for the languishing nymph, who is up to her eye brows in love, and the deep
sighing swain whose heart is as full of holes as a riddle, they ought (for
humanity's sake) to be prevented from slabbering and snivelling at their hard
fate. Not an hundred apothecaries shops, not a regiment of physicians,
inclusive of quack doctors in abundance, will do them half the service that can
be effected by a perusal of this book. If they should chance to be a little
squeamish at the stomach, it will prove an excellent remedy for the spleen, or
the belly-ach of despair. In a word, the Editor has written and compiled it for
the benefit of those who may be disposed to dance and sing; to add glee to the
short pittance of life, to improve the social virtues; to heighten the charms
of the big-bellied decanter, and to frighten haggard care and her wry faced
train to a distance. Depend upon it, Reader, that with a few glasses of wine in
your head, a pretty lass upon your knee and the "Feast of Merriment" in your
hand, you will be a thousand times happier than any monarch in the universe.

Philadelphia, October, 1795.
THE FEAST OF MERRIMENT.
A SCOTCH major, who had been so skillful with his sword as to fight several
duels with repeated success, but who, on account of his extreme desire for
quarreling when a little intoxicated, and for his boasted courage, was deserted
and despised by his brother officers, came one evening into a large company.
There happened to be present a Yankee, an officer of the same regiment which
was then stationed at Montreal. This Yankee related among other things the
failure of a certain expedition in which he had the misfortune to be wounded.
That was because you were a rascally set of cowards, observed the supercilious
major. You are a d -- n'd liar, says the Yankee. The company stared. The
Scotchman looked down upon him with as much contempt as Goliath did upon David
and immediately asked, Are you a man to meet me? Yes, replied the Yankee, at
any time and where you please, only with this proviso, that we me^^ without
seconds. Well then, tomorrow morning at five o'clock, at --. Agreed. The
company present endeavored to dissuade the Yankee, telling him the major had
every advantage where he had none, and that he had best compromise matters, ere
he would have cause to repent his rashness; but he still persisted. The next
morning the Yankee repaired to the place somewhat before the appointed hour,
armed with a large musket, shortly after the major made his appearance, with
his brace of pistols and his sword. Before he had advanced far, the Yankee, in
an austere tone, bid him halt or he would blow his brains out. Upon which the
major, struck with amazement at this unexpected stratagem, reluctantly obeyed,
but expostulated with him upon the injustice of such an ungentle man like
proceeding; the Yankee was implacable, determined to punish him for his past
conduct and for the abuse he had himself received. Lay down your sword and
pistols, says he, (still presenting his musket) and to the right, about, face,
march! The poor major was again under the necessity of obeying, and uttering a
volley of curses against his stars, passively submitted. -- The Yankee then
quietly took possession of his arms. It Is base, it is cowardly thus to disarm me
of all defense, says the major. No, replied his fellow combatant, I will deal
honorably with you, there take my musket (throwing it toward him) and defend
yourself. He, quite incensed, seized the weapon with a mixture of exultation
and precipitate vengeance, and rushing forward demanded his arms or he would
blow him to h -- l; blow and be d -- n'd, says the Yankee. Provoked at such
unparelled insolence, in a fit of frenzy, he drew the trigger! But, alas, the
musket had not been charged! The glory of our braggadocia was so sullied, and
his seeling so mortally wounded by this indignation, that he sold his
commission and left the place.

Mr. L --, a citizen of some note in New York, was taken very ill of the gout,
which inspired him with such dreadful apprehensions that he looked upon himself
as already dead. Dr. M N -- was sent for, and on entering the room his patient
exclaimed. Oh, doctor, I Am a dead man, I Am a dead man! Well then, replied the
doctor, I can do nothing for you, and instantly left the room. On his return
some gentlemen enquired, how his patient was? How! why he is dead. Dead! said
they, with the utmost surprise. Yes, absolutely dead, replies the doctor. The
solemn news soon gained circulation; however before long it was discovered to
be a false report. Some of the gentlemen to whom the doctor had communicated
the intelligence meeting with him shortly afterward, questioned him, why he
had informed them that Mr L -- was dead, when it was not so. What is he not
dead? said he. No surely. Well then, said the doctor, he is ad -- n'd liar for
he told me so himself.

A young man meeting his father one moonlight evening pretty tipsey, thought it
his duty to lead him home; on their way the old gentleman happened to stumble
just as they were passing under a sign, and enquired of his son what sign it
was? says he, It is a sign you are d -- n'd drunk, father.

Two sailors passing by a taylor's shop in Philadelphia, observed one of the
journeyman had a great variety of patches in the back part of his jacket; upon
which one of the honest tars exclaimed, D -- n my eyes, Jack, did you ever see
so many different kinds of cabbage grow upon one stalk?

Previous to the late American revolution, when distinction and rank were more
fashionable than at present, there happened to be a splendid ball in the city
of New York, which Miss T -- and Miss M -- attended. Miss T's father had been a
rope-maker in the former part of his life, but having acquired an immense
fortune at his trade, he quit business and lived in the most magnificent style.
But the circumstances of Miss M -- 's father, who was a saddler, were somewhat
circumscribed, and he still subsisted by the use of his hammer and awl. Miss T
--, who had conceived an aversion against Miss M --, affected a surprising
mortification that the august personages of the assembly should be insulted by
the presence of a lady of such mean rank and fortune; in a fit of extreme
indignation she came up to Miss M -- and in a whisper said to her, Miss, I wish
to speak to you before one of the managers. Miss M -- consented, and when they
came before the manager, Miss T -- proclaimed in a loud voice, which instantly
silenced the whole company, "Mr. Manager, I am astonished that you admit a
person of her low rank (pointing to Miss M --) to disgrace the presence of her
superiors, and at any rate I think if such creatures cannot be excluded, they
ought to be compelled to wear the badges of their professions." "Alas, retorted
Miss M --, with a smile of infinite contempt, were we all to appear with the
badges of our professions, we should see your noble ladyship with a rope around
your neck." This reply occasioned such reiterated peals of laughter, that the
noble Miss T -- was obliged to retire with anguish and mortification not to be
described.

A Dutch seaman being aloft unluckily fell from a great height flat upon deck,
but not receiving any considerable injury, rose up and exclaimed, Got bless me,
I Have broke my bipe.

Some time ago a number of tailors had a meeting at an inn, one of them coming
later than the rest enquired of a boy in the bar-room, whether there was any
gentlemen met up stairs, was answered, No, but there is a parcel of tailors up
there.

Two lawyers, who were as different in stature as in ability, happened to be
opponents in a cause. The one, though very diminutive, proved nevertheless too
powerful in argument; which when his taller adversary discovered, and thinking
to confuse him by redicule, bellowed out very austentatious, Hold your prattle
you little chatter-box, or I Will put you into my pocker. Could you do that,
retorted the little orator, you would have more law in your pocket than ever
you had in your head.

One day a very little man was about entering a house, but the door being shut
and the knocker placed above his reach, not wishing to hurt his knuckles,
accosted a tall good-natured looking man just coming by and requested him to
step up and knock for him, which when he had done he jocosely said, What are
such little chaps as you good for? ^he dw^ri replied, for such big lubberly
follows as you are to wait upon.

As a New England sea-captain and an englishman were conversing together, the
latter says to the former, Do you know what we englishmen call you yankies? He
was answered in the negative. Why, continued he, we call you pumpkins. Do you,
says the yankee, and do you know what we call you englishman? No, truly. Why we
call you squashes. Squashes, squashes, what are they? Pumpkins bastards,
replied the yankee.

The celebrated Dr. Franklin sent word, one christmas morning to some of his
literary friends that he intended to kill a turkey for their enterainment by a
discharge of one of his electrical batteries, and that the process of cooking
might be carried on equally as philosophical, he intended to have it roasted by
a fire kindled with the electrical fluid. He began the business of charging his
bottles, but before he had quite completed the process, by some casualty the
whole battery was discharged through his own body. He was so violently stunned
by this misfortune that he lay, a a considerable length of time, in stare of
insensibility. Shortly after the Doctor had recovered his senses, some of his
friends coming into the room enquired what was the matter! Ah, gentlemen,
r^plied he, I informed you of my intention to kill a turkey by electricity,
but, alas, my design miscarried and I had like to have killed a goose.

A wild young nobleman being in company with Shakespeare, desired leave to toast
the d -- l: with all my heart replies our wag, I have no objection to any of
your lordship's friends.

A gentleman being choked with a honeycomb, his friends began to bemoan him,
Why make you such lamentation? said Shakespeare, never man had a sweeter death.

Shakespeare being at church, when a dry empty fellow preached, most of his
auditors went out of the church, said, he made a very moving sermon.

Shakespeare being with a s^t of merry companions, over a cheerful bowl, when
different toa^^s were going round, a gentleman, whose name was Brown, toasted
a^ absent lady, which he had often done for many years, though he had never the
conrage to speak to her: our wag, who sat next him, said, I believe, Sir, you
have toasted that lady these seven years at least, and it is surprising she is
not Brown yet.

Shakespeare being in company with some gentlemen and ladies, who were playing
at comparison; an agreeable young lady was likened to a repeater; she applied
to Shakespeare for the propriety of the resemblance: Madam, says he, I find a
very great difference; a repeater makes us remember the hours, but you make us
forget them.

Shakespeare having brought his friend down into his cellar, his friend
observing there was no seat to sit upon, asked him the reason of it; because,
replied Shakespeare, I will have no man that comes here drink any longer than he
can stand.

Shakespeare being told by a gentleman, that players were idle fellows; you are
mistaken says our wag, for their whole life is full of action.

Shakespeare went to a turner's shop to buy a mat; many were shown him, but none
pleased him. The turner thinking to play a trick upon him, called his wife and
daughter, whose names were Mat; there, says the turner, are all the mats I have
got; and there you may keep them, replied our wit, for I must have one that has
not been tread upon.

Some ladies walking in the meadows, a few miles from London, they met a
shepherd with a young kid in his arms, one of them stroked and admired it, and
asked the reason it had no horns; the shepherd, vexed at being detained,
answered, because he is not married.

Lord M -- endeavoring to persuade one of his dependants to marry his cast off
mistress, said, she had been used a little; but if she had a good husband she
might turn. Aye, but my lord, answered the other, she has been so much used,
that I am afraid she is not worth turning.

A young lady who had been lately married, on seeing her husband about to rise
pretty early in the morning, said, what, my dear, are you getting up already?
pray lie a little longer and rest yourself. No, my dear, I Will get up and rest
myself.

Shakespeare one day condoling with an Irish gentleman, whose father had lately
died well; says Paddy, it does not signify grieving, for its what we must all
come to, if we do but live long enough.

At a tavern meeting Shakespeare finding himself intoxicated, slipped from the
company and home to bed; next meeting one of the party, who reproached him with
going away without taking leave of his companions; says he, indeed you ought to
excuse me, for if I did not take leave of the company, I staid till I had
entirely taken leave of myself.

Lady L -- asked Sir W -- when he was Lord Mayor of London, how many women he
had kissed since their marriage? Why, my lady, said Sir W --, if we had as many
penny loaves as I have kissed women since you have been my wife, we should have
bread enough to last us these seven years. And now, continues he, pray tell me
how many gallants have kissed you in the same space of time? Why, if we had as
many cheeses as I could tell you, I have had gallants, I think we should have
three cheeses to every one of your loaves.

Alderman Townsend one day seeing his sootman with an old greasy hat, slouching
over his shoulders, Sirrah, says the alderman, who gave you that cuckold's hat?
Indeed, Sir, says John, it was my mistress gave it me, and told me it was one
of yours.

Lord Temple asked a clergyman once, at the bottom of his table, why the goose,
if there was one, was always placed next the parson? Really, said he, I can
give no reason for it; but your question is so odd, that I shall never see a
goose for the future without thinking of your lordship.

The late duke of York asking a young lady, one day, what it was o'clock; she
told him her watch stood. I don't wonder at that, madam, replied his highness,
when it is so near your what-do-you-call-it.

A gentleman and his man riding into the country, they met a fellow astride
upon a cow: the man calls out to his master, Oh, Sir, says he, yonder is a
strange sight; A fellow is on horseback upon a cow. That Is a bull, said the
gentleman. Nay, Sir, said the man, it is not a bull: I know it is a cow by its
teats.

One asked another why he wore his stockings the wrong side outward; the other
told him, Because there was a hole on the other side.

A fellow that was notoriously known to have been in the late riots and
insurrection, was brought before justice A --. Sirrah, says the justice, you
shall be hanged if the law will do it; you are a notorious rogue: I remember
you ever since the last resurrection.

Dr. Wilson meeting his godson, asked him whither he was going? To school,
replies the boy. That Is well, said he, there is sixpence for you; follow thy
learning apace; I may live to hear thee preach my funeral sermon.

Michael Angelo, in his picture of the last judgment, in the pope's chapel at
Rome, had painted among other figures in hell, that of cardinal Campegio (who
had once done him some ill offices abroad) with such a striking likeness, that
every body knew it at first sight: upon which Campegio complained of the
affront to his holiness, and desired it might be erased. The pope replied, it
was out of his power to oblige him. Why so? said Campegio. Because, said his
holiness, we can only deliver out of purgatory, but not out of hell.

A celebrated lady complained to Lord Chesterfield of the ill nature of the
town, and amongst other instances, said, that occasion had been taken from a
late illness of here is, to spread a report that she had been brought to bed of
two children. His lordship advised her to be easy under such circumstances;
adding, that for his part, he had long made it a rule not to believe more than
half what the town said.

Mons. de Vergy, when in Scotland, hearing a woman calling out Fresh Butter,
drew his sword, thinking she called him French Bugar.

A gentleman being asked what wine he chiefly chused for his own drinking,
answered, that of other people's.

A London rider going to Edinburgh, and perceiving it to grow late, asked a man
whom he met in his way, if he thought he could get thought the gate; the rider
meant to ask him, if he could get into the city before the gates were ^hut, but
the man taking it in another sense, when seeing him so very fat and thick,
burst out a laughing, and cried, why should not you get through, since a cart
loaded with^^^y can very well make its way in.

A good old woman being at the Sardinian ambassador's chapel, took two wax
tapers, and set one of them before the image of St. Michael, and the other,
without thinking what she did, before the devil, which stood at his feet; the
priest taking notice of it, began to say to her, Alas, good woman, what are you
about? don't you perceive that he you offer a candle to is the devil. To whom
the woman replied, No matter, my good sir, it is good to have friends every
where, in hell as well as in heaven, for we don't know where we may go.

A certain man who was a great wit, showed one of his sonnets to a person that
was crooked, and was looked upon as a poet; but the silly fellow had no sooner
read it, when he began to despise it, saying, it was ill made. The wit did not
forget to pay him in his kind, by saying to him, if it is not well made, it is
like you.

A Scotchman was walking in depth of winter upon the new bridge at Paris, with
only a thin white linen doublet on, with stockings of the same stuff, a little
camblet cloak, and a sword by his side; the king happened to pass that way, and
seeing this man in such a dress at that time of the year, was curious to know
the reason of it; upon which he commanded him to be called: He the^ asked him
if he was not cold? No, sir, replies our Scot. How is it possible friend,
replies the king, but you should be so, in the thin dress you wear, when I who
am better clothed than you, am yet ready to freeze? Oh, replies Sawney, if
your majesty would but do as I do, you would never feel the least cold. How Is
that, says the king; Why if your majesty would but put on all your clothes, as
I put all mine, you would be warm enough. The king was so pleased with this
secret, that he gave orders for his having a good winter suit.

A countryman desired a neighbor of his to lend him an ass, who told him that
he had lent it to another, and that he was very sorry he had not asked him
before: he had not yet done speaking when the ass began to bray; oh, oh, says
the peasant, do you hear; your ass says, that it is not true that you had lent him
out; you are indeed a very obliging person: How, says the countryman, would you
sooner give credit to my ass than to myself.

Earl Verney going to cross a river, and imagining it to be very deep, bid his
servant go before him; but he, to show politeness, replied, I never will be
guilty of so much ill manners, pray, my lord, do you cross over first.

A young man being violently in love with a virtuous and beautiful girl, and
meeting one day with an opportunity of speaking to her, he asked her whether
she would content him? The prudent and witty young woman replied, yes, provided
he would grant her one thing only: when being asked, what that thing was? She
replied, that which you have not, nor cannot have, and yet may give me. The
lover desired to know the meaning of that riddle; she explained it to him as
follows: as you are a young man, you neither have, nor can have, a husband, and
yet you may give me one by bestowing yourself upon me, and then I shall have
what I wish for.

A great personage lately censured his brother very severely for his irregular
course of life, and particularly on account of his unbridled passion for
intrigue: you see, says he, what a sum I have to pay for you: not sensible of
the disgrace you bring on your family, and how unworthy it is not to follow our
better example. The young buck, with his usual levity, turned round upon his
heel, whistled, for he is fond of music, and then left the room, humming to
himself my mother did so before me.

A poor Frenchman, who was very hungry, went into a cook's shop in St. Giles's,
and there staid till his stomach was satisfied with the smell of the victuals;
the cook falling into a passion, insisted on his paying him for a dinner, which
the poor monsieur refused to do and the dispute growing high, it was agreed to
refer the decision of it to the first man that passed that way, which happened
to be a chimney sweep, but who, on hearing the case, very wisely determined
that the Frenchman's money should be shook between two empty dishes, and the
cook should be satisfied with the gingling of it, as the poor man had been
satisfied with the smell of the cook's meat.

As counselor Messing was pleading before Lord Mansfield, he asked his
lordship, Whether the lawyer or the physician was to have the precedence in any
judicial affair: says my lord, Pray who goes first, the criminal or the
executioner? the criminal, replied the pleader: Then, says his lordship, the
lawyer may go first as the thief, and the physician follow after as the
executioner.

A watchman met a person one evening who was going along in great perplexity,
to whom he said, What arms have you about you? he replied, a dagger, sir. But
searching him, he found that it was a bottle of wine, which he drinking off,
returned him the bottle, saying. Here friend, I return you back the sheath
again.

As surgeon Fordyce was dressing a poor man, whose eye had been struck with a
stone, the patient asked him, whether he should lose his eye? No, no, says
Fordyce, I have got it in my hand.

A man who was blind of an eye, met, very early one morning, a crook-back'd
man, to whom he said, friend, you are loaded very early: the crook-back'd man
replied, It must indeed be very early since you have got but one of your
windows open.

As justice Cox was bemoaning himself to another who was a farmer, for the
great scarcity of corn, saying, he believed, that if it did not rain* all the
beasts would die: he replied to him, Heaven preserve your worship.

The noted Drs. Rock and Franks on a time being very angry with each other,
Rock saying to him, hold your tongue you scoundrel, don't I know, that your
father was a bricklayer: Franks immediately replied, no one could have told you
that, but your own father who carried the stone and lime to mine.

A patriotic gentleman standing at the window of his house with his wife, whom
he had married a few days before, and seeing a beautiful young woman pass
along, he said to his wife, my dear soul, I Will make you laugh, you must know
that I had to do several times with that girl there before she married, but she
was so silly as to go and tell her mother of it; his wife replied, oh, the
silly brainless wretch, I in like manner ho^ had to do an hundred times with
our coachman and footman and never said a word of it to my mother.

As the celebrated Mrs. Robinson was going one Sunday to mass, met an upstart
peasant at the church or, who was for aping a gentleman, when she, in order to
ridicule him, asked him, if the mass for the peasants was ended; he immediately
replied, madam, it is ended, and that of the strumpets is just beginning, make
haste in, and you will be time enough with the rest.

L -- d Chatham making one of a party at whist, one of the gamesters, with a
bitter oath declared he had the worst hand in the company, a considerable bet
was proposed, and agreed to by his lordship, that he had a worse; he pulled off
his glove, and showed his gouty hand, when the company unanimously pronounced
it in his lordship's favor.

Shakespeare being one day at dinner at a country inn with some gentlemen
travelers, observed one of them, in particular, take great precaution to
convey a silver spoon into his pocket unperceived by any of the rest; our wag,
in order to clear himself and the rest of the guests from the imputation of
theft, takes his spoon, and ties it to the breast button of his coat, which the
landlord perceiving, asked, what he was going to do with it, why, replies
Shakespeare, I thought it was the custom of this house for all guests to carry
away their spoons which way they thought proper, I prefer this way, but for
that gentleman, pointing to him that stole one, he likes to put his in his
pocket.

Lord Carlisle happening to make water against a house, did not see two young
ladies looking out of a window close by, till he heard them giggling, when
looking toward them, he asked, What made them so merry? O Lord, said one of
them, a very little thing will make us laugh.

Two gentlemen having words in a tavern, at length fell to fighting with their
canes; a standerby observing one of them to strike his antagonist over the
head, while the other only belabored his sides and shoulders; after the fray
was over, asked the latter why he did not strike upon the head also; Oh, sir,
said he, if I had hit him over the head, I should have broke my cane.

A gentleman came to a widow's, and she presented him with a cup of small beer;
so coming a week afterward, she salutes him with another cup of the same beer,
saying, sir, I dare not commend the beer to you, for indeed it is dead. To
which he replied, That may very well be, for it was very weak when I was here
last.

A gentlewoman loved a doctor of physic, and to enjoy him feigned herself sick;
the doctor being sent for in all haste, went up and staid with her an hour;
when he came down, her husband asked him how she did? O, says he, she has had
two such extreme fits, that if you had but seen one of them it would have made
your heart ach.

One Mr. Mann, master of the ship called the Moon, used to be very familiar
with a gentlewoman and her husband taxed her with another gentleman; she swore
she knew him no more than she did the man in the moon.

King Charles the second and the duke of Ormond discoursing of the prettiest
women of several countries, says the king to the duke, My lord, you have pretty
women in Ireland, but they have great legs: O, that is nothing, please you my
liege, lay them aside, search for other beauties.

A young ^^^^dy of pretty high spirits, who was just about entering into the
marriage state, told her gallant, that she could never bring herself to say
obey, and was resolved she would not. When the ceremony was performing, and she
was to repeat that word, she was for mincing the matter, and cried, honor and
b^y, nay, mad^m, said the parson, you must say obey, I cannot say you are
married if you do not speak the words as the office directs; but still she
would only say as she had done; and the parson again reproving her. Let her
alone, doctor, said her husband, let her only say b^y if she has a mind to it
now, and I Will make her cry O at night.

One parting a fray was cut in the skull; Sir, said the surgeon, one may see
your brains: Nay, then I Will be hanged, said he, if I had any brains, I never
would have come here.

A young lady, with a good fortune, bestowed herself upon a wild young fellow:
Well, says the old lady, her aunt, for all you were so eager to have him, you
will have your belly full of him in a little time, I Will warrant you.

A fellow hearing one say, according to the Italian proverb, that three women
make a market with their chatting: Nay then, said he, add my wife to them, and
they will make a fair.

A knavish attorney asked a very worthy gentleman What was honesty? he replied,
What is that to you, meddle with those things that concern you.

A young woman came to a lady to be hired, and the lady told her, she was no
maid, Yes indeed, madam, says she, but I am. How can that be, replied the lady,
when, to my knowledge, you have had a child. Well madam says she, it was but a
very little one, and do you make such a matter of that?

A fellow blaming his sweetheart, telling her she was false to him, she, to
clear herself, used many imprecations, bidding him if it were so, to mark her
end. Nay, for that, said he, I shall not so much mark your end as I shall your
middle.

Two widows sitting by the fire were chatting about their dead husbands, and
one said, Let us have a candle, for my poor husband loved light, God send him
light everlasting; and, said the other, my husband loved fire, I wish him fire
everlasting.

Socrates was asked, why he endured his wife's brawling? says he, Why do you
suffer your geese to cackle? Because they lay us eggs, said the person. Well,
says he, and my wife brings me children.

Married women, says Shakespeare, usually show all their modesty the first day,
as married men show all their love the first night.

Dr. Graham having been out a shooting one whole morning without killing any
thing, his servant begged leave to go over to the next field, for he was sure
there were some birds there, and, adds the man, "If there are, I Will doctor
them;" Doctor them, says the master, what do you mean by that? Why kill them,
sir.

Lord D -- n told Betty Careless, upon showing her legs, that they were very
handsome, and so much alike that they must needs be twins: but indeed, said
she, you are mistaken, for I have had more than two or three between them.

One meeting an acquaintance, says to him, with a kind of secret joy, I Will tell
you a piece of news, my friend, between you and I my wife's with child. Between
you and I, answered the other, you are greatly mistaken, for I have not lain
with your wife these twelve months.

A lady seeing the sheriff of a county, who was a very handsome young
gentleman, attending the judge, who was an old man, a gentleman standing by,
asked her, which she liked best, the judge or the sheriff? the lady told him
the sheriff; Why so, said the gentleman. Because, answered she, though I love
judgment well, I love execution better.

An attorney who had always been jocose in his lifetime, when he lay on his
deathbed, his clerk came and desired he would leave him a legacy: here, said
he, giving him a key, in such a drawer there is what will make you drink. Not
many hours after he died, and the youth, greedily opening the drawer, found
accordingly two red herrings.

Lord M -- stood staring at a lady in a balcony in Portland Place, on which she
retired; says he, what, does the sun offend you, madam? Yes, say^ she, the son
of your father and mother.

A sharper of the town seeing a country gentleman sit alone at an inn, and
thinking something might be made of him, went and sat near him; having thus
introduced himself, he called for a paper of tobacco, and said, do you smoke,
sir? Yes, said the gentleman very gravely, any one that has a design upon me.

Lord W -- G -- n, playing at questions and commands, with some very pretty
young ladies, was commanded to take off a garter from one of them, but she, as
soon as he had laid hold of her petticoats, ran away into the next room, where
there was a bed; Now, madam, said he, tripping up her heels, I bar squeaking,
bar the door you fool, cried she.

A gentleman saying one day at table, that he could not endure a breast of
mutton; You said so the other day, cried another, of a breast of veal. Very
true, answered the first, I do not love the breast of any but of a woman, and
that goes against my stomach.

One evening a gentleman very much in liquor, was leaning against a post in
Cheapside: a fellow coming by at the same time, seeing he was in such a
situation that he could not pursue him, snatched his hat off his head and ran
away with it: Another of the same fraternity, at a little distance, saw what
had happened, and told the gentleman that a man had stole his hat and run away
with it, and asked him why he did not run after him? I am, so damned drunk,
says he, that I can hardly stand and therefore, I cannot run after him. If
that is the case, said the "other, I may safely venture to steal your wig;"
which he immediately took from the gentleman's head, got clear off, and left
the old toper bareheaded, hugging the post, and lamenting the loss of his hat
and wig.

An honest Jack tar being at a quaker's meeting, heard the friend that was
holding forth speak with great emotion against the ill consequence of giving
the lie in conversation, and therefore, he advised, when any man was telling a
tale that was not consistent with truth or probability, to cry t^ang, which
would not irritate passion as the lie would; afterward he digressed into the
story of the great miracle of five thousand being fed with five loaves of
bread, etc. he told them, that they were not such loaves as are used now but
were as big as a mountain, at the hearing of which, the tar uttered with a loud
voice, twang; what, says the quaker, do thou think I lie, friend? No, says
Jack, but I am thinking how big the ovens were that baked them.

A quibbling lady at a pig dinner, asked Mr. Selwyn, whom she had often
outwitted with many jests and retorts, whether he loved pig, and if she should
carve him some? Who answered, I thank you, madam, I love any thing that comes
from a sow.

Sirrah, says justice Ad -- n, to one brought before him, you are an arrant
knave; says the prisoner, just as your worship spoke, the clock struck two.

Lord H -- n assured a young lady that he would do any thing to serve her: If I
was poor and necessitous, said the lady, I make no doubt but you would express
yourself in a different manner. Indeed, madam, I would not, replied his
lordship, for if you was naked I would cover you.

Dr. Rider, and two or three more gentlemen walking toward Hampstead on a
summer's day, were met by the famous Daniel Purcel the punster, who was very
importunate with them to know upon what account they were going thither? The
doctor merrily answered, to make hay; very well, replied the other you will be
there at a very convenient season, the country wants rakes.

An arch footboy who was bringing to the table a calf's head, between the
kitchen and the dining room picked out one of the eyes, and eat it; the
gentleman who had got the eye that was left, missing the other, asked the boy
after it, who confessed his having taken it; but how did you do it, says the
gentleman, just so, said the boy, and snatching up the other from the
gentleman's plate swallowed it.

A gentleman was saying of a maid, at least a nominal one, on her wedding
night, that he wondered how she would act her part, very well, replied one who
knew her, for she has frequently rehearsed it.

Shakespeare said of physicians, that earth was to them like charity, for it
covered a multitude of the sins.

Shakespeare seeing a very old lady youthfully dressed, especially from her
waist downwards, her petticoats being richly flounced and embroidered, said it
was a pity to see so much finery employed in new hooping an old cask.

A haughty fellow taking notice that every time he went by a shoemaker's shop,
the master of it laughed, took it into his head to have him before a justice
for the affront, upon which, the shoemaker replied; that he had equal reason to
complain for that every time he laughed the other went by his shop.

A paddy and a sawney were disputing one day with great warmth, upon the
excellence of their respective nations; paddy, in proof that his surpassed all
others, said, all the heroes, sages and philosophers, came out of his country,
that is so true, replied sawney, that there is not one left in it.

A young nobleman, who had more good will than experience, being alone with a
lady, who did not want for either, cried out in a transport, oh, that I had you
but in a wood; a wood says the lady, smiling, that might be very well, but
methinks such a closet as this with the doors shut, and a velvet couch, is full
as convenient a place.

Shakespeare seeing one coming toward him where he stood, asked who it was, and
being told that it was lord B -- g, said I thought it was a lord he looked so
little like a gentleman.

A gentleman upon seeing hung at a lady's watch the picture of her deceased
husband, who it was believed had hastened his end by intemperance in connubial
joys, said, it was barbarous in her, to hang him in chains so near the place of
execution.

A Frenchman who spoke very broken English, having some words with his wife,
endeavored to call her bitch, but could not recollect the name, at last he
thought he had done it, by saying, begar mine dear you be vone vile dog's wife;
aye that is true enough answered the woman, the more my misfortune.

The celebrated Thompson going up the water in a boat, one of the watermen told
him as they passed by Peterborough house at Millbank, that house had sunk a
story; no friend, says he, I believe it is a story raised.

A drunken fellow having made away with all his goods, except his feather-bed,
was at length obliged to part with that also, for which being reproved by some
friends, pshaw, says he, I am very well, thank God and why should I keep my bed.

A young fellow being told his mistress was married, and the better to convince
him of it, added he had seen the bride and bridegroom; prithee, said the
forsaken swain, do not call them by those names, I cannot bear to hear them;
shall I call them dog and cat, answered the other; oh no, for heaven's sake,
replied the first, that sounds ten times more like man and wife than the other.

A droll fellow who got a livelihood by fiddling at fairs and about the
country, was one day met by an acquaintance that had not seen him a great
while, who accosted him thus, Bless me, are you alive! Why not, answered the
fiddler, did you send any body to kill me? No, replies the other, but I was told
you was dead. Aye, so it was reported it seems, says the fiddler, but I knew it
was a lie as soon as I heard it.

Lord Mansfield being willing to save a man that had stole a watch, desired the
jury to value it at ten-pence; upon which the prosecutor cries out, Ten-pence,
my lord, why the very fashion of it cost me five pounds. Oh, says his lordship,
we must not hang a man for fashion's sake.

A gentleman riding over Salisbury plain, when it rained very hard, set up a
gallop and passed by another whose horse stood still; a little surprised at
this sight, he asked the reason of it: Zounds, says the other, who the devil
but a fool would ride in all this wet.

A certain lady, finding her husband somewhat too familiar with her
chambermaid, turned her away, saying, Hussy, I have no occasion for such sluts
as you, I hired you to do your own business, not mine.

A young gentleman having had misfortunes, came to his mistress, and told her,
he was reduced even to the want of five guineas; to which she replied, I am
glad of it with all my heart. Are you so, madam, says he, suspecting her
constancy, pray, for what reason? Because, said, she, I can furnish you with
five thousand.

Some thieves met a man, robbed him, and bound him in a wood; a little after,
they met another, bound him also, and laid him on the other side of the hedge;
when one of them cried out, saying, I am uudone! I am undone! the other hearing
him say so, prayed that he would come and undo him too.

Lord T -- ple lately addressed a lady in a public assembly, and told her, he
had heard that her ladyship had spoke of him in a very disrespectful manner; on
which her ladyship, with a great deal of humor, patted him on the head, and
said, Indeed my good lord, there is nothing in it.

An Irish fortune-hunter at Bath, telling Mr Smollet, that he had got an
excellent phaeton on the new plan; I am rather of opinion, says our celebrated
author, that you have got it on the old plan, for I suppose you never intend to
pay for it.

A wag, going through a country churchyard, saw these words inscribed on a
tomb stone, To remain there till called for; upon which he immediately took out
his pencil and wrote underneath, stay there and be d -- d.

The celebrated Mr. Leveridge, on Saturday evening in giving out the play made
a small mistake, and instead of saying on Monday next will be presented, etc.
addressed the audience with Ladies and gentlemen, tomorrow will be --
Tomorrow, says a buck from the pit, why tomorrow's Sunday. I know it my good
friend, says Leveridge, tomorrow there will be a charity sermon preached at
St. Paul's Covent Garden, and on Monday, at this theater, will be presented the
Recruiting Officer, with a farce called, Wit at a pinch. This turned the laugh
of the audience, which was before against him, and he went off with an
universal plaudit.

Some ladies in the long room at Bath, observed colonel J -- n was a smart
fellow: Mr. Wilkes being present, chose to exercise his wit, by immediately
asking him, Who was his tailor? Oh sir, says the colonel, he will not do for you,
he deals for ready money only.

One of the troublesome gentry called dinner hunters, one day invited himself
to dine with an alderman, the dinner consisted of some fish, and a fine piece
of roast beef, the gentleman helped himself about half a dozen times, and
approved highly of the alderman's taste in prefering the roast beef of old
England to those flimsey kickshaws so much in fashion, adding here is cut and
come again; Sir, says the alderman, you may cut, but damme if you ever come
again.

At a private masquerade colonel L -- ^ -- l appearad in the character of a
cook, and being met by lord T-m-e, was desired to dress a couple of pork chops;
my lord, replied the colonel, as you are the only hog in company, I must beg
leave to cut them from your carcass.

Shakespeare being one evening in a tavern with a gentleman, the latter
endeavored to force the former to drink more than he cared for, and swore if he
did not pledge him he would rum him through the body; why then, says our wag,
to save you the trouble, I Will run myself through, and pledge you afterward.
Upon which he ran down stairs and left the hero a pledge for the reckoning.

The daughter of a haberdasher who came down to Bath to drink the waters, being
offered some indecency by a gentleman, spit plump into his mouth: Earl
Chesterfield being told of it, said, That he never knew a nasty trick done in
so clean a manner.

Shakespeare was one night drinking a bottle with a justice, when a constable
brought a fine girl before him, however, the magistrate being engaged with his
friends, bid Mr. Constable take her home to his house, and bring her the next
day; I have no objection, says he, provided your worship will commit my wife
till morning.

A man was at another time brought before the same magistrate, when Shakespeare
was present, for defamation, in calling his neighbor a scavenger. Pray, sir,
said Shakespeare to the justice, attend seriously to this charge, for to me it
appears there is some very dirty work going forwards.

A young lady of earl C -- d's acquaintance, having refused her hand to a very
deserving man, because he was poor, and being upon the point of marriage with a
rich old gentleman; Madam, says his lordship, I always took you for a woman of
sense, but I have been mistaken, I find you make matrimony a mere matter of
money.

Shakespeare being one morning at a coffee-house, was very much disturbed by a
very noisy gentleman, who sat at a small distance from him, upon which he
enquired who the spark was; a gentleman told him he was one of those gentry
called rooks. A rook, sir, says our wag, zounds, it is impossible, by his
chattering I am sure he is a magpye.

A fellow playing at back gammon threw deuce ace three times successively, at
which he was so enraged that he swore if he threw deuce ace again he would
swallow the dice. He threw, and behold deuce ace again made their appearance;
accordingly he swallowed the refractory dice. A short time afterward he had
occasion to evacuate in a garden, and having appeased Pri^pus he cast his eyes
down, and to his astonishment found that the impious dice again turned up deuce
ace.

Teague being asked one day, where he had been? replied, I have been receiving
money all day but the d -- l a farthing did I get.

Some jovial sons of Neptune having got somewhat top-heavy with the juice of
Bacchus in a gentleman's house, conceited themselves to be at sea in a storm,
and threw all the furniture out of the windows in order to lighten their ship,
as they termed it.

A countryman (for his comfort) had married a spit-fire of a wife, and by the
force of long habit whenever he gave her any disagreeable intelligence
respecting the farm, she would cry out, Why, did not I tell you so? One day, for
a little merriment he came running into the house and in great earnestness
exclaimed, Lord, my dear, the cows have eaten up the grind-stone! Well, did not
I tell you so? says she.

Very shortly after a certain gentleman had been disappointed in a political
pursuit he was taken sick; an acquaintance of his enquired how he was? Why,
says a gentleman of the opposite party, I hear he is dangerously ill of a
mortification.

Parson T --, when about fulfilling his design of preaching to the Susquehanna
Indians, applied to an opulent merchant for a small sum of money, the better to
enable him to prosecute his great undertaking; Why, what do you intend to do
among those copper gentry? says the merchant. Prepare for them, replies the
parson, a place in the bosom of Abraham. And do you imagine, says the merchant,
that father Abraham will thank you for filling his bosom with a pack of d --
savages?

A country gentleman happening to be in company with some witty young ladies in
Burlington, who, thinking to have some sport, began to joke with him about his
occupation; which not being much relished by him, he said, if he had an acre of
such as they were, he should soon know how to dispose of them; this speech
exciting their curiosity, he replied, that he would give the d -- l the crop to
clear the land.

Parson Bate having the chimney of his printing house swept, came into the
room, and the man's son was holding the bag for his father. How now, sweep,
says he, do you intend to bring up your son to the trade. Why, replied the
sweep, I cannot tell, but if he behaves well and is tractable, but I might; if
not, says he, I will make a parson of him, for he must be a clever fellow to go
up a chimney; but any fool can read a sermon in a pulpit as well as you Mr.
Bate.

A light headed blade walking along the streets, meets with an old decayed
gentlewoman, with a gown that by age was worn ^hreadbare; the gallant thinking
to break a jest with her, took up the him of her gown and kissed it; which she,
looking back, took notice of, and asked him what he meant by that? Why, said
he, to honor old age. Alas, sir, replied she, you might then have kissed my b
-- s -- c for it is forty years older.

On a benefit night at the playhouse, many particular friends of the actor
were let in at a private door, before the great doors were open, which when
discovered, Col. Bar cried out, in a passion, 'Twas a shame they should fill
the house full of people before any body came.

An Irishman who lately came to America, made it his constant practice to run
out against every thing that was the production of this country; one day,
talking of the American bees, said they were nothing like so large as the bees
were in Ireland; one present asked him how large the Irish bees were? he
replied as large as sheep; and how large are their hives then? asked the other.
No larger than common, replies Paddy: Ah, say^ the other, then how is it
possible for them to get in and out? Oh, says the Hibernian, they must sec to
that themselves.

About half a century ago, when it was more the fashion to drink ale at Oxford
than it is at present, a humorous fellow of punning memory, established an
alehouse near the pound, and wrote over the door, "Ale sold by the pound." As
his ale was as good as his jokes, the Oxonians resorted to his house in great
numbers, and sometimes staid there beyond the college hours. This was made a
matter of complaint to the vice chancellor, who was desired to take away his
license by one of the proctors of the university. Boniface was summoned to
attend; and when he came into the vice-chancellor's presence, he began hawking
and spitting about the room ^ this the chancellor observed, and asked what he
meant by it? Please your worship I came here on purpose to clear myself. The
vice chancellor imagined that he actually weighed his ale, and sold it in that
manner; he therefore said to him -- they tell me that you sell ale by the
pound, is that true? No, replied the wit. How do you then? replied the
chancellor: -- Very well, I thank you, Sir, replied he, how do you do? The
chancellor laughed and said get away for a rascal, I Will say no more to you. The
fellow departed and passing the quadrangle, met the proctor who laid the
information. Sir, said he, the vice chancellor wants to speak with you, and
returned with him. Here Sir, said he, here he is. -- Who? said the chancellor.
Why Sir, said he, you sent me for a rascal, and I Have brought you the greatest
that I knew of.

A tall man said to another, considerably less than himself, You cannot put your
hand upon my head without stretching, was answered, You cannot kiss my a-se
without stooping.

A fellow who took a passage in a stage-boat to New York with a very old woman,
thought he would run his rigs upon her, Well grandmother says he, at what age
are old ladies unfit for the works of generation? Indeed sir, returned she, you
must ask one that is older than I am.

An arrogant Englishman passing through New Jersey in the stage, entered into a
lengthy detail in praise of the severity of British discipline, and observed as
an instance, that two soldiers in Cornwallis's army were hung merely for
robbing a hen-roost. A facetious Jerseyman in company, said, it was a pity this
discipline had not been enforced among Lord Howe's men when he invaded
New Jersey. Why, so? says the Englishman. Because, sir, replies the Jerseyman,
we should have been happily rid of such rascals, for his lordship and his whole
army would have been hung together.

Dr. Graham being on his stage at Chel^sford, in Essex, in order to promote the
sale of his medicines, told the country people, that he came there for the good
of the public and not for want; then speaking to his merry Andrew -- Andrew,
says he, do we come for want? No faith, sir, says Andrew, we have enough of
that at home; besides, continued he, my master has a very great estate, but
that is neither here nor there.

One seeing his son in mischief, cried out, sirrah, did you ever see me do so
when I was a boy?

A curious Sermon.

Brethren! Brethren! Brethren! (The word Brethren comes from the tabernacle,
because we all breathe there-in) -- If you are drowzy, I Will ro^ze you: I Will
heat a tat-too upon the parchment cases of your consciences, and whip the devil
about like a whirl-a-gig among you -- Even as the cat upon the top of the house
does squall; even from the top of my voice will I bawl; and the organ pipes of
my lungs shall play a voluntary among ye: and the sweet words that I shall
utter -- and the sweet words that I shall utter shall sugar candy over your
souls, and make carraway comfits of your consciences. -- Do you know how many
tailors make a man? -- Why nine -- Nine taylor^ make a man? -- And how many
make half a man? -- Why four journeymen and an ^prentice. -- Even so have ye
all been bound 'prentice to Miss Fortune the fashion maker; and now you are out
of your times you have set up for yourselves. -- My great bowels and my s^^ --
all guts gr^an for you. I have got the gripe of compassion, and the belly-ach
of pity. -- Give me a dram! -- Give me a dram -- Do, give me a dram -- A dram
of patience I mean, while I explain unto you, what reformation, and what
abomination mean: -- which the worldly wicked have mixed together like potatoes
and buttermilk and therewith make a sinful s^ir about. Reformation is like the
comely ^^oth at the top of a ta^kard of porter; and Abomination -- is like the
the dregs at the bottom of the tap^t^^ -- Have you carried your consciences to
the scourers? Have you bought any fuller's earth at my shop to take the stains
out? -- You say* Yes, you have, you have: -- But I say, No: you he^ you lie!
you lie! -- I am no velvet ^^^th preacher; I scorn your lawn sleeves -- You are
full of f^^th: ye must be parboiled: yea, you must be boiled down in our
tabernacle, so make a por^^^le soup, for the saints to sup a l^^leful of: (...)
the scum, and the scaldings of your iniquities will boil over; and that is
called the kitchen (...) of your consciences, that serve to grease the cart
w^e^ls that carry us over the Devil's ditch, and the Devil's gap. -- she
Devil's di^^h; that is among the jockeys at Newmarket: and the Devil's gap;
that is among the other jockeys, the lawyers at Lincoln, ^-inn-fields. -- A^^
then there is the Devil among the tailors, and the Devil among the players: the
players, that play the Devil to pay. -- The playhouse is Satan's ground, where
women stretch themselves out upon ^^^ter hooks of temptation. -- Tragedy, is
the blank verse of ^eelzebub; -- Comedy is his hasty pudding; and Pantomime is
the Devil's country dance. -- And yet, you will pay the players for s^^^^g plays:
yes, yes; but you wont pay me: no, no; till Beelz^^ub's bumbailiffs lay hold of
you; and then you think I will pay your garnish: but I will not. No; you shall lay
on the common side of the world: like a toad-in-a-hole, that is baked for the
Devil's dinner. -- Do put some money in the plate. -- Put some money in the
plate; and then all your iniquities shall be scalded away; even as they scald
the bristles off the hog's back, and you shall be cleansed from all your sins,
as easily as the barber shaveth away the weakly beard from the chin of the
ungodly.

Do put some money in the plate,
Or I, your preacher, cannot eat:
And it is with grief of heart I tell ye,
How much this preaching scours the belly.
How pinching to the human tripe
Is Pity's belly-ach, and gripe;
But that Religion (lovely maid)
Keep's a cook's shop to feed the trade.
The Parson and the Fowls; or, the Maid too cunning for her Master.

A rich old bachelor, a clergyman in the country, having made choice of a
pretty young maid to be his housekeeper, had ordered upon a certain Sunday, a
couple of fowls to be got read for his dinner, that after he had given his
congregation a little Christian consolation at church, he might come home and
refresh his tired vitals with a dainty modicum; when the clerk and his loobily
assistants had chimed all in, for about a quarter of an hour, away jogged the
shepherd to fodder his sheep, and measure his time by the hour glass, leaving
his pretty housekeeper to prepare the cacklers against the accostomed time of
his return.

The diligent maid, when she thought her ghostly master had been long enough
exalted two degrees above his clerk, to get about a quarter of an hour on the
right side of his text, guessed it a very proper time to lay down the fowls,
which she did accordingly. As the tidbits were running merrily round before a
rousing fire, who should take the advantage of the parson's absence, but his
housekeeper's sweetheart, who by his pleasant, comical hoity-toities, and other
winning accomplishments, had so wriggled himself into her affections, that it
is not unreasonable to think he had as much command as her master.

The maid having mistaken the time of the day, happened to be a little too
early with her cookery, so that the fowls were full ready before the parson had
given his hungry auditory leave to return home to their puddings and dumplings.
The sweetheart being a fellow of an incomparable stomach, thought it a great
pity, such good victuals should be spoiled for want of eating, and very eagerly
solicited his loving Jug to spare him one of the fowls to stop a little hole he
had in his appetite, telling her one would be sufficient for her master, and
that she had wit enough to contrive some story or other, handsomely to excuse
the matter, and blind him from the true knowledge of what became of it.

The maid being willing to oblige her lover, who she found was so desirous to
oblige her upon all occasions, ventured to take up one to save the longing of
her sweetheart who being very well prepared for such a nice entertainment,
gobbled it up with such expedition, that before his benefactress had wound up
the jack, he had not so much as left the claws which the poor cockral used to
scratch the dunghill withal.

He had no sooner dispatched his sweetheart's first courtesy, but he began to
be very importunate with her for the second, telling her an excuse was as easy
made for both as for one, and that she had as good be hanged for a sheep as a
lamb; till at last, by adding a few melting kisses to his ravenous
solicitations, he prevailed upon her to draw the other off the spit, that he
might finish his meal by robbing the parson of his Sunday's dinner.

The second bird being brought before him, he lost no time, but drove down the
former with the latter, without any visible abatement of either his speed or of
his appetite. When he had cleared the dish, and washed all down with a cup of
the parson's best beer, he took a thankful leave of his mistress, who now began
to be at her wit's end how to excuse the rudeness she had so foolishly
committed.

As she was thus pondering with herself, who should step in but the parson and
a stranger with him, who coming from another town to hear him preach, the
parson thought himself obliged to invite him home to dinner with him.

No sooner had the old Levite conducted his guests into the parlour, but he
begged his pardon a minute and retired into another room to whet his knife upon
the frame of an old table, which was always his custom before dinner; the maid
in a peck of fears and troubles took the advantage in the interim, and stepping
into the parlour, in a strange seeming sort of disorder, frightens away her
master's guest with a surprising story, as follows, viz. Lord, sir, how came
you to venture yourself home with my master, at this time of day, when if you
had known him, you might have easily discovered by his countenance, he is in
one of his old freaks. -- Why, what is the matter with him, says the country
farmer, he was woundy civil to me in the churchyard, and by all means would
bring me home to dine with him. Alas, good sir, replied the maid, whatever you
do, let me advise you to make the best of your way out of the house, for if you
stay, now he is in one of his frenzical humors, he will certainly g -- you;
and I dare say, he is whetting his knife for that purpose; he has lately served
two or three so already, though they have had the discretion to keep it silent,
because they should not be laughed at. I thank thee kindly sweetheart, cried
the countryman, are these his tricks -- wounds, show me the nearest way out.
Upon which the wench showed him out of a back door, and away ran Gaffer as if
the devil was at his heels.

He had not been gone a minute, but in comes the parson with his knife in his
hand, and finds the maid stamping and storming, as if she was raying mad in the
parlour, with an empty sineared dish upon the table, and his guest gone. What Is
the matter now, says the parson, what is the meaning of all this, where is the
man gone that I brought home with me? Lord, sir, replien the (...). I never saw
such ^n unmannerly h^^nd (...) my eyes were open, ^^^o sooner b^ought the fowls
on table, but he snatched them both out of the dish and cra^^^ed them into his
breeches, and away he scow red out of the back door as if the devil was in him.
Zounds, says the priest, I am resolved the impuden^ fellow shall not cozen me
of my dinner so, and away runs the parson after the countryman, who by this
time had got near a field's length off; but however, having preached himself
very hungry, he trotted away after him, with his naked knife in his hand,
crying out, give me, you brazen dog, what you have run away with in your
breeches. The fellow answering as he ran, Efaith doctor not I, I would rather
see you hanged first. The parson finding the fellow too nimble for him, was
very (...) to compound, and cried out, in milder terms, Prithee, friend, don't
run away with them both, but be so kind to let me have one of them. Not by the
mass, replie^ the fellow, I had rather see you at the devil than part with
either of them. The farmer being young and lusty, soon got ground of the
parson, that he was forced to give over his chase, ^^d return home puffing and
blowing, having nothing left but batchelors fare, bread and cheese, and kisses
for his Sunday's dinner.

When the celebrated Beau Nash was ill, Doctor Cheyne wrote a prescription for
him. The next day the ^octor went to see his patient, and enquired if he had
followed his prescription? "No, says, Doctor, (said Nash) if I had I should
have broke my neck, for I threw it out of a two pair of stairs window.

A child of six years of age, being introduced into company for his
extraordinary abilities, was asked by an eminent dignified clergyman, "Where
God was?" with the proffered reward of an orange. "Tell me, (replied the boy,)
where he is not? and I will give you two!"

Poor Joe Miller going one day along the Strand, an impudent Derby captain came
swaggering up to him, and thurst between him and the wall. "I don't choose to
give the wall, said he, to every jackanapes." "But I do," said Joe; and so made
way for him.

A countryman being in London, a friend of his undertook to conduct him to
every place that was remarkable, and worthy of observation. One day he tells
him, that that he would show him Bedlam; it was accordingly agreed upon; but,
instead of that, he carries him to the door of the house of commons, telling
him, that was the entrance into Bedlam. It happened just then, that the house
was breaking up; and the door being presently opened, the countryman, to his
great astonishment, saw several of the members hastening toward it; upon that
he immediately takes to his heels, and runs, as it were, for his life: when
being stopped by some persons, who wondered at his running so fast, "Oh! (cries
he,) for the Lord, a sake don't stop me; yonder is Bedlam open, and all the
madmen are loose and coming out"

A domstic once entering in a fright, the study of his master, who was in deep
thought and contemplation, exclaimed, "Sir the house is on fire." "Well (said
he) inform my wife of it: I do not interfere in the house hold affairs."

The famous Weston, of facetious memory, having borrowed the sum of five
pounds, and failing in payment, the gentleman who had lent the money, took
occasion indiscreetly to talk of it in the public coffee-house, which obliged
Weston to take notice of it; so that it came to a challange. Being got into the
field, the gentleman a little tender in the point of courage, offered him the
note to make it up, to which our hero readily consented, and had the note
delivered. But now, said the gentleman, if we should return without fighting,
our companions will laugh at us; therefore let us give one another a slight
scratch, and say we wounded one another. With all my heart, says Weston, come,
I Will wound you first; so drawing his sword, he whipped it through the fleshy part
of his antagonist's arm, till he brought the tears in his eyes. This done and
the wound tied up with a handkerchief; Come, said the gentleman, Where shall I
wound you? -- Weston putting himself in a posture of defense, Where you can, by
G -- d, Sir." "Well, well, says the other, I can swear I received this wound of
you;" and so marched off contentedly.

The Emperor Charles V. having wandered up and down for a good while in a
forest, where he had lost his way in hunting, found himself at last near a
public house, whither he went to refresh himself. As he came in, he espied four
fellows, whose looks forbode him no good; however, he put a good face upon the
matter, sat down and called for something to eat and drink. The fellows who
were lying down and pretended to be asleep, thought fit to awake. I dreamed,
said one of these ruffians, coming near the Emperor, "That I was taking off
your hat;" and so he took it. For my part, says another, "I dreamed that your
great coat would fit me exactly;" and without any more ado, he fairly stripped
him of it. The third paid him the same compliment, and stripped him of his buff
coat. The fourth rogue with the same good manners, went about to take from off
his neck a gold chain, where a whistle was hanging. Hold a little, says the
Emperor, pu^^ing back his hand, before you take this ^^ar whistle from me, give
me leave to teach you the virtue of it; you must do so. Then having given a
loud whistle, his attendants, who were looking for him, and by chance were got
near that house, as soon as they heard the whistle, came in, and were very much
surprised to find him in that condition. Why, says the Emperor t^ them, here is
a parcel of fellows who have (...) now made an end of dreaming whatever they
pleased; for my part I have a mind to dream too. Then having paused a while,
Well, added he, I have be^^ dreaming that these four rare dreamers were a pack
of rogues, and deserve to be hanged; and I will have my dream out this very
minute. This command was no sooner given but executed, and all the four knaves
were, without any more ado, hanged before the door of that nest of thieves. The
old saying was varified in the case of these rogues, That dreams go by
contrarieties.

A country justice invited Edwin one day to dinner, with many other persons;
and having a mind to show his wit, took these aside and told them, "Gentlemen,
if you will be ruled by me, we shall make ourselves merry to day with Edwin, who
you know sets up for a jester, and drolls upon every body. My clerk being sick
a bed, so that I have no body to wait on us, I will propose to draw cuts, to
see which of us shall go to the cellar to draw the wine, and wait on the rest
whilst they are at dinner: and I will contrive it so, that it shall fall to
Edwin's lot." Which being thus concluded amongst them, was put into execution
accordingly. Edwin smoaked the plot, and was resolved to make his host repent
it. Down he went to the cellar to fill the bottles, whilst the others fell too;
and being come up again with the bottles, "You see, Gentlemen, said he, how I
have performed what I had to do; let us now draw cuts to see which of us shall
go down into the cellar to stop the hogsheads I have left running." Now the
justice talked no more of casting lots, and knowing Edwin to be as good as his
word, leaves presently his dinner, and runs to the cellar, where he finds his
vessels running, and part of his wine spilt, for which he afterward
expostulated with Edwin. You have no reason to complain of me, answered he,
since I have punctually complied with the conditions of the play, which indeed
obliged me to draw the wine and fill the bottles, but not to stop the Vessels
of a host who entertains a guest so scurvily."

The following story is related of the king of Prussia. A clergyman of
Neufchatel chapel preached against eternal d -- n. His parishioners were so
disgusted with him, that they would not afterward suffer him to enter the
church-door, nay, they even pelted him. The king hearing of it, ordered the
doors to be thrown open to the priest, that he might resume his function. The
parson now resumed his subject. He would not allow eternal d -- n by any means;
he had no objection to a limited time, even a hundred thousand years, but not
infinite punishment. The parishioners would not suffer him to go on with his
sermon, but pulled him headlong from his rostrum, turned him out of the church,
and again pelted him. The king sent for the priest, and censured him for his
absurdity in resuming a subject so noxious to his bearers, and said, "Since my
subjects of Neufch^^^ are so fond of everlasting d -- n, they have my free
leave to be d -- ned to all eternity."

At the assize of Caernarvon, where judge Barrington presided, a simple
Welshman was tried for some petty offense. The judge in an austere manner,
asked him, "What are you?" To which the culprit replied, in his shire manner,
"My Lord, I was sell ale by the pound!" "Eh, (says the judge, not hearing him
distinctly) "How do you do, my friend?" "Pretty well, I thank your lordship, I
hope you are well," replied the rustic, with such a simplicity in his manner,
that threw the court into a fit of laughter that lasted for a quarter of an
hour. His lordship was as merry as the rest, and leaned to his case in such a
manner that he was acquitted.

When Sir Thomas Moore was ambassador from Henry VIII. to the emperor of
Morocco, the morning he was to have an audience, he called for a bumper of
sack, drank it, and asked for another; the servant would have dissuaded him
from it, but could not; he drank that off, and afterward a third; he then
insisted on a fourth; but being over persuaded by his servant, he let it alone.
When he returned from his audience, "You rogue, said he to his man, what
mischief have you done me, I spoke so well to the emperor, on the inspiration
of the three glasses I drank, that he told me I was fit to govern three parts
of the world. Now, you scoundrel, had I drank the fourth glass, I had been fit
to govern the whole world."

One day Socrates, having for a long time endured his wife's brawling, went out
of his house and sat down before the door, to rid himself of her impertinence.
The woman, enraged to find all her scolding unable to disturb his tranquillity,
flung the contents of a chamber pot on his head. Those that happened to see it,
laughed heartily at poor Socrates; but that philosopher told them, smiling, "I
thought, indeed, after so much thunder we should have rain."

That excellent companion the old earl Bathurst, related the following
anecdote: When the celebrated actress Mrs. Cibber was in Dublin, she sung in
the Oratorio of the Messiah. A certain bishop was so struck with the extreme
sensibility of her manner, that he could not refrain from saying, loud enough
to be heard by numbers round him, "Woman! thy sins be forgiven thee!"

As the late Dean Swift was once upon a journey, attended by a servant, they
put up at an inn, where they lodged all night; in the morning the Dean called
for his boots; the servant immediately took them to him; when the Dean saw
them, "How is this Tom, says he, my boots are not cleaned?" "No, Sir, replied
Tom, as you are going to ride, I thought they would soon be dirty again;" "Very
well, said the Dean, go and get the horses ready." In the mean time the Dean
ordered the landlord to let his man have no breakfast. When the servant
returned, the Dean asked if the horses were ready? "Yes, Sir," says the
servant; "Go bring them out then," said the Dean; "I have not had my breakfast
yet, Sir," says Tom; "Oh, no matter for that, says the Dean, if you had it you
would soon be hungry again." They mounted and rode off; as they rode the Dean
pulled a book out of his pocket and began to read, a gentleman met them and
seeing the doctor reading, was not willing to disturb him, but passed by till
he met the servant. "Who is that gentleman?" said he to the servant. "It is my
master, Sir," said Tom. "I know that, you blockhead," said the gentleman, "but
where are you going?" "We are going to heaven, Sir," says Tom. "How do you know
that?" said the gentleman. "Because I am fasting and my master is praying, Sir,
so I think we are in the right road."

Two friends, who had not seen each other for a long while, met one day by
accident. -- "How do you do?" says one. "So, so, replies the other, and yet I
was married since you and I were together." -- That is good news." -- "Not very
good; for it was my lot to choose a termagant." -- "It is a pity." -- "I hardly
think it so, for she brought me two thousand pounds." -- "Well, there is
comfort." -- "Not so much; for with her fortune I purchased a quantity of
sheep, and they are all dead of the rot." -- "That is indeed distressing." --
"Not so distressing as you may imagine; for by the sale of their skins I got
more than the sheep cost me." -- "In that case you are indemnified." -- "By no
means; for my house and all my money have been destroyed by sire." -- "Alas,
this was a dreadful misfortune!" -- "Faith not so dreadful; for my termagant
wife and my house were burned together."

Alexander the Great asked Diomedes a famous pirate, who was brought prisonor
to him, "why he was so bold as to rob and plunder in his seas?" he answered,
"that he did it for his profit, as Alexander himself was used to do it. But,
because I do it with a single galley, I am called a pirate; but you, sir, who
do it with a great army, are called a king." This bold answer so pleased
Alexander, that he set him at liberty.

A gentleman having lent a guinea for two or three days to a person whose
promises he had not much faith in, was very much surprised to find that he very
punctually kept his word with him; the same gentleman sometime after was
desirous of borrowing a larger sum. No, said the other, you have deceived me
once, and I am resolved you shall not do it a second time.

A gentleman amusing himself in the gallery of the Pallais, a place in Paris
somewhat like what our exchanges formerly were, observed while he was
carelessly looking over some pamphlets at a booksellers there, a suspicious
fellow stood rather too near him: the gentleman was dressed, according to the
fashion of these times, in a coat with a prodigious number of silver tags and
tassels: upon which the thief, (for such he was) began to have a design; and
the gentleman, not willing to disappoint him, turned his head another way, on
purpose to give him an opportunity: the thief immediately set to work, and, in
a trice, twisted off seven or eight of the silver tags: the gentleman
immediately perceived it, and slily drawing out of his pocket a penknife, which
cut like a razor, catched the fellow by the ear, and cut it off close to his
head. Murder! murder! cries the thief; Robbery! robbery! cries the gentleman*
upon this the thief, in a passion, throwing them at the gentleman, "There are
your tags and buttons!" "Very well, says the gentleman, there is your ear,"
throwing it back in a similar manner."

A fellow who had picked up a few scraps of the French tongue, and was entirely
ignorant of the Latin, accosted a gentleman with "Quelle heure est il
Monsieur?" in French, (what is it o'clock, Sir?). To which the gentleman
answered, "Nescio," in Latin. (I don't know.) "D -- n it, said the fellow, I
did not think it was near so late;" and ran off, as if he had something of
consequence to do.

A sea officer, who for his courage in a former engagement where he had left
his leg, had been preferred to the command of a good ship; in the heat of the
next engagement, a cannon ball took off his wooden deputy, so that he fell upon
the deck; a seaman thinking he had been fresh wounded, called out for a
surgeon. "No, no, said the captain, the carpenter will do."

Miss S --, one of the famous Miss H -- 's fille's-de-joy, in dancing a
masquerade at Carlisle-house happened to trip, and fell flat on her back;
Foot, who was in a domino, and near her, stooping to pick her up, said "Never
mind it, my pretty dear, practice makes perfect."

A fellow hearing the drums beat up for volunteers for France, in the
expedition against the Dutch, imagined himself valiant enough, and thereupon
enlist^^ himself; returning again, he was asked by his friends, what exploits
he had done there? he said, that he had cut off one of the enemy's legs; and
being told that it had been more honorable and manly to have cut off his head:
"Oh! said he, you must know that his head was cut off before."

In the war in Flanders, when the earl of Stair was commander in chief, after a
severe battle, which lasted from morning till evening, and terminated in favor
of the British troops, a veteran soldier, excessively fatigued, was resting on
his arms, and looking very grave; Lord Stair coming by, asked him why he looked
so dull? "Dull! your honor, I am not dull; I am only thinking what a hard day's
work I have done for a groat!"

Dr. Thompson was a peculiar sloven, and in the practice of a physician, an
utter and declared enemy to muffins, which he always forbad his patients. Being
one day upon a visit to Lord Melcombe, at Hammersinith, with Mr. Garrick, Mr.
P. Whitehead, etc. the company were assembled at breakfast, long before the
doctor appeared: just as he entered the room, in an uncouth habit, Lord
Melcombe uncovered a plate of muffins, which Thompson fixing his eyes upon,
with some indignation said, "My Lord, did not I beseech your lordship before,
never to suffer a muffin in your house?" To which his lordship archly replied,
"Doctor, I Have an utter aversion to muffins and raggamuffins."

An Irish lad was sent to buy a piece of cheese; his fellow servants did not
like the t^^e of it, and desired him to change it; it was o^e half of a
Gloucester cheese. He went back, and brought the other half; he was told upon
tasting it, it was the same. "I Will take my bible oath of that, said he, for it
is the other half; I saw the man change it with my own eyes; -- you may buy
your cheese yourselves for me."

Pope, who, whatever his other good qualities might be, certainly was not much
troubled with good nature; was one evening at Button's coffee-house, where he
and a set of literati had got poring over a manuscript of the Greek comic poet
Aristophanes, in which they found a passage that none of them could comprehend:
as they talked pretty loud, a young officer who stood by the fire, heard their
conference, and begged that he might be permitted to look at the passage. "Oh!
says Pope, sarcas^cally, by all means, let the young gentleman lo^k at it."
Upon which the officer took up the book, and considering awhile, said, that
there only wanted a note of interrogation to make the whole intelligible; which
was really the case: "and pray, master," says Pope, qiqued, perhaps, at being
cut-done by a red-coat, "what is a note of interrogation?" -- "A note of
interrogation," replied the youth, with a look of the utmost contempt, "is a
little crooked thing that asks questions." It Is said, however, that Pope was so
delighted with the wit, that he forgave the sarcasm on his person.

The late Earl of Chatham, who bore no goodwill to a certain physician, was
rallying him one day about the inefficacy of his prescriptions. To which the
doctor replied, he defied any of his patients to find fault with him. "I
believe you, replied the witty earl, for they are all dead!"

The mildness of Sir Isaac Newton's temper, through the course of his life,
commanded admiration from all who knew him, but in no one instance perhaps more
than the following: Sir Isaac had a favorite little dog, which he called
Diamond; and being one day called out of his study into the next room Diamond
was left behind. When Sir Isaac returned, having been absent but a few minutes,
he had the mortification to find, that Diamond having thrown down a lighted
candle among some papers, and the nearly finished labor of many years was in
flames, and almost consumed to ashes. This loss, as Sir Isaac was then very far
advanced in years, was irretrievable; yet, without once striking the dog, he
only rebuked him with this exclamation, "Oh, Diamond! Diamond! thou little
know the mischief thou have done."

The following incident which occurred in a Caledonian courtship, exhibiting
the true ridiculum sublime, is as veritable as laughable: -- A son of medicine
(a doctor Shaw) in vital date climacterically verging, having purse as well as
person in perspective, breathed out his amorous sighs to the daughter of a
Scorch baronet: the lady, prone to jocularity, seemed to listen to his suit
solely for the reception of that entertainment gray haired folly renders in
attempting the characteristics of juvenility. The doctor one day was to pay a
visit in form to the goddess of his idolatry; on this occasion he was
determined to be as Adonis-like in habiliments as possible. It is requisite to
be known, that the doctor was a man who scorned to be thought of the sect of
Pe^ip^tetics; when he appeared, it was in the style equestrian; and his steed,
in lack of flesh, and show of ossification, paced in singularity: on this
automaton of bones, he was to be carried to the house of the lady in question;
and forward he set for the interview. The doctor was never remarked for a
frequent mutation in linen; he had particular attachment for a shirt when once
it met in contact with his skin, and before they were separated the natural
blanch of the one was somewhat improved by its intimacy with the other; on
such an important event as the present, he was guilty of deviation, and
resolving to be profuse, he took an immaculate shirt, and put it not on, but in
his pocket, prudently considering, that in the action of riding its honors
might be tarnished, and its appearance not so white; to prevent this, he
resolved to put it on when he should arrive at a small distance from the scene
of his wishes. Arrived at this se^^led distance, the doctor proceeded to
disrobe his upper garments; s^^l sitting on his horse, his hat, his wig, his
coat, and his waistcoat, were taken off, and laid on the pummel of the saddle;
his hands were employed in stripping his sassron-hued skin-case over his head:
In this critical moment, malignant fate reigning, his visual ray preluded by
the covering of his shirt, his faithful Pegasus received affright from somewhat
in the road, set off with the doctor in deminudity, and ran with him in statu
qu^ (instinctively knowing, from frequency in going, his master's destination)
to the door of the very house he had hoped to en^er with every minutia of dress
adjusted. His Quixote-like appearance threw the family into such paroxysms of
laughter, as precluded the operations of speech, or the means of assisting the
distressed doctor: the lady, in the doctor's disgrace, received the extremest
entertainment, and though she liked human nature in its primitive state, gave
the doctor to understand his period in it was not her choice.

The late lord Ross engaged an apothecary, in Oxford Street, to attend three of
his servants who were dangerously ill, and went to Ireland without discharging
the account. In about two years after this event, he returned to London, and
was traced by the apothecary, who knew his carriage, and stopped him in
Bond-street. Lord Ross enquired for the bill, which the understrapper of
Esculapius presented in at the window with a receipt. The sum total was sixteen
pounds ten shillings and sixpence, which he thinking an exorbitant charge,
^^^led out his purse, gave the pharmacopolist half^^ guinea, and then ordered
his coachman to drive on; but not before the enraged apothecary had surveyed
the limited recompense with surprise, and exclaimed, in the hearing of the mob,
"Ah, you Irish bite, I have got six and three pence by you now."

The la^^ lord Hawke, when a young man, was pressed very much by a taylar to
discharge a debt which he wa^ at that time unable to pay. "You know, said Mr.
Buckram, my bill is very long and frightful to think of." -- "Don't threaten
me, replies the blunt tar, with your bill; my talons will prove a match for
your bill any hour!"

When C -- F -- was vehemently teazed for money, by some Hebrew creditors, he
told them, he would discharge the encumbrance as soon as possible. "But, Mr. F
-- name the daysh?" "The day of judgment." Oh, Mishter F --, that will be too
bishy a day for us." "Right, Moses, so we will make it the day after."

During his Majesty's last painful illness, that eminent physician, Dr.
Zimmerman of Hanover, attended him. One day, when he waited upon his Majesty,
the king said to him, "You have, Sir, I suppose, helped many into another
world." "Not so many, replied Zimmerman, as your Majesty, nor with so much
honor to myself."

A gentleman in Ireland, remarkable for what is called bulls, was met one day
in mourning; "How now, Frank, says his acquaintance, who are you in mourning
for?" "For my poor wife, honey," answers he. "God bless me!" says the other.
"Indeed it is very true, says Frank, she would have been three weeks dead, if
she had lived till last Wednesday."

The same person going to see what time of day it was by a dial, which the sun
shone very bright upon, his eyes were so dazzled, that he could not
distinguish: "Oh! the devil burn these fellows, says he, why could they not
have put this dial in the shade?"

Another time being asked to breakfast at a friend's house, he excused himself,
because he never drank tea; "And pray, says somebody, what do you usually take
for breakfast?" "Vegetables, says he, generally; a beef-steak or a m^ttonchop"

The earl of Dorset having a great desire to spend an evening with Butler, the
celebrated author of Hudibras, spoke to Mr. Fleetwood Shepherd to introduce
him. The three wits, some time after, accordingly met at a tavern, when upon
the first bottle, Butler was rather flat; on the second, he broke out the man
of wit and reading; but on the third, relapsed into a tameness of conversation,
very inferior to the author of Hudibras. Next morning Mr. Shepherd asked his
lordship how he liked his friend Butler? "I do not know any thing better to
compare him to, says his lordship, than a roling pin, little at both ends, but
great in the middle."

Milton was asked by a friend whether he would instruct his daughters in the
different languages? to which he replied, "No, Sir, one tongue is sufficient
for a woman."

When lord I'ownshend was viceroy of Ireland, his butler, in preparing the
cloth for a ch^^^e ^estival, was unlucky enough to break a dozen of china
plates, of a rare and beautiful pattern. "You blockhead, cries his lordship,
meeting him presently after, with another dozen in his hand, how did you do
it?" "Upon my soul, my lord, they happened to fall just so," replied the
fellow, and instantly dashed them also upon the marble hearth into a thousand
pieces.

Two country attorneys overtaking a waggoner on the road, and thinking to break
a joke upon him, asked him, Why his fore horse was so fat, and the rest so
lean? The waggoner, knowing them to be limbs of the law, answered them, "That
his fore horse was a lawyer, and the rest were his clients."

Dagger Mar, who was ever wrangling with the managers of Drury Lane theater,
was very fond of taking bread in his pocket, and feeding the ducks in St.
James's Park; one day while he thought himself unnoticed, he observed one of
the ducks to swim about as swift as any three of them, and gobble n^^^so much
of the bread, that Dagger roared ou^^^nd enough to be heard by Garrick, who was
not far behind him, "Get out of that you gobbling rascal, I perceive you are a
manager!"

A gentleman talking of his travels, a lady in company said she had been a
great deal farther, and seen more countries than he. "Nay, then, madam, replied
the gentleman, as travelers, we may lie together by authority."

A person about to describe a snuff box he had seen, which was an Egyptian
pebble set in pinchbeck, said it was "a gipsy's nipple set in pinchgut."

A Scotch bag-piper traveling to Ireland, opened his wallet by a wood side,
and sat down to dinner; no sooner had he said grace, but three wolves came
about him. To one he threw bread, to another meat, till his provender was all
gone. At length he took up his pipes, and began to play, at which the wolves
ran away. "The deel faw me, said Sawney, and had I ken'd you loo'd music so
weel, you should have haen it before dinner."

Ben Johnson being one night at the Devil tavern, there was a country gentleman
in the company, who intearupted all other discourse with an account of his land
and tenements; at last Ben, unable to bear it longer, said to him, "What
signifies your dirt and your clods to us? where you have one acre of land I
have ten acres of wit." "Have you so, said the countryman, good Mr. Wise-acre?"
This unexpected repartee from the clown, struck Ben quite mute for a time;
"Why, how now, Ben, said one of the company, you seem to be quite stung?" "I
never was so pricked by a hob-nail before," replied he.

A lady being ill, sent for a physician, and on his leaving the room, gave a
fee of two guineas. This she repeated several times, and one day she gave him a
single guinea. This by some accident fell upon the floor, when the doctor
picked it up, and turning to the lady, with a significant look, said, "Madam, I
believe I have lost a guinea." "No, doctor, replied the lady, smartly, 'twas I
who lost the guinea."

One telling Charles XII. of Sweden, just before the battle of Narva, that the
enemy were three to one: "I am glad to hear it, answered the king, for then
there will be enough to kill, enough to take prisoners, and enough to run away."

A pert blockhead, who thought himself very smart, was once in company with
doctor Swift, who rising from his chair in a saucy manner, on something he
said, "for you must know, Mr. Dean, adds he, that I set up for a wit. "Do you?
says the Dean, very gravely, why then, take my advice, and sit down again."

Lord Ross, of Ireland, sold a gentleman a horse for a good round sum, which he
took upon his lordship's word, that he had no fault. About three weeks after,
he meets my lord; "Why, your lordship told me, says he, that your horse had no
fault, and he is blind of an eye." "Well, Sir, says my lord, that is only his
misfortune."

Charles F --, when a boy, delighted in arch tricks. In his walks, one Easter
Monday, meeting a blind woman, who was crying puddings and pyes, he took her by
the arm and said, "Come along with me, dame, I am going to Moorfields, where
this holiday time you may chance to meet with good custom." "Thank'e kindly,
Sir," says she: Whereupon he conducted her to Cripple-gate church, and placed
her in the middle aisle. "Now, says he, you are in Moorfields;" which she
believing to be true, immediately cried out, "Hot puddings and pies! hot
puddings and pies! come, they are all hot," etc. which caused the congregation
to burst into a loud fit of laughter, and the clerk came and told her she was
in church. "You are a lying son of a whore," says she. Which so enraged the
clerk, that he dragged her out of the church; she cursing and damning him all
the while; nor would she believe him till she heard the organ play.

One Irishman meeting another, asked what was become of their old acquaintance
Patrick Murphy? "Arrah, now, my dear honey, answered the other, poor Patty was
condemned to be hanged, but he saved his life by dying in prison."

Mrs. Macauly having published her Loose Thoughts, Mr. Garrick was asked if he
did not think it a strange title for a lady to choose? "By no means, replied
he, the sooner a woman gets rid of such thoughts, the better."

An Irish Lord, who, to say a bold word, had as little understanding as any man
of quality in the three kingdoms, was going down to his country seat, at a time
when the road between that and Dublin had been lately measured, and milestones
set up; his Lordship, who had not been that way since this new improvement, was
exceedingly pleased with it: now, you are to observe, that, as he came from
town, the stones were on his right hand; so that sitting in the same place of
the coach when he returned, they were consequently on his left; upon which, not
being able to account for so extraordinary a phenomenon, his Lordship observed
this to his Lady, that no doubt the stones were very convenient: "However, I
think it is taking a needless trouble, (says he,) to change them from side to
side, every two or three days thus."

A common liar, who, to the improvement of his faculty, had been a traveller,
was telling very strange stories of the remarkable things which he had met with
while he was abroad: among the rest, he said there were cannon so large in
Egypt, that once being in a calash, drawn by four horses, and a sudden shower
of rain falling, he drove into one of them for shelter, calash and all. "Oh!
says a gentleman, who was listening to him, I can vouch the truth of that
myself; for I remember I was at the very same time at the other end of it in a
post-chaise; and, upon your coming in at the mouth, I drove out at the
touchhole."

A rich farmer's son, who had been bred at the university, coming home to visit
his father and mother, they having one night a couple of fowls for supper, he
told them, that by logic and arithmetic, he could prove those two fowls to be
three. "Well, let us hear," said the old man. "Why this, cried the scholar, is
one, and this, continued he, is two, two and one you know make three." "Since
you have made it out so well, answered the old man, your mother shall have the
first fowl, I will have the second, and the third you may keep to yourself for
you great learning."

A justice of the peace seeing a parson on a very stately horse, riding between
Highgate and Hampstead, said to some gentlemen who were with him, "Do you see
what a beautiful horse that proud parson has got? I Will banter him a little. --
Doctor, said he, you do not follow the example of your Great Master, who was
humbly content to ride upon an ass." "Why really, Sir, replied the parson, the
king has made so many asses justices, that an honest clergyman can hardly find
one to ride, if he had a mind to it."

One day, during the last term, as a certain Solicitor, of no gentleman-like
appearance, was passing through Lincoln's Inn, with his professional bag under
his arm, he was accosted by a Jew, with, "Clowes to sell, Sir, old Clowes!" The
lawyer somewhat nettled at this address, from a supposition that Moses mistook
him for an inhabitant of Duke's Place, snatched a bundle of papers from their
damask repository, and replied, "No, Sir, they are all new suits."

A gentleman sat by another, whom he was very little acquainted with, in the
pit of Drury Lane play house, when seeing two women come into a box just
opposite to them, he turned about to his neighbor, and said, "'Sdeath, can you
tell me what ugly bitch that is;" "Who, Sir, answers the gentleman, that lady
coming into the box?" "'It Is my sister;" "Lord Sir, cries the other, greatly
confused, I beg ten thousand pardons; no, I mean that shocking monster with
her?" "Oh! Sir, answers he, that is my wife."

Mr. Macklin, the comedian, going to one of the fire offices, to ^nsur^ ^ome
property, was asked by the clerk, how he would please to have his name entered?
"Entered! replies the veteran of the sock, why I am only plain Charles Macklin,
a vagabond by act of parliament: but in compliment to the times, you set me
down Charles Macklin, Esquire, as they are now synonimous terms.

When the distinguished major Rogers took up his abode in a spunging house in
Southampton buildings, Holborn, like a true philosopher, he endeavored to make
his situation as agreeable as possible; he therefore one day, out of a whim,
sent cards of invitation to all the bailiffs who frequented the house, to come
and dine with him. They accordingly came, and being in high spirits, after
dinner, one of them being called upon for a toast, gave, "The d -- I ride rough
shod over the rascally part of the creation." When every body was going to
drink the toast, the major (who was at the bottom of the table) cried out,
"Stop, gentlemen, every man fill a bumper." -- "Oh, there is no occasion for
that," says one of the company. "Yes, but there is, says the major, consider it
is a family toast, and ought to be done justice to."

Lady Vane was at the public rooms in Bath, sitting on a bench among some of
her own sex, when a gentleman came up, and asked her ladyship how she did? no
sooner had they heard her name, than all the females about her began
immediately to change their places; upon which she cried after them, "Bless me,
ladies, don't be frightened, whoring is not catching, I hope."

Two sailors, one Irish the other English, agreed reciprocally to take care of
each other, in case of either being wounded in an action then about to
commence. It was not long before the Englishman's leg was shot off by a
cannon-ball; and on his calling to Paddy to carry him to the doctor, according
to their agreement, the other very readily complied; but he had scarcely got
his wounded companion on his back, when a second ball struck off the poor
fellow's head. Paddy, who, through the noise and disturbance, common in a sea
engagement, had not perceived his friend's last misfortune, continued to make
the best of his way to the surgeon, an officer observing him with a headless
trunk upon his shoulders, asked him where he was going? "To the doctor," says
Paddy. "The doctor! says the officer, why you blockhead the man has lost his
head." On hearing this he slung the body from his shoulders, and looking at it
very attentively, "by my shoul, says he, he told me it was his leg."

A sailor coming across Blackheath one evening, was stopped by a footpad, who
demanded his money, when a scuffle ensued, the tar took the robber, who meeting
some people, who persuaded him to bear away with his prize to the justice of
the peace, at Woolwich, which the tar did; and when the magistrate came to
examine into the assault, he said, he must take his oath, that he put him in
bodily fear, otherwise he could not commit the man: the sailor looking
steadfastly at the justice, answered, "He, d -- n him, he put me in bodily fear!
No, nor any that ever lived; therefore if that is the case, you may let him go;
for I will not swear to any such lie."

A gentleman who happened to sit in company with Foot at the Smyrna
coffee-house, took up a newspaper, saying, "he wanted to see what the ministry
were about:" look then among the robberies," says Foot.

A person going down the river in a boat, hailed a ship as he went by. "Ho!
says he, have you one wise man aboard of you?" To which they answered no:
"Then, says he, you are all fools."

A gentleman on his travels called his servant to the side of the post-chaise.
"Tom, says he, here is a guinea which is too light, and I can get nobody to
take it, do you see and part with it so^^ how or other on the road." "Yes, Sir,
(...) the footman, I will endeavor." When they came to their inn at night, the
gentleman called to his servant to know if he had passed off the guinea? "Yes,
Sir, says the man, I did it slily." "A^^! Tom, says the master, I fancy thou
art a (...) ^^rt of a fellow; but tell me how?" "Why, (...) says the footman,
the people refused it at (...), and so they did where your honor dined; (...)
as I had a groat to pay at the turnpike, I whip^^d ^im in between the
halfpence, and the man put ^n his pocket, and never saw it."

Jonathan Durrant, who was tried at the late Norfolk assizes, for privately
stealing a bridle from the shop of a sadler, through the humanity of the jury,
escaped the consequences of a capital conviction by their bringing in a verdict
guilty of stealing only; upon which, he immediately turned round and thanked
them for their lenity, at the same time archly adding, "I assure you,
gentlemen, I had no use for the bridle, I only meant to touch the bit, but I
now find I had very nearly got a halter.

Lady H -- one day said to her Lord, who is much attached to reading, "I wish I
was a book, that I might always have your company." "Then, answered he, I
should wish you an almanac, that I might change once a year."

It is related of Mr. Addison, who, though an elegant writer, was too diffident
of himself ever to shine as a public speaker, that at the time of debating the
Union Act in the house of Commons, he rose up, and addressing himself to the
Speaker, said, "Mr. Speaker, I conceive" -- but co^^^ (...) no farther; then
rising again, he said, (...) Speaker, I conceive" -- Still unable to proceed,
he sat down again. A third time he arose, and was still unable to say any thing
more than "Mr. Speaker, I conceive;" when a certain young member, who was
possessed of more ^ffrontery and volubility, arose and said, "Mr. Speaker, I am
very sorry to find that the honorable gentleman over the way has conceived
three times, and brought forth nothing."

Pope Sixtus V. while he was cardinal, feigned himself broken with age and
infirmities, and stooped to excess; looking upon this as one probable means of
his exaltation to the papal chair. It being observed to him soon after his
election, that he carried himself much more erect than he had lately done: "I
was looking for the keys of St. Peter, said he, but having found them, I have
no longer any occasion to stoop."

Mr. Pope, who, notwithstanding his diminutive and misshapen figure, was not a
little vain of his person, having asked Swift what they thought of him in
Ireland? "Why, said Swift, they think you are a very little man, but a very
great poet." Pope retorted with some acrimony, "They think the very reverse of
you in England."

Colonel Bond, who had been one of King Charles the First's judges, died a day
or two before Cromwell; and it was strongly reported every where, that the
Protector was dead* "No, said a gentleman, who knew better, he has only given
Bond to the devil for his future appearance."

As a gentleman in one of the coffee-houses in London, was reading to a group
of city politicians, the late famous speech of Lord Shelburne, in which his
lordship expressed his opinion, "That our very woman were able to beat back the
French, if they should attempt an invasion of this country." A naval gentleman
immediately jumped up, and striking his fist against the table, cried, "Right,
my boy! I don't doubt it, and I hope to see the day that some of the Monsieurs
shall receive a sound drubbing from a British ship manned with women."

A courtier being suspected of impotency, and always denying the charge, met
Benserade, who had often rallied him on it, and said, "My good Sir,
notwithstanding your precious wit, my wife was yesterday brought to bed." "What
then? said Benserade, nobody accused your wife."

Among the numerous complaints of the excessive high price of provisions, a
poor Irish gentlewoman, when enumerating her sufferings, said, "That let a
woman be ever so well inclined to keep lent, she could not do it on any
moderate terms, for they sold the flour for a pudding at double price, and did
not make the eggs half so large as they were used to be.

One of those wretches, who having overcome every principle of honesty,
affected (...) to disregard the feelings of nature, was condemned to be hanged.
When under the gallows, he uttered very profane and profligate ^ravado^s; and
at last, as the moment of execution arrived, he asked the hangman, "if he had
any commands for the other world?" KETCH, tying the noose, very deliberately
replied, " Yes, my friend -- I will trouble you with a LINE.

A good friar preaching upon the power of God, said he had created nothing but
what was perfect in its kind. A hunch-back wag waiting for him at the door,
said, "Father, I thank you for your sermon; but do you really think that I, for
instance, am perfect in my kind?" "Yes, said the father, gravely, a perfect
hunch-back, surely."

Sir Thomas Moore, on the day that he was beheaded, had a barber sent to him,
because his hair was long, which it was thought would make him more pitied by
the people. The barber came to him, and asked him, "Whether he would please to
be trimmed? "In good faith, honest fellow, said Sir Thomas, the king and I have
a suit for my head; and till the title be cleared, I will do no cost upon it."

During the troubles in the reign of king Charles the First, a country girl
came up to London in search of a place, as a servant maid; but not succeeding,
she applied herself to carrying out beer from a brew house, and was one of
those then called tub-women. The brewer, observing a well-looking girl in this
low occupation, took her into his family as a servant; and after awhile, she
behaving herself with much prudence and decorum, he married her; but he died
when she was yet a young woman, and left her a large fortune. The business of
the brewery was dropped, and the young woman was recommended to Mr. Hyde, (who
was afterward the great earl of Cl^rendon) finding the widow's fortune very
considerable, married her. Of this marriage there was no other issue than a
daughter, who was afterward the wife of James II. and mother of Mary and Anne,
queens of England.

A gentleman, the first time of his coming to Bath, was very extravagantly
charged for every thing by the persons in whose house he lodged, as well as by
others whom he had occasion to deal with; of which, some time after,
complaining to beau Nash, "Sir, replied the latter, they have acted toward you
on truly Christian principles." "How so?" says the man. "Why, returned Nash,
you was a stranger, and they took you in."

LOST.

Supposed to be stolen from a boarding-school near Turnham Green, a beautiful
young lady, aged 16, daughter of the late earl of Froth, and heiress to
L.20,000, independent of her mother's jointure. She was observed to walk in the
back garden after dinner with Mr. Allemand the dancing master, and is supposed
to have made her escape with him through the yew-hedge. She took nothing with
her but her mistress's dram bottle out of the best china closet, the first
volume of Virtue rewarded, Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, and the Marriage
Service torn out of the Common Prayer Book. They are supposed to be gone to
Scotland.

An Irish lawyer, of the Temple, having occasion to go to dinner, left this
direction in the keyhole: "Gone to the Elephant and Castle, where you shall
find me; and if you cannot read this, carry it the stationers, and he shall read
it for you."

A soldier saying, at Thermopylae, that the arrows of the Barbarians were so
numerous as to hide the s^n: "Then, said Leonides, we shall have the great
advantage o^ fighting in the shade".

Few men would succeed in their gallantries if the women were always to conduct
themselves with the prudence of the lady, who being urged by her lover to
consent to his happiness; answered him as follows: "When I was about to be
married. I took the advice of my parents; now that I am married, I obey my
husband's: go, therefore, to him; make your proposals, and if he consents, be
assured that I shall have no objection."

A lawsuit arose in an university, upon the point, Whether the doctors in law,
or the doctors in medicine, should hold the precedence? The judge asked the
council. Whether it was usual for the thief or the hangman to walk first at an
execution? Being answered, that the thief always walked first. "Then, said the
judge, let the doctors in law have the precedence; and let the doctors in
medicine be next in rank."

The Duke Philip of Borgona said, "Of great lords, speak neither well nor ill;
because, if you speak well, you lie; and if ill, you are in danger."

A gentleman who assisted the Count de Cabra in putting on his armor before a
battle, perceiving him tremble, asked, what could cause this emotion in a man
of such known bravery? The Count answered, "My flesh trembles at the dangers
into which my soul will lead it."

A girl being deflowered, was bitterly reproached by her confessor, who said
she had lost a treasure never to be regained. "Ah, said she, how difficult it
is to keep this treasure, when every clown has a key to it?"

Two scholars being in a tavern, fell a talking, in presence of their host, of
the great Platonic year; in which, they said, after thirty thousand years,
every thing shall revert to its former state. The host seemed much pleased with
the novelty of the idea, one of them said to the landlord, that seeing every
thing was, in thirty thousand years; to revert to its present condition, they
hoped he would trust them till then, and they would pay him most faithfully.
The host, who was a shrewd fellow replied, "Gentlemen, I will trust you with
all my heart; but, as thirty thousand years ago, you must have been just this
sum in my debt, I must insist on being paid that first."

The archbishop of Toledo standing at a window, and seeing a clown beat his ass
most unmercifully, opened the casement, and called out, "Have done, have done,
you scoundrel, else I shall have you whipped." The clown answered, "Your pardon,
good master; I did not know my ass had friends at court."

A remarkable eater, who piqued himself upon devouring as much as six other men
could manage, was brought before Henry IV. expecting that monarch would make
him a present to keep his chops a going. The king, who had heard of this hero
of the platter, asked him, if it was true that he could eat as much as six?
"Yes, Sir," answered he. "And do you work in proportion?" added the king.
"Sire, replied he, I work a^ much as any other of my strength and age." "Get
along, exclaimed the king, had I six such as thee in my kingdom, I should cause
them all to be hanged, to prevent a famine."

A witty divine receiving an invitation to dinner, wrote on the ten of hearts,
by a young lady of great beauty, merit and fortune. This the gentleman thought
a good opportunity to give the lady a distant hint of his hopes; he wrote
therefore the following lines on the same card, and returned it by her own
servant: Your compliments, lady, I pray now forbear,
For old English service is much more sincere;
You Have sent me ten hearts, but the tythe's only mine,
So give me one heart, and take back the other nine.


Sir Watkin William Win talking to a friend about the antiquity of his
family, which he carried up to Noah, was told that he was a mere mushroom. "Ay!
said he, how so, pray?" "Why, replied the other, when I was in Wales, a
pedigree of a particular family was shown to me; it filled up above five large
skins of parchment, and about the middle of it was a note in the margin: --
About this time the world was created."

The elector of Cologne is likewise an archbishop. One of the electors swearing
one day profanely, asked a peasant, who seemed to wonder, what he was so
surprised at? "To hear an archpishop swear," answered the peasant. "I swear,
replied the ele^tor, not as an archbishop, but as a prince." "But, my lord,
said the peasant, when the prince goes to the devil what will become of the
archbishop?"

Silence! keep silence in the court! said, one day, an angry judge, why will
you not keep silence? Here we have judged a dozen causes this morning, and have
not heard a word of one of them."

Never did an Irishman utter a better bull, than did an honest John; who being
asked by a friend, "Has your sister got a son or a daughter?" answered, "Upon
my soul, I do not know whether I am an uncle or an aunt."

A Westminster justice taking coach in the city, and being set down at Young
Man's coffee-house, Charing Cross, the driver demanded eighteen pence as his
fare. The justice asked him, "if he would swear that the ground came to the
money?" The man said, "he would take his oath of it." The justice replied,
"Friend, I am a magistrate;" and pulling the book out of his pocket,
administered the oath; and then gave the fellow his sixpence, saying, "He must
reserve the shilling to himself for the affidavit."

Rochester, in king Charles the Second's time, was as famous for his frolic and
humor, as he was infamous for his vices; one day as he was walking in the park,
with some of his gay companions, he saw Dr. Barrow, one of the greatest
divines, and the greatest mathematician of his time, musing along the Mall, in
his usual contemplative manner; and so he proposed to make up to him, and have
some drollery, as he termed it. His companions were ready enough to attend him;
and upon meeting the doctor, Rochester, making a very low bow, with great
vivacity said, "Doctor, a good morning to you -- I am exceeding glad to see you
-- I am yours to the very center of gravity." The doctor, who was not easy to
be surprised, perceived his drift, and with all the composure in the world,
returned the lowly bow, and said, "My lord, I am yours to the Antipodes." This
put him to a short pause; but as wit is seldom at a loss -- "Doctor, says he, I
am yours to the lowest pit of hell." -- "There then, replied the doctor, I
will leave you." -- And so pursued his walk.

A few days after the late lord L -- married the buxom Miss H. he found it
necessary to withdraw from the business of love for a little while; but not
caring to let his wife into the secret, he procured a subpoena to be sent to
him to attend as an evidence at one of the courts in London; which, showing
her, he took leave with seeming regret, and set forward on his journey, and was
absent about a month. A few days after his return home, the said nobleman and
his lady were looking out at a window, at their cows grazing in a field
adjoining: "My dear, said he, what is become of the bull which used to be so
brisk among the cows here?" Oh! child, says she, he is subpoena'd, I suppose, to
the other end of the field."

A Highwayman and Chimney Sweeper; or, No Distinction at the Gallows.

A highwayman and a chimney-sweeper were condemned to be hanged the same day at
Tyburn, the first for an exploit on the highway, the latter for a more ignoble
robbery. The highwayman was dressed in scarlet, and mounted the cart with
alacrity; the chimney-sweeper followed him slowly. While the clergyman was
praying with fervor, the gay robber was attentive; and the other approached
near to his fellow sufferer to partake of the same benefit, but met with a
repulsive look from his companion, which kept him at some distance. But
forgetting this angry warning, he presumed still to come nearer; when the
highwayman, with some disdain, said, "Keep farther off, cannot you?" "Sir,
replied the sweep, I will not keep off; and let me tell you, I have as much right
to be here as you."

A silly fop being in company with a lady, and wanting his servant, cried out,
"Where is my blockhead?" "Upon your shoulders," replied the lady.

A dancer saying to a Spartan, "You cannot stand so long on one leg as I can."
"True, answered the Spartan, but any goose can."

Curious board at a country hair dressers: ISAAC FAC-TOTUM. Barber,
Perriwig-Maker, Surgeon, Parish Clerk, Schoolmaster, Blacksmith, and
Man-Midwife.

Shaves for a penny, cuts hair for twopence. Young ladies genteelly educated.
Lamps highted by the year or quarter. Also Psalm-singing and horse-shoeing by
the real maker. Likewise makes and mends all sorts of boots and shoes, teaches
the hoboy and Jew's harp, cuts corns, bleeds and blisters on the lowest terms.
Cowtilions and other dances, taught at home or abroad. Also deals wholesale and
retail. Sells all sorts of stationary ware, together with blacking-balls, red
herrings, fine gingerbread, coals, scrubbing-brushes, treacle, mouse traps, and
all other sorts of sweetmeats. N. B. I teach Jografy, and them outlandish
kind of things. A ball on Wednesdays and Fridays. All performed (God willing)
by me, Isaac Fac-Totum.

The following is a true copy of a Painter's bill, at Cirencester, delivered to
the Churchwardens of an adjoining parish:

Mr. Charles Forbes, Churchwarden of Siddington.
To Joseph Cook, Dr.

To mending the Commandments, altering the Belief, and making a new Lord's
Prayer, 1 l. 1 s. 0 d..


Curious inscription at Wigan in Lancashire: "James Williams, Parish Clerk,
Saxtone, Town-Cryer, and Bellman -- makes and sells all sorts of
haberdasharies, groceries, etc. likewise hair and wigs dressed, and cut, on the
shortest notice. N. B. I keeps an evening school, where I teach at reasonable
rates, reading, writing and singing.

N. B. I play the hooboy occasionally, if wanted.

N. B. My shop is next door, where I bleed, draws, and shoo horses with the
greatest scil.

N. B. Children taught to dance, if agreeable, at 6 d. per week, by me J.
Williams, who buy and sell old iron and coals -- ^^oos cleaned and mended.

N. B. A hat and pair of stockings to be cudgelled for, the best in 5, on Shrof
Tushday. For particulars encuire within, or at the horse shoo and bell, near
the church, on the other side of the way.

N. B. Look over the door for the sight of the three pigeons.

N. B. I sell good Ayle, and sometimes Cider. Lodgins for single men."

Two Irishmen having traveled on foot, from Chester to Barnet, were very much
tired ^ith their journey; and the more sto, when they were told they had still
about ten miles to London. "By my shoul, cries one of them, it is (...) five
miles a-piece, let us even walk on."

A French clergyman, whose parishioners had many of them not made the most
honorable exit out of this bad world, insisted, when he was baptizing one of
their children, (...) be paid the ^uptial and burial fees, as well as those of
baptism; and when the parents asked the reason of this extraordinary demand, he
replied, "Because I know, as soon as he is grown up, he will cheat me of my
dues, by going to Paris to be ^anged."

As a thief was going to the g^llows out of the town, near Norwich, many boys
ran to see the execution; which he seeing, ca^ed to them, saying, "Boys, you
need not make so much haste, for there will be no sport till I come."

Mr. Edmund Burke, the Irish orator, was telling Mr. Garrick, one day at
Hampton, that all bitter things were hot; "Ay, says Mr. Garrick, what do you
think, Mr. Burke, of bitter cold weather?"

A young fellow was extolling a lady's beauty very highly, and one of his
companions allowed she had beauty, but that she had a bad set of teeth. "Very
true, but she is a fine woman in spite of her teeth."

The other day a captain of a vessel, had a quantity of coals to put on board;
as a great number lay scattered about the wharf, he thought it were best to
have a ^ake, that they might more speedily collect them together. He went
himself into a counting house and enquired of the merchant, whether he could
have tho loan of a rake for a few minutes. The merchant smiled, and looking
significantly round at his clerks, said, "I believe I have a number of them,
but not one that will readily answer your purpose." The captain, comprehending
the pun, very wittily replied, "I think you are quite right, sir, for neither
of them, I suppose, would wish to be hauled over the coals.

At the commencement of the late war, the very women became desirous to
signalize the zeal they felt in their country's cause. At a meeting of the
gentlewomen belonging to the county of Bristol, in Pennsylvania, they made a
large collection of money, to fit out a regiment raising there, and wrought a
magnificent suit of colors for their use, with devices and ^^ottos of their
own composing. The gentlewoman who was appointed by the others to present them
in their name to the regiment, made a very gallant and spirited speech on that
occasion, which she concluded by giving it in charge to the officers and
soldiers, never to desert the colors of the ladies, if they ever wished, that
the ladies should list under their banners.

Sir George Rooke, before he was made admiral, had served as a captain of
marines upon their first establishment; and being quartered upon the coast of
Essex, the ague made great havoc amongst his men. The minister of the village
where he lay was so harrassed with his duty, that he refused to bury any more
of them, without being paid his accustomed fees. The captain made no words; but
the next that died, he ordered him to be conveyed to the minister's house, and
laid upon the table in his great hall: this greatly embarrassed the poor
clergyman; who, in the fullness of his heart, sent the captain word, "That if
he would cause the dead man to be taken away, he would never more dispute it
with him; but would readily bury him and his whole company for nothing."

The Three Kisses.

In the summer 1782, a certain baronet sent his lady down to his country ^eat,
being himself detained by business in town, he was prevented for several days
from following her. In the mean (...) time, one of his most intimate friends
and dearest companions, proposed to the knight to pay a visit to his lady in
his absence, with a view to divert her in her retirement, until the arrival of
her husband. The knight not only gave his proposal a friendly reception, but
gave him the following introductory bill, addressed to his lady: "My dear,
"Please to pay the bearer, on sight, the full sum, or number of three kisses
-- value received -- and place to account of, My dear, yours for ever."




The lady, like an obedient wife, honored the bill on demand, but the friend,
unluckily continued to draw such large sums of the same commodity upon credit,
the whole bank of love was at length exhausted, and the lady, on the arrival of
her husband, (the knight) found herself a bankrupt in love to him. In a word
the affair was discovered, and a divorce was sued for and obtained. Never were
the poet's words better verified than in this trifling business.

What dire effects from little causes spring!
Yet trifling as it is, it well serves to show that beauty is not to be trifled
with; and that the jewel chastity can never be guarded too strongly from the
hands of rude spo^ers, because the least touch will sully it.

A number of Irish gentlemen coming on a party of pleasure to London, a few
weeks since, were becalmed midway between the harbor of Dublin and Parkgate.
After surveying for some time the watery expanse, they had recourse to that
which is the general refuge in the moments of suspense or difficulty, and a
potent bowl of punch was ordered in the cabin. To that they were no sooner
seated, than, still warm with recent patriotism, they characteristically drank,
"The land we live in, and prosperity to it."

Lord Mansfield, being in one of the counties, on the circuit, a poor woman was
indicted for witchcraft. The inhabitants of the place were exasperated against
her. Some witnesses deposed, that they had seen her walk in the air, with her
feet upwards and her head downwards. Lord Mansfield heard the evidence with
great tranquillity, and perceiving the temper of the people, whom it would not
have been prudent to irritate, he thus addressed them: "I do not doubt that
this woman has walked in the air, with her feet upwards, since you have all
seen it; but she has the honor to be born in England as well as you and I, and
consequently, cannot be judged but by the laws of the country, nor punished but
in proportion as she has violated them. Now I know not one law that forbids
walking in the air with the feet upwards. We have all a right to do it with
impunity. I see no reason, therefore, for prosecution; and this poor woman may
return home when she pleases." -- I his speech had its proper effect: it
pleased the auditory, and the woman retired from court without molestation.

During the late war, when draughts were made from the militia, to recruit the
continental army, a certain captain gave liberty to the men, who were draughted
from his company, to make their objections, if they had any, against going into
the service. Accordingly, one of them, who had an impediment in his speech,
came up to the captain, and made his bow. "What is your objection?" said the
captain. "I ca a-an't go, answers the man, because I st-st-stutter." "Statter!
says the captain; you don't go there to talk but to fight." "Aye, but they will
p-p-put me upon g-g-guard, and a man may go ha-ha-half a mile before I can say,
Wh-wh-who goes there?" -- "Oh, that is no objection, for they will place some
other sentry with you, and he can challenge, if you can fire." "Well, b-b-but I
may be ta-ta-ken, and run through the g-g guts, before I can cry
qu-qu-quarter." This last plea prevailed, and the captain out of humanity,
(laughing heartily) dismissed him.

A poor fellow in Dublin some time since, was taken up for stealing a bo^led
leg of mutton, and was caught eating it. When he was put to the bar, lord
Earlsfort asked of what profession he was? The prisoner replied* a Barrister.
"Pray, continued his lordship, how came you to the bar?" "In the same manner,
says the fellow, that you did -- I eat my way to it."

A farmer in New Jersey, going to catch his horse which was in pasture, but
D^bb^n, being one of those who could never find so good a relish in the bitt as
in a mouthful of good clover, not seeming to relish the idea, led his honest
master a most tiresome dance several times round the field, and that perhaps
without once considering that his master might possibly be in a hurry, which in
fact h^ was, his business being that of going for a physician. The man at
length that he might not run himself to death after such an ungrateful brute,
betook himself to stratagem, and made of some rails which happened to be handy,
a long narrow pen in one corner of the field, into which he succeeded in
driving Dobbin, "Now said the farmer, I have you safe enough," and went in
after him, but while he was putting on the bridle, the horse still unwilling to
yield, threw himself furiously round and got away again, but not without
throwing his master uncivilly among the rails, which bruised him not a little,
and set him to swearing; who in the height of his passion threw the bridle
after the horse saying -- "Go to h^ll with you -- I Will soon be after you."

A brawny limbed lun^ti^ having broke loose from his cell, ran up into the
third story of the hospital unobserved, and took refuge in a chamber
appropriated to the use of the physicians. One of the medical students
happening to enter the room shortly after was struck with surprise at the
appearance of the lunatic, who abruptly accosted him with a look of
desperation, "Jump immediately out of that window, sirrah, or I Will throw you
out." "Oh, that would be a mere trifle, answered the student composedly but,
continued he, very earnestly, if you will let me go below I will perform a much
greater wonder. I will then jump into the window." The lunatic beholding him
with eyes of astonishment and credulity, b^de him go, and by this fortunate
turn of expression he saved his life.

Two sailors, who were traveling one fall to Philadelphia, stopped on the road
at the inn of an historical old gentleman, a distant relation of Baron
Munchausen, and called for a dinner. In the interim our host broached his
magazine of miracles, and informed our roving tars, that had they arrived
sooner he could have shown them the greatest wonder in the known world. "I was
blessed this year, said he, with such a miraculous and luxuriant crop of Indian
corn, that in ploughing it I was obliged to have a candle carried before me at
noon day, in order to light me along the furrows, for such was the darkness
occasioned by the monstrous leaves of corn. When husking time came on, the corn
had grown to such an amazing height, that I was under the necessity of having
ladders erected against the stalks before I could have it gathered." "By St.
Christopher, replied one of the tars, who was not inclined to be out done, that
is not half so great a wonder as we have seen, for before our late arrival on
the American coast, we were overtaken by such a hard gale of wind, that it took
ten men to hold one man's hair upon his head."

Not long since a swaggering blade, about three sheet in the wind, as the
sailors express it, made his way into a barber's shop, sat himself down and
desired to be shaved. The barber being somewhat of a wag, took advantage of the
gentleman'^ situation, and as he had a strong beard, thinking to make him
appear ludicrous, shaved it but half off. When this was done the gentleman
arose and viewing himself in the glass, exclaimed, Why -- why you d -- n'd ras
-- rascal you have but half shaved me. No, sir, replied the barber, I thought
there was no occasion to do more, for you was half shaved when you came.

One sailor coming to see another one pay-day, desired to borrow twenty
shillings of him: The monied man fell to telling out the sum in shillings, but
a half-crown thrusting its head in, put him out, and he began to tell again:
but then an impertinent crown-piece was as officious as his half-brother had
been, and again interrupted the tale; so that taking up a handful of silver, he
cried, "Here Jack, give me a handful when your ship's paid; what a pox
signifies counting it?"

During a conversation between a certain knight of biographic fame (Sir John
Hawkins) and a celebrated female friend of Dr. Johnson, the lady disapproved of
the greater part of those certainly reprehensible memoirs. "At least, Madam,"
answered the writer, "you must allow that they are passable." "I thank you for
that word," replied the fair censurer; "they are passable in every point of
examination. You might have passed over the compilation of them; we might have
passed over the perusal of them, and they will pass over to o^livion in a much
shorter time than you, perhaps, conceive."

An unprincipled peer being told by a friend, (...) that one of his creditors
wished, since he had no chance of receiving the principal of his debt, to be at
least paid the interest -- replied with more wit than honor -- ^'It is not my
interest to pay the principal -- nor is it my principle to pay the interest."

A worthy old gentleman in New Jersey, having a numerous family, consisting
chiefly of boys, and many of them grown up, was sorry to find that none of them
inclined to shift for themselves, but preferred lounging at home with their
mamma, who was extremely fond of them -- The old gentleman coming home one cold
evening, and not one of the family, (who were all wedged in round the fire,)
moving to make room for him, he stood still a few moments, and then desired his
wife to go up stairs and bring him down his best suit -- she much surprised,
enquired the cause, and hesitated till he repeated the request several times --
she then brought them, when he very deliberately began to pull off the clothes
he had on, saying at the same time, "I Will go and spark somebody, and try to get
another home, since none of the rest of you will.*

Some scholars, on a time, going to steal, by the way they warned a novice
amongst them to make no noise, for fear of spoiling the game; but he no sooner
espied some of them, than he cried out aloud, Ecce cuniculi multi; whereupon
the conies ran with all speed into their burrows; on which his fellows chiding
him -- Who the devil, said he, would have thought thot conies understood Latin?

A quaker came before two judges at an assize in Ireland, as a witness, when he
made frequent use of the words also and likewise: "Prithee man, cried one of
their lordships, why do you vary these words so often, have not they both the
same signification? "No truly, said the quaker, their meaning is very
different: as for example, Sergeant Bettsworth is a judge upon this bench, thou
art one also, but not like wise."

A soldier stood upon the stage at the play of Don Carlos prince of Spain,
which affected him so much, that he burst into a violent passion of tears; and
the duke of York, (afterward king James the second) who happened to be at the
theater, was so pleased with the fellow's sensibility, that he sent him five
guineas: the next night the duke was at the play again, which was the comedy of
Rule a Wife and have a Wife; when the sentinel upon the stage, who had heard
how liberally his comrade's weeping had been rewarded, began to blubber and cry
in a most lamentable manner; and he met with his reward also; for the duke
ordered him to be whipped for misbehaviour on duty.

Facetious Epigrams, Epitaphs, etc.
EPIGRAMS.
Teague's Request of the Executioner.
DO tie the rope below my arms, my dear,
Says Teague to Ketch, as he was on the wreck,
Because, do you see, it makes me feel so queer
As I Am so very ticklish round the neck.
A witty Thought of a Barber.
Sure nature's laws should be revered
Since woman was refused a beard;
Her tongue, inured to endless din,
So wildly wags her restless chin,
That had stern sat or nature craved
This sweet dear creature should be shaved,
Even barbers of the greatest note
Would cut the pretty prattler's throat.
How can it be that Satan left Job his dear wife?
Why, (answered Hodge, gravely) he left her for strife,
For he knew women lead men a tarnation life.
Upon an old Maid.
Ruth's truly handsome, says old Dick the wag,
Zounds, says a stripling, she is a perfect hag;
'Sdeath man, cries Dick, your father well, I know,
Swore she was lovely forty years ago!
Neighbor Darby and Farmer John's Wife.
"What makes John call you ever his better half,
When you're his wife?" says Darby with a laugh,
Because, says she, he tells you what is true,
I give him half and the other half to you.
On a Traveller who returned no wiser than he went.
A numskull went across the main
And came a blockhead home again.
On a pale Lady.
Whence comes it, that in Clara's face
The lily only has a place? --
Is it, that the absent rose
Is gone to paint her husband's nose?
Alike in temper and in life,
A drunken husband, sottish wife,
She a scold, a bully he --
The devil's in it they cannot agree.
A landlord, a rogue, put upon me a queer hum,
I asked him for punch, and he gave me mere rum.
Oh, let me die in peace! Eumenus cried,
To a hard creditor by his bedside.
How! die! roared Gripus; thus your debts evade!
No, no, sir, you shall not die, till I am paid.
Jack, eating rotten cheese, did say,
Like Sampson, I my thousand slay:
I vow, quoth Roger, so you do,
And with the self same weapon too.
I am unable, yonder beggar cries,
To stand or go; -- if he says true, he lies.
I heard last week, friend Edward, thou was dead;
I Am very glad to hear it too, cries Ned.
Tom's coach and six! -- Whither in such haste going?
But a short journey -- To his own undoing.
The Miser's Feast.
His chimney smokes! it is some omen dire;
His neighbors are alarmed and cry out fire!
The Giant's angling.
His angle rod made of a sturdy oak,
His line a cable, which in storms never broke.
His hook he baited with a dragon's tail,
And sat upon a rock, and bobb'd for whale.
Brutus unmoved heard how his Portia fell;
Should Jack's wife die, he would behave as well.
Says a husband, when taking a leave of this life.
Why weep you such torrents of tears, my dear wife;
Alas, cried the lady, and fetched a deep sigh,
I Am weeping because I Am afraid you will not die.
Let Us throw all ^uckold's over, Pantus cries,
First learn to swim, my dear, his wife replies.
On being turned out of a public House, after having spent all his Money.
Written with Chalk on a Window-board.
Has God alone perfection, do you say,
When many perfect things we see each day
The poor have some perfections -- some the rich,
Here Is mother Dashwood, she is a perfect bitch.
A Couplet written on a Dog's Collar.
I am my master's dog, it is true,
But tell me, friend, whose dog are you?
Tom sighs for the day, when he will be wed,
But Molly, his fair one, more wise,
Considers the bliss she will partake of in bed:
For the night after marriage she sighs.
On a great House adorned with Statues.
The walls are thick, the servants thin,
The gods without, the devil within.
Says Kate to Ralph, in fire and lure,
With leg exposed to view, sir,
This is the lovesick member sure
When one and one make two, sir.
Quoth Ralph, a wag in gallantry,
The figure's not uncivil;
Yet Kate when one and one make three,
It plays, you know, the devil.
One morn, said lovely Chloe, with a laugh,
To her old man, "Here read your epitaph."
My epitaph, he! he! now I Am a bed?
"Here lies old Buff to marriage pleasures dead."
THE RIB.
Adam alone could not be easy,
So he must have a wife an' please ye;
But how did he procure his wife,
To cheer his solitary life?
Why from a rib ta'n from his side,
Was made this fascinating bride.
"But how did he the pain beguile?
"Sir, he slept sweetly all the while."
"But when his rib was re-apply'd,
"In woman's form to Adam's side,
"How then, I pray you, did it answer?"
"He never slept so sweet again sir."
A Receipt for a Critic.
Take one dram of stale sense, a scruple of wit,
A pound of learning, of taste a small bit;
One ounce and one half of Aristotle's old rules,
A bottle of nonsense gleaned from the schools;
An handful of wormwood, of onions a load,
The brains of a calf -- the heart of a toad;
The eye of a mole, the nails of a cat,
The teeth of a mouse, the wings of a bat;
The purse of old poverty, hu^^ger's lank jaw,
A gander's long windpipe, the monkey's crimp maw;
Take of this mixture, each morning a gill,
You may censure and backbite as much as you will.
Brother bucks, your glasses drain,
Tom, it is strong and sparkling red --
Never fear! t'wont reach my brain --
"No -- that is true -- but 'twill your head."
Says Rackett, "D -- n the dice! I Have spent
Two thousand pounds of yearly rent."
Good Sense replied -- "You only show
Fortune was blind to give it you."
On Meg.
Meg lets her husband boast of rule and riches,
But she rules the roast, and wears the breeches.
One asked a madman, if a wife he had?
A wife! quoth he, I never was so mad.
EPITAPHS.
St. Bennet's, Paul's Wharf, London.
HERE lies one More, and no more than he,
One More, and no more, how can that be,
Why one More and no more may well lie here alone,
But here lies one More, that is more than one.
Sure heaven is wondrous kind to me
Since here my wife in silence has,
But, ah, what grief to (...) that she
Must at the r^^urrection rise!
Selby Churchyard, Yorkshire.
Here lies the body of poor Frank Row,
Parish clerk, and grave stone cutter,
And this is writ to let you know,
What Frank for others used to do,
Is now for Frank done by another.
Here old John Randall lies, who telling of his tale.
Lived three score years and ten, such virtue was in ale,
Ale was his meet, ale, was his drink, ale did his heart revive,
And if he could have drank his ale, he still had been alive.
On an idle Man.
The laziest lounger of the human race.
Beneath this dirt has found a resting place;
Slouthful in life, he could not be more blessed,
For now the lubber has eternal rest.
Here lies my wife, here may she lie,
For she is at rest and so am I.
On a Lawyer.
Here lies within this dusty grave,
A most litigious wicked knave:
Death now has summoned him to court,
Where all must in their turns resort;
At length, poor fool, he is sent to jail,
And death, his plaintiff, never takes bail*
TOASTS and SENTIMENTS
A Head to earn, and a heart to spend.

All fortune's daughters but the eldest.

Constancy in love and sincerity in friendship.

Friendship without interest, and love without deceit.

May the men leave roving, and the women deceit.

Great men honest, and honest men great.

Happy to meet, happy to part, and happy to meet again.

Health, joy, and mutual love.

Health of body, peace of mind, a clean shirt, and a guinea.

To every one that you and I know.

Independency, and a genteel sufficiency.

May the single be married, and the married be happy.

May we kiss whom we please, and please whom we kiss.

May we always be able to resist the assaults of prosperity and adversity.

May temptation never conquer virtue.

May we never know sorrow but by name.

May the evening's diversion bear the morning's reflection.

More friends and less need of them.

Peace and plenty.

May the miser grow poor, and the benevolent rich.

May our passions be slaves to us, not we to our passions.

Short shoes and long corns to the enemies of America.

CONUNDRUMS.
1 WHO was the first that bore arms? Adam. 2 What is that which God never made,
and commanded not to be made, and yet was made, and has a soul to be saved? A
cuckold. 3 Why are men like timber? Because they often prop a gate. 4 Why is a
kept mistress like a rudder? Because she has her rake. 5 Why are Rochester's
works like a chimney sweeper? Because they are smutty. 6 Why are the beaux both
light and heavy? Because they are feathers and lead. 7 Why are young girls like
an old ship? Because they want breaking up. 8 Which is the wonderful plant?
That which grows in the hand. 9 Which is the best, a shoulder of mutton or
heaven? A shoulder of mutton, for nothing is better than heaven, and a shoulder
of mutton is better than nothing. 10 What is it that God never sees, kings
seldom see, but you reader often see? An equal. 11 Why is a prime minister like
a May Pole? Because it is a high post. 12 Why is swearing like an old coat?
Because it is a bad habit. 13 Why is the second horse in a race like the main
mast of a ship? Because he is next the foremast. 14 Why is thy hat, reader,
like a butcher's shop? Because there is a calves head in it. 15 Why is a man
fishing like a pair of breeches? Because he has a line-in. 16 Why is a silly
fellow like a feather-bed? Because he is soft. 17 Why is a bad pen like a
wicked man? Because it wants mending. 18 Why is a good sermon like a plumb
pudding? Because there is reasons in it. 19 Why is Ireland like a bottle of
wine? Because it has a cork in it. 20 Why is a tailor like a sprout? Because he
will cabbage. 21 Why is the moon like a weather cock? Because it often changes.
22 Why is a good play like a ring of bells? Because it has clappers. 23 Why is
a first floor like a lie? Because it is a story raised. 24 Why is a good cook
like a woman of fashion? Because he dresses well. 25 Why is a false note like a
bar of iron? Because it is forged. 26 Why is a bunch of keys like a head of
hair? Because it has locks belonging to it. 27 Why is a nobleman like a book?
Because he has a title 28 Why is a pretty woman like an oat cake; Because she
is often toasted. 29 Why is a full dressed lady like a hogshead; Because she is in
a hoop. 30 Why is a woman's face like a mountebank? Because it is often in a
mob. 31 Why is a pack of rakes like a pack of bad hounds? Because they are sad
dogs. 32 Why is a woman with child like a gentleman? Because she shows her
breeding 33 Why are soldiers like some doors? Because they are listed. 34 Why
is your saddle like a mule? Because it is between a horse and an ass. 35 Why is
a church bell like a good story? Because it is often tolled. 36 Why is a little
man like a good book? Because he is often looked over. 37 Why is a madman like
two men? Because he is a man beside himself. 38 Why is the gallows the last
refuge of a condemned man; Because he has nothing else to depend upon.
A REBUSS.
Howsoever strange the expression,
There Is a thing in your possession,
Which your acquaintance never had,
Yet oft'ner use than you it is said.
Solve it if you can.

SONGS.
Rural Sports, and the happy Return of Love. An original SONG.
THE landscape in darkness is clad
And nature seems lost in repose,
The moon looks as thin as a shad
And CANCER has bit off her nose:
She Is dressed up in sheepskins for shawls
And coaxes the stars to her bed;
As she reels to the ocean, she hauls
A nightcap of clouds over her head.
Young Crispin comes bloated with sighs
To Bella his barefooted queen,
"Come, rise up," the cow-driver cries,
"Let Us gambol like colts on the green;
"We'll hie to the cow-pen for air,
"Come, quick Bella, put on your cloak,
"I Will weave for your beatiful hair
"A garland of cabbage and poke.
"To the deepest recess of the vales
"We'll scamper as brisk as the fleas,
"What harm though you show your toe-nails
"And mud plaster'd up to your knees!
"We'll dash over ditch, swamp and brook,
"Or bounce over the hills if you choose,
"As we care not a curse how we look
"We'll sigh not for stockings nor shoes.
"Let Us dance with the nymphs and the swains;
"Call Martha and long bearded Dick --
"With whis^ey ^^e'll fuddle our brains
"And then see how high we can kick.
"Old Potgut, the ^inker, full hard
"On ^^rrels and hogsheads shall drum,
"And David the earth grubbing bard,
"His rhymes on a banjo shall thrum.
"But, oh, whence proceeds this soft pain!
"Sure Be^la, you have scalded my soul;
"I Am in love and poor Crispin again
"Must yield to your cruel control!
"My heart I imagined was tough,
"Like soal-lea^her -- bomb-proof to sighs,
"But love! alas love has blown snuff,
"Or pepper, or salt in my eyes!"
He ceased, then she buss'd him and sighed,
His cares in an instant all fled --
Her mouth when she kissed was so wide
I thought she would bite off his head.
She plied her long nose to his face,
No bull ever parry'd such butts,
She gave such an iron ^^^brace
As like to have squeen'd out his guts.
THE RUSH-LIGHT.
SIR Solomon Simons, when he did wed,
Blushed black as a crow, his fair lady di^ blush light,
The clock struck twelve, they were both tuck^ in bed,
In the chimney a rush light, a little farthing rush light,
Fall, lall, lal, lal, la,
A little farthing rush-light.
Sir Solomon gave his lady a nudge,
Cries he lady Simons, there is vastly too much light,
Then Sir Solomon, says she, to get up you cannot grudge,
And blow out the rush-light,
A little farthing rush-light,
Fall, lal, lal, lal, la,
A little farthing rush-light.
Sir Solomon then out of bed pops his toes,
And vastly he swore and very much did curse light,
And then to the chimney Sir Solomon he goes,
And he puffed at the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light,
Fall, lal, lal, lal, la,
The little farthing rush-light.
Lady Simons got out in her nightcap so neat,
And over the carpet she did brush light,
And there she ^ound Sir Solomon in a heat,
Puffing a^ the rush-light,
And she puffed at the rush-light,
But neither of the family,
Could blow out the rush-light.
Sir Solomon and Lady, their breath quite gone,
Rang the bells in a rage determined to crush light,
Half asleep in his shirt then up came John,
And he puffed at the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light,
But neither of the family,
Could blow out the rush-light.
Black coacheemen and maids, very near all in buff,
Came and swore in their lives they never met with such light,
And each of the family by turns had a puff,
At the little farthing rush-light,
The cursed farthing rush-light,
But neither of the family,
Could blow out the rush-light.
The watchman at last went by crying one,
Here Vatchmans come up than you we might on vorch light,
Then up came the watchman the business was done,
For he turned down the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light,
Fall, lal, lal, lal, la,
So he put out the rush-light.
I Will Laugh and be Fat.
TO rival the miser who broods over his plumb,
Or to envy the great I shall never presume,
Though wealth to mankind as a blessing was sent,
With much or with little l'm always content:
For should I grow rich, I Will near murmur at that,
And if I grow poor, still I Will laugh and be fat.
Though patriots and placemen each other abuse,
It Is nothing to me, I Have no pension to lose,
If they levy new taxes, I vow and protest,
I will not complain while I fare like the rest.
And if Outs becomes Inns, I Will never murmur at that;
Or if Inns become Outs, still ill laugh and be fat:
But love I confess is the first of my care,
And Celia is fairest of all that is fair;
Yet though I Am enamored I Am not such an elf,
As to think of my mistress and not of myself:
If she smiles, why of course I Will never murmur at that;
Or if she should frown, still I laugh and be fat.
When I urge the soft plea, should she kindly incline,
To crown my fond wishes at Hymen's bright shrine,
I Will seize the blessed moment and make her my wife,
Secure of contentment and pleasure for life*
And though care should ensue, I Will never murmur at that,
But all my life long will I laugh and be fat.
The Twins of Latona.
THE twins of Latona, so kind to my boon,
Arise to partake of the chase;
And le^^ a ray to chaste Dian's fair moon,
And a smile to the smiles on her face.
For (...) sports I delight in the bright queen of love,
With myrtles my brows shall adorn,
While Pan breaks his charter, and skulks in the grove,
Excelled by the sound of the horn
The dogs are uncoupl'd, and sweet is the cry,
Yet sweeter the notes of sweet echo's reply.
Hark forward, hark forward, the game is in view,
But love is the game which I wish to pursue,
The stag from his chamber of woodbines peeps out,
His sentence he hears in the gale,
Yet flies still entangled in fear and in doubt,
His courage and constancy fail;
Surrounded by foes he prepares for the fray
Despair taking place of his fear.
With antlers erected, a while stands at bay,
Then surrenders his life with a tear.
The Lass of Richmond Hill,
ON Richmond Hill there lives a lass
More bright than May Day morn,
Whose charms all other maids surpass,
A rose without a thorn
This lass so neat with smiles so sweet,
Has won my right good will:
I Would crowns resign, to call her mine,
Sweet lass of Richmond hill,
Sweet lass of Richmond hill,
Sweet lass of Richmond hill,
I Would crowns resign to call her mine,
Sweet lass of Richmond hill,
Ye zephyrs gay that fan the air,
And wanton through the grove,
Oh, whisper to my charming fair
I die for her I love,
This lass so neat etc.

How happy will the shepherd be,
Who calls this nymph his own:
O may her choice be fixed on me,
Mine Is fixed on her alone.
This lass so neat, etc.

COME listen now my friends, to an old dog's queer story,
Who retains of his race some pretensions to glory;
We dogs may be found in each rank and station,
Since puppies are caressed as the best in the nation,
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal de, id die, id die, bow, wow, wow.
A lover is a wretched Dog, without his pretty dear, sirs,
A Bully is a swagg'ring Dog I neither dread nor fear, sirs;
A Miser is a stingy Dog, who'd keep an inch of candle;
And a Coxcomb is a lap-dog, oh! for pretty maids to dandle.
Bow, wow, wow.
A Cuckold is a common Dog, that many a wife can tell you;
A Glutton is a greedy Dog, who loves you for his belly;
A Soldier is a noble Dog, in every rank and station;
And a Sailor is a hardy Dog, as any in the nation.
Bow, wow, wow.
A Police-man's an ugly Cur, who most Dogs do hate, sirs;
A Tailor is a stout Dog, since he the Police beats, sirs;
A Merchant is a useful Dog, the nation's chief support, sirs;
A Farmer is a merry Dog, who does delight in sport sirs.
Bow, wow, wow.
A Gambler is a shuffling Dog, he cheats you by the cards, sirs;
A Bailiff is a suappish Dog, he bites you rather hard, sirs;
A Landlord is a cheating Dog, he chalks up two for one, sirs;
And a Flatterer's a canting Dog, who many has undone, sirs;
Bow, wow, wow.
A Butcher is a rum Dog, who handles well his steel, sirs;
A Bruiser is a fighting Dog, makes men his blows to feel, sirs;
A Doctor's a Dog, who'd kill his best friends for a fee, sirs;
A 'Pothecary's a dirty Dog, who'd clyster all degrees; sirs.
Bow, wow, wow.
A Drunkard is a soaking Dog, who never is but dry, sirs;
A Lawyer is a Cur-dog, I wish the breed would die, sirs;
A Rake he is a jolly Dog, whom all women fancy;
And I am your faithful Dog, as any here you can see.
Bow, wow, wow.
HOW blessed the life a sailor leads,
From clime to clime still ranging,
For as the calm the storm succeeds,
The scene delights by changing;
Though tempests howl along the main,
Some object will remind us,
And cheer with hope to meet again,
The friends we left behind us.
CHORUS.
Then under full sail we laugh at the gale,
Though the landsmen look pale never heed 'em,
But toss off the glass, to a favorite lass,
To America, Commerce and Freedom.
But when arrived in sight of land,
Or safe in port rejoicing,
Our ship we moor, our sails we hand,
Whilst out the boat is hoisting.
With cheerful hearts the shore we reach,
Our friends delighted greet us,
And tripping lightly over the beach,
The pretty lasses meet us.
CHORUS.
When the full flowing bowl enlivens the soul,
To foot it we merrily lead 'em,
And each bonny lass will drink off her glass
To America, Commerce and Freedom.
Our prizes sold the chink we share,
And gladly we receive it,
And when we meet a brother tar,
That wants we freely give it.
No freeborn sailor yet had store,
But cheerfully would lend it,
And when it is gone, to sea for more,
We earn it but to spend it.
CHORUS.
Then drink round my boys it is the first of our joys,
To relieve the distressed, clothe and feed 'em,
It Is a duty we share, with the brave and the fair,
In this land of Commerce and Freedom.
NO INDEED, NOT I.
WHEN May Day buds on fields were seen
And flowerts decked the ground,
When my last birth day, told eighteen,
And time came smiling round.
Young Jockey met me here and there,
With a kiss, and song, and smile;
At mill or meadow, wake and fair,
And at the milking style.
By chance as 'twere at night or noon,
To find him, I would try,
Yet, if he asked the smallest boon,
'Twas, "no indeed, not I!"
Poor Jockey vexed to be so teased,
Resolved my love to prove,
No more the struggling kiss he seized:
Nor sought me in the grove.
He toy'd with Jenny of the green,
He gave her kisses three:
By Bridget of the brook, 'twas seen,
It Was Bridget told it me.
They sleer'd and called me fusty maid,
Who now alone might lie,
I pettish flounc'd away and said,
Pshaw, "No indeed, not I."
At length, he asked of me to wed,
With many a tender bow,
I smiled, I simper'd, hung my head,
And looked I cannot tell how.
I wished and feared, I cannot tell what;
I blushed, he begged and sighed:
Then whispering said, you will surely not
Refuse to be my bride.
Lord bless me! how could I refrain,
'Twere sinful too to lie;
So, when he asked me that again,
'Twas no indeed, not I.
I ASK NOT BEAUTY.
I ASK not beauty quite complete,
Give me a girl who' simply neat,
Rich golden tissue can despise,
And wear no brilliants, but her eyes;
Which blended in those eyes there sit,
The laughing loves and sparkling wit.
O, give me, Hymen, such a wife,
With joy I Will quit the single life.
O, give me, Hymen, such a wife,
With joy I Will quit the single life.
A pauses find in music place,
Her speech let proper silence grace,
And in her dimpl'd smiles ^e seen,
A modest yet a cheerful mein.
Her conversation ever free
From censure as from levity;
Not fond of compliment, nor rude;
Not a coquet; nor yet a prude,
Averse to grandeur ^^d parade,
Nor pleased with midnight masquerade.
The virtues that her sex adorn,
By honor guarded, not by scorn,
To such a virgin, such a wife,
I give my love, I give my life.
FINIS.

