DR. DWIGHTS SERMON ON THE MEANS OF PUBLIC HAPPINESS.

THE TRUE MEANS OF ESTABLISHING PUBLIC HAPPINESS. A SERMON, DELIVERED ON THE
7TH OF JULY, 1795, BEFORE THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI, AND PUBLISHED
AT THEIR REQUEST.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by T. and S. GREEN, and sold by I. BEERS, at his Book-Store.

STATE OF CONNECTICUT. New Haven, 7th July, 1795. SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI.
VOTED, That Mr. BEERS and Mr. PINTO wait on the Reverend Doctor DWIGHT, with
the Thanks of this Society for his Sermon delivered before them this Day, and
request a Copy of the same for Publication, at the Expense of the Society.

Extract from the Minutes, HENRY DAGGETT, jun. Assist. Sec'y.

TO THE SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI, IN CONNECTICUT, THIS DISCOURSE IS RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED BY THEIR VERY OBEDIENT, AND MOST HUMBLE SERVANT, TIMOTHY DWIGHT.

THE MEANS OF ESTABLISHING PUBLIC HAPPINESS.
ISAIAH xxxiii.6. AND WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE SHALL BE THE STABILITY OF THY TIMES.


TO establish on firm foundations the Happiness of Society is evidently one of
the most important concerns of man. If the attainment of that happiness be
highly desirable, the perpetuation of it must be more desirable. Its daily
value is daily renewed, during its continuance; and, when extended through a
century, it is mathematically proved to be of a hundred times the value, which
it would possess, if extended only through a year.

The mind of man, instinctively realizing this truth, has ever labored rather
to secure, than to obtain, happiness, both public and private. The attainment
is usually not a difficult task, the establishment a Herculean one. A free
government has been always, and justly, supposed to be a primary source of
national happiness. To form such a government has been found sufficiently easy;
but to render it durable has been ever considered as a problem of very
difficult solution. Yet in its durability plainly consists almost all the value
of such a government. Hence most of the political knowledge and labor of
freemen has been employed, and exhausted, in endeavoring to give stability to
their respective political systems. Hence have arisen the numerous checks,
balances, and divisions of power and influence, found in our own political
constitutions, and in those of several other nations. In other nations, these
means have been generally insufficient to accomplish the end. Whether they will
issue more happily in our own is uncertain. In several instances, we seem to
have approached the verge of dissolution; but we have providentially withdrawn,
before the season of safety was passed. Men of extensive political information,
and sagacious forecast, have frequently trembled for our national existence;
and, notwithstanding some favorable interpositions of Providence in our
behalf, they still wait anxiously to know what the end will be. Should we fall,
the fairest hopes of wise and good men will be blasted; the maxim, That mankind
cannot be governed without force and violence, will stand on higher proof, and
be advanced with new and triumphant confidence; and the great body of civilized
men will probably sit down in sullen and melancholy conviction, that nations
cannot, unless circumscribed by Alps, or oceans, be permanently free.

Most nations, and most politicians, have considered Arms and Wealth, as
primary means of continuing national happiness. To this opinion they have
probably been led by the allurements of avarice and ambition, by the power of
custom, and by a persuasion, easily imbibed, that grandeur and happiness are
synonymous. All these are deceitful guides, and have in this instance conducted
only to error.

As means of defense, arms are evidently necessary to national safety, and, of
course, to the permanence of national happiness; but, as means of conquest,
they are usually the source of national ruin. States of moderate size,
uninclined to military enterprise, and unambitious of high distinction, appear
to have realized more happiness, than those of a contrary character. Widely
extended dominions are too unwieldy an object, to be managed with either skill,
or success; and power, diffused over a large territory, lessens at every stage
of its diffusion. A greater and greater mixture of nations and tribes, once
independent and impatient of subjugation, of different manners, religions, and
interests, and prevented from uniting by prejudice and hatred, by imperious
domination and irritated dependence, is continually accumulated, at every
stride of conquest; and, like the iron and clay in the prophecy, though
carefully molded into a fair and regular form, is preparing to crumble, under
the hand of the Former.

The system of government, also, and its necessary measures by becoming daily
more complicated, become daily more perplexing. The public concerns are too
numerous, the public officers, in opinions, characters, and interests, too
various, the opportunities of secure oppression too easy, and the neglects of
duty too frequent, to allow of any possible firmness, or consistency. The pile,
however skilfully erected, and constantly repaired, is by the increase of its
own weight precipitated to the ground.

From great accumulations of Wealth the same evil is derived with not less
certainty, and in methods not very dissimilar. Avarice is one of those
daughters of the horse-leach, which incessantly cry, "give, give;" it is
eminently the fire, which says not, "it is enough." The love of property
increases in a more rapid proportion, than the property itself, In a country
possessed of immense wealth, places in government are, of necessity, highly
lucrative, and, of course, the objects of ardent desire. To attain them, no
principles, no efforts, are esteemed too great a sacrifice. Sycophancy,
servility, bribery, perjury, and numberless other specter of vice, haunt all
seats of power and trust, and force the friends of public integrity to retire
with alarm and discouragement. Honesty is no longer counterfeited; but laughed
at. Conscience is not silenced; but discarded. Posts of honor, are tossed out
for a scramble; and truth, justice, and the public welfare, are vendued to the
highest bidder.

On personal manners the effects are no less unhappy. Stimulated by avarice,
and called onward by the commanding voice of custom, every man makes gold his
god. To acquire riches becomes the only object, honor, or duty. By his wealth
every man's worth is sealed. Wealth is virtue; and poverty vice. The means of
acquisition are, therefore, sanctified by the acknowledged importance of the
end. Extortion, fraud, gaming, and peculation, steal into character, under the
imposing names of industry and prudence, and whiten into virtues, in the
sunshine, with which opulence is surrounded.

In the mean time, luxury holds out to appetite his store of various and sickly
confections, and persuades those, who are prepared to be persuaded, that sense
is the only source of real good, and that to eat and drink is the chief end of
man. Enfeebled by sloth, debased by indulgence, and gross with a perpetual
prostitution of taste and of talents, the rational character becomes
assimilated to the animal one, and man claims a new and more intimate kindred
to the swine.

Parade and appearance, also, invite and engross the national attention.
Houses, gardens, equipage, and dress, take the place of duty and worth; and
from the prince to the peasant the great ambition is to shine. Arts of ornament
eject those of use; and manners of manliness and dignity give place to ceremony
and profession. Education, instead of enlightening the understanding and
forming the heart, is employed in gracing the person and suppling the limbs;
and instead of teaching truth, implanting virtue and fashioning to worth by
sober discipline, habituating care, and persuasive example, terminates all her
labors in accomplishing for the dance and the drawing room. Children, are of
course, led out of the path of reason and duty into the by-ways of appearance
and sense, are conducted to the theater and not to the church, and, while they
are expected to become men and women, dwindle, with a regular diminution, into
fribbles and dolls.

Thus the influence of enormous Wealth, and of extended Conquest, is equally
pernicious to the Magistrate, and to the subject; and the national character
becomes tainted, of course, with sickliness and corruption.

The experience of mankind has effectually elucidated the truth of these
remarks. Greece, Rome, and the great nations of modern Europe, are all evident
proofs of the intimate connection between Conquest and ruin; and Carthage and
Holland are strong exhibitions of the perishing nature of society, which rests
on the specious and treacherous support of unlimited Commerce.

The plans of those, who hitherto have chiefly planned for mankind, appear to
have been formed principally for the purpose of fixing securely that state of
society, which they found, and little, if at all, for its melioration. For this
end, they appear to have aimed merely to strengthen the existing government
against invasion and insurrection. Men, they seem to have supposed, must
continue to be what they found them; ignorant, vicious, and unhappy. To render
them as quiet as possible, in that state, is naturally concluded to have been
the highest object of their policy, so far as it is exhibited in history. Hence
they labored much to consolidate the elements of the government, and to secure
to it that reverence, submission, and strength, which promised undisputed
dominion. When the promotion of science became a part of the political system,
it was principally adopted, for the purpose of qualifying individuals to
govern, and furnishing useful agents to those who governed, in the prosecution
of their measures; and rarely, and scantily, for the purpose of improving the
mass of men. The Object was not so so rule, as to engross the esteem and
affection of subjects; or to enable them to know when they were so ruled, as to
make their rulers the proper objects of their esteem and affection. The Object
was not to prepare subjects by information, happiness, and virtue, to
understand, to love, and to preserve their state* but to make them quiet in
that state, whether disposed, or indisposed. Hence, policy became an art; and
government a trick. Rulers were employed in plotting against their subjects;
and subjects either quietly sunk into torpid insensibility, or, awakened by
oppression extended beyond every bound, rose to insurrection and madness.

This system, though it has been almost the only human system, has never
appeared to be of real use to man. It has often defeated itself, and frustrated
the designs of those, by whom it has been adopted. Assyria, Persia, Macedon,
Rome, and France, are all proofs, that carefully supported, as it has been by
all the arts of policy, and the utmost accumulation of power, it has still sown
in itself the seeds of dissolution; and that those, whom it was intended to
aggrandize, have fallen into the same gulf of perdition, with those whom it
was intended to enslave. The Character of the mass of people, in each of those
monarchies, was the real cause of its political ruin; and the nature of the
political system was as really a principal cause of that character. In Africa,
where Oppression has more effectually wielded her iron rod, and where man has
been more entirely shorn of his intellectual dignity, a more uniform course of
society has been accomplished. But here quietness has existed without
happiness; a stagnant lake, filled with pollution and death; and nations,
commuting reason for instinct have shrunk into brutes. In India, and in China,
where the same system has long, though not uninterruptedly prevailed, the
inhabitants have indeed risen to higher grades of manual ingenuity, but, as
moral beings, are nearly on the same level.

Under the influence of freedom, man has been roused from this lethargy, and
shaken himself with a returning consciousness of energy and action. In this
superior situation, his powers, his views, his efforts, enlarged with a
portentous growth; but they grew chiefly by the aid of soil, climate, and
accident. The cultivation which they received, was the cultivation of chance,
of passion, and of appetite; not of system, wisdom, or virtue. Greece became a
Giant in war, in science, and in arts; but was still an infant in moral
improvement, and useful policy. No regular plan of amending the human character
appears to have been thought of by her most admired sages; and, while her
efforts in the field, and in the study, awed mankind to astonishment, her
citizens were merely a collection of superior savages. Their depravity
assumed, indeed, a more elegant form, but not an essentially different
character. Rome systematized, and in a higher degree than any other State has
ever done, war, oppression, and devastation. Her government, also, was more
skilfully adjusted, and more firmly compacted, than the Grecian systems; but it
was still tossed by tumult, and shattered by frequent violence. Her citizens
were left to the same accidental improvement; and, though possessed of a more
specious stateliness than those of Greece, were debased with the same grossness
and immanity. Accustomed, from our infancy, to study their history, to admire
their talents, and to celebrate their exploits, we are prone to form a
different estimate of these nations; yet by a very moderate examination we
shall find, that they furnish us many things to admire, but few to approve,
that, as moral beings, they are distinguished with little advantage from
various nations whom they contemptuously styled barbarians. Indeed, one of the
first political errors of later ages appears to be too high a respect for the
state of society in Greece and Rome.

There is, I believe, a more rational policy, beginning with a different aim,
and pursuing public quiet in a nobler and more effectual manner. The primary
mean of originating and establishing happiness, in free communities, is, I
imagine, the formation of a good personal character in their citizens. Good
citizens must of course constitute a happier community than bad ones, and must
better understand the nature and causes of their happiness. They may safely be
governed by a milder policy, and cannot but be better judges of the
desirableness of such policy. More the children of reason, and less the slaves
of appetite and passion, they will naturally be more satisfied with real
happiness, and less allured, by that, which, however shewy, is unsubstantial;
will need fewer restrictions, and be more contented under such as are
necessary; will prize more highly such liberty, as is suited to the condition
of man, and proportionally disregard that, which is Utopian. Hence, such
citizens may probably be governed by justice, and Common-sense; and will not
necessitate the adoption of force and oppression, or the employment of
circumvention and statecraft.

A family is, in some respects, a state in miniature. Children of bad personal
characters can scarcely be governed at all, and never, without constant
exertions of terror and force. Children of a good character are easily swayed,
without either. Mild and equitable measures, few and gentle interpositions of
mere authority, united with argument and persuasion, will, in a family composed
of such children, effectually establish domestic order, peace, and happiness.
This difference of regulations, this exemption from the necessity of exerting
force and inspiring terror, depends wholly on the character of those, who are
to be governed. To a State these truths are not less applicable. If the
personal character of its citizens were perfectly good, there would be neither
necessity, nor opportunity, of governing by force. That train of penalties,
which constitutes a great part of the business of every Legislature, and of the
contents of every statute book, would cease to exist, as it would cease to be
necessary; and the mere expression of the public will would execute itself. The
Sheriff would enjoy a sinecure, and the jail moulder without an inhabitant.

On this general principle was the prophecy of the Text written. Wisdom and
knowledge, the prophet declares, shall, at some future period, some period
which I apprehend to be still future, be the stability of the times, to which
he refers: i. e. the public stability of the age; of one, or of more than one
nation: or, in other words, the means of establishing on firm foundations
public happiness.

By Wisdom, all Persons who read the Bible know, the Sacred Writers commonly
intend Virtue; and Virtue in that enlarged and Evangelical sense, which
embraces Piety to God, Good Will to mankind, and the effectual Government of
ourselves. "The fear of the Lord," said Jehovah, when disclosing this
inestimable and hitherto unexplored subject, "that is Wisdom." "The fear of the
Lord," says Solomon, (Heb.) is the chief part of Wisdom." "The Wisdom, that is
from above," says James, "is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy." As Wisdom is properly defined to be that attribute of mind, which
aims at the best ends, and chooses the best means to accomplish them; so
Virtue, which steadily aims at the Glory of God, the Good of mankind, and the
Good of ourselves, the best possible ends, and which more naturally than any
other disposition directs to the best means of accomplishing them, was, with
peculiar propriety, styled Wisdom by the penmen of the Scriptures.

Virtue may be defined -- The Love of doing good. It will be easily seen from
this definition, if allowed to be just, that it can be but one indivisible
Attribute of mind. Yet, as the objects, toward which it is exercised, are
materially different, it has been divided, for the purposes of consideration,
into the three great branches already mentioned. It ought to be observed, that
it is not a passion, nor an aggregate of passions; but a principle, or
disposition, habitual, active, and governing. It is the mental energy, directed
steadily to that which is right.

God, the greatest object in the Universe, and infinitely more important and
worthy than all others, demands, of course, the supreme regard of every
rational being. The first, the most obligatory, and the most noble exercise of
Virtue is the Love and Reverence of this Glorious Being, generally termed Piety.

Our fellow creatures, collectively, form the next great object of our regard.
Virtue, exercised toward them, has very properly been denominated Good Will or
Benevolence; a name descriptive of all right affections toward them, and
including justice, faithfulness, kindness, truth, forgiveness, and all those,
which, are frequently styled the Social Virtues.

To himself every Man is also an important object of regard. Virtue, as
exercised toward ourselves, includes every just desire and vindicable pursuit
of our real good; but it is principally employed in regulating and confining
within due bounds our appetites and passions; principles in the human mind,
which perpetually prompt to wrong, and which, without a continual and vigorous
restraint, invariably dishonor God, injure our fellow men, and ruin ourselves.
Thus exercised, Virtue is termed Temperance, or Self-government.

It is unnecessary for me to remark to this Audience, that all human conduct
springs from the human will; that this is the only active principle in man; and
that, as the will is directed to good, or evil, right, or wrong, man invariably
does that, which is evil, or that which is good. The real importance of Virtue
to the happiness of Society lies in this; that Virtue is an uniform direction
of the will to that which is good. When man is virtuous, therefore, his
disposition, the source of all his conduct, being steadily pointed to that,
which is good, and right, his conduct must, of course, be also right and good.
Hence Virtue of necessity aims at the happiness of Society. A man's private
interest may, for a time, and in his own view, be promoted by wrong; but the
interests of a community can never be, for a moment, promoted but by that which
is right. A selfish, separate interest clashes with that of every neighbor,
and cannot be advanced, but to the injury of the common good. Avarice always
robs; ambition always oppresses; and sensuality always wounds. Virtue, on the
contrary, invariably seeks the common welfare, and gives no pain, where it is
not indispensably necessary for the promotion of that welfare.

Virtue is, also, a principle sufficiently powerful and active to make all the
happiness, which Society can enjoy. It is the whole energy of the Deity; and of
every perfect being; and may become the whole energy of man. It often has
become sufficiently powerful to produce the highest self-denial, of which man
in his present state is capable; and is not uncommonly of such strength, as to
constitute the only active character. Greater exertions have rarely sprung from
selfishness, than have sprung from virtue. The labors of Alfred were not
inferior to those of Caesar; nor were those of the proudest and most ambitious
Philosopher to be named with those of Paul.

As Virtue is the genuine, the invariable, and the efficient source of public
happiness, so it is in the same degree its stability. As it is its natural
tendency to produce happiness, so this is always and equally its tendency.
Wherever, and how long soever, it exists, the happiness, of which it is the
parent, will also exist.

Good Will to Mankind, accomplishes directly most of those desirable objects,
at which the political Constitutions, and the Laws, of Society aim; It makes
men honest, just, faithful, submissive to government, and friendly to each
other, without restrictions, or punishments; and renders magistrates equitable,
public spirited, and merciful, without checks, factions, or rebellions. And all
this it can accomplish, without labor, or expense, without force, turmoil or
terror.

Self-government, on the other hand, effectually restrains from all those evils
in Society, to prevent which is the principal employment of Laws and of
Magistrates. With far more efficacy, and incomparably more ease, than the post
and the prison, the gibbet and the cross, does it deter from fraud, revenge,
impurity, theft, robbery, treason, and rebellion. At the same time, it guards
from ten thousand other evils, which no Law can restrain, and which, often, are
not less pernicious to Society, than those overt and glaring acts, which are
the objects of judicial decision. Its influence on the Magistrate is equally
propitious; nor are the private evils, which I have specified more effectually
prevented, than the extensive and enormous mischiefs of corruption, peculation,
and tyranny.

With regard to the advantage and necessity of Good Will to public happiness,
there has never been any debate, except that, which respects all Virtue, viz.
Whether it is necessary, that men should be principled to pursue the good of
Society; or whether it is sufficient, to require the actions conducive to this
end, without any regard to the principle. This question I shall discuss in the
sequel.

With regard to the necessity of Self-government to the happiness of Society a
debate has always existed. In every Community men are found, who steadily
insist, that the indulgence of those desires which are appropriately termed
Appetites is justifiable, and in no way noxious to the public good. Were men
brutes, and connected on equal terms with a republic of swine, goats, and
swift-peters, this sentiment would at least plead some pretense in its behalf;
and Reason would not be obliged so often to blush for the human character, when
it read, to this effect, the labors of infidel philosophers, or heard the
conversation of equally rational sensualists.

The man of sloth, the drone of Society, who adds nothing to the common stock,
and lives on the labors and spoils of others, might yet be borne, were not his
sloth the flood-gate of wickedness. Idle to do good, he is a pattern of
industry in doing evil. In his merely slothful character, every morsel, which
he tastes, is the plunder of his neighbor, and every act of his enjoyment a
depredation on Society. To console them for the injustice, with a restless
mind, and hands diligent in mischief, he consumes his time, and employs his
talents, in gambling, horseracing, cheating, stealing, receiving from thieves,
corrupting youth, disturbing good order, and pursuing an universal round of
noxious labors and pernicious diversions.

If idleness, prodigality, the ruin of health, reputation, and usefulness, the
depravation of every mental and bodily faculty, the mortification of friends,
the destruction of the peace, comfort, and hopes, of his family, and the
exhibition of a contagious and pestilential example, are not injurious to a
Community, the drunkard, and the glutton, will undoubtedly stand on new ground,
and may with new confidence bring forward a putrid carcass, and a putrid mind,
to the public eye, and insist, that they are sound, useful, and healthy members
of the Body politic.

The man of lewdness is in a condition even less hopeful. He unceasingly
scatters firebrarnds, arrows, and death, on all around him. He professes,
indeed, to be in sport, and merely to pursue his own amusement; but the
sufferings of those, who are unhappily within his reach, make that amusement a
very serious concern to them. He lives but to injure, and acts but to destroy.
The burglar plunders the purse; the murderer cuts off the life, and hurries his
unhappy victim to an untimely grave. The man of Lewdness robs the parent of his
child, the husband of his wife, and the family of their mother; murders
household peace, character, and happiness; plunges the dagger of death into the
soul, and hurries the victim of his lust into the abyss of the damned. The
plunder of the burglar may be recovered, or the loss may be borne: the victim
of the murderer may live beyond the grave, and the unhappy mourners may with
this hope soothe their excruciating sorrows: but no means can restore, no mind
can sustain, the plunder of peace; no balsam was ever found for the ulcer of
infamy; no skill can rebuild a ruined family; nor can any artist repair the
wrecks of a soul. Such is the innocence of the Leacher; and, were not too great
multitudes interested in protecting and conniving at vice, the chase of the
wolf and the tiger would be forgotten, and he, in their stead, would be hunted
from the residence of men.

Piety, the remaining branch of Virtue, although its utility, and its necessity
to public happiness, has been more frequently questioned, and denied, is,
probably at least as useful, and as necessary to this object, as either of the
other branches. It will, I presume, be allowed to be wholly rational, and
probable, that there are, within the limits of the creation, worlds, where the
Creator is wholly respected according to his character; and where infinite
greatness and excellence not only demand, but obtain, a love, reverence, and
obedience, suited to their nature. That there is one such world, the Bible
directly declares. In such a world, it is evident, Piety is the whole source of
order, peace, and happiness. Perfect itself, it there renders the whole moral
system perfect, and spontaneously produces that obedience to the divine
government, which is less effectually produced here by threatenings and
judgments. As Piety is the foundation, in that world, of the order and peace,
on which all social happiness depends, it is rationally concluded, that it must
be the natural foundation, in any other world, of proportional order and peace;
and that, so far as it exists, it will benefit earth, as well as heaven, men,
as well as angels, and any particular nation, as well as mankind in general. In
other words, as Piety appears to be the foundation of the most perfect
intellectual happiness; so it is to be deemed the real, the natural, and the
universal foundation of social good.

From Piety, also, the other exercises of Virtue derive a higher distinction,
are presented with stronger motives, and enforced by more solemn sanctions,
than can spring from any other source.

All the duties which we owe to mankind, are, without the consideration of
Piety, viewed as merely due to men; worms of the dust, beings of yesterday, and
children of vanity and sin. To such beings moral obligation, though real, must
be of comparatively little importance, and operate with little force. But in
the eye of Piety all these duties are enhanced, beyond measure, by the
consideration, that they are enjoined by God, and that, of course, every
fulfillment of moral obligation to our neighbor is the performance of a duty to
our Maker. The same remarks are, with equal force, applied to the duties of
Self-government. As much greater, therefore, as much more excellent, and as
much more possessed of a right to require our service, as God is, than men,
just so much more importance, and distinction, does Piety give to these
branches of Virtue, than they could otherwise receive.

The principal motives to virtue are evidently the pleasure found in the
practice of it -- the esteem, affection, and beneficence which it excites in
our fellow creatures -- the approbation and love of God -- and the expectation
of future rewards and punishments. The two first of these motives must
certainly operate with as great, and the two last with much greater influence,
on Piety, than on any other supposable character. To the eye of Piety God
appears, as a Being totally different from that, which is usually formed by
every other eye. His character is invested with an importance wholly new. His
approbation, love, and rewards, on the one hand, and his abhorrence, anger, and
punishments, on the other, appear as objects real and boundless. Primary
objects of attention, they become primary concerns; and are not only seen by
conclusion, but directly felt to involve all the interests of man. Hence they
become the directory of thought, and the law of action.

A clear and fixed sense of moral obligation is, probably, in the opinion of
most men, indispensably necessary to the discharge of the duties, and to the
production of the happiness of Society. But such a sense, it is presumed, is to
be looked for in Piety alone. The strength of moral obligation lies wholly in
the conviction, that a constant adherence to it is obedience to the will of
God. But almost all the regard, which is rendered to God, or to his will, is
rendered by the pious. Imperfect and desultory feelings of this nature,
feelings which are yet of no small importance, will generally be found, where a
religious education has given birth to just moral sentiments; and especially
where general influence and example, united with public instruction, have
cultivated such sentiments into habit. Beyond these limits nothing can be
expected, nothing is commonly professed, and nothing will ever be found, beside
the changing power of fashionable opinion, the slippery dependence of personal
honor, and the accidental coincidence of selfishness with duty.

The great support of moral obligation, in the present world, is the belief of
God's moral government, of our accountableness to him, and of an approaching
state of rewards and punishments. The desire of happiness, and the dread of
misery, is a part of the intelligent, and even of the animal nature, and is
inseparable from the faculty of perception. As all happiness, and all misery,
are ultimately derived from the hand of God, and as no bounds can be set to the
degree, or the continuance, of either, beside those, which he is pleased to
set, this object comes home to every heart with a power totally peculiar. Its
efficacy reaches all places, times, and persons: all persons, I mean, beside
the fool, who has said in his heart, "There is no God." Its superior efficacy
on men of piety I have already explained.

In a world, like this, where the depravity of man is proclaimed by every Law,
is engraven on the altars of every Religion, and is written with a pen of
adamant on the iron page of History, how desirable is it, that this great
motive to duty, this great sanction of moral obligation, should, instead of
being lessened by sophistry, ridicule, and neglect, be preserved and
strengthened to the utmost, to save Society from those numerous evils, of which
it is the only remedy, and to prompt men to those indispensable duties, to
which it is often the only effectual motive?

In addition to these observations it may be justly asserted, that, without
Piety, the other branches of Virtue are never found. There has been no proof
either from fact, or from argument, hitherto adduced, to show, that one branch
of Virtue can exist independently of the others. All the heathens, both
individuals and nations, who regarded their fellow men in the most equitable
manner, and who regulated themselves with the greatest decency, were
distinguished by reverence for the gods. Among Christians, also, there is no
want of evidence, to prove, that impious men are alike destitute of benevolence
and self-government, and that the appearances, which are sound, of these
characteristics, in those who are not pious, are the accidental result of
convenience, or necessity.

But the subject will easily, and, I apprehend, perfectly explain itself.
Justice in man is the love of that which is just. But can he, in whom this
principle exists, be unjust to his Maker? Can he be willing, and principled, to
render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and not to God the things which
are God's? Or can any thing be Caesar's with such absolute right, as he, his
talents, time, and services, are God's? Gratitude is an affectionate sense of
benefits, and a proportionate love to the Benefactor. But can any man be
grateful to a human, who is not grateful to the Divine, Benefactor? Generally,
can a man love intelligent being at all, who does not love the Infinite
Intelligent; or be at all virtuous, unless his virtue be directed primarily to
that Being, who is, infinitely beyond all others, excellent, lovely and
beneficent?

Whether it be desirable for Society, that its members should be principled to
promote its happiness, or not; is a question, which cannot be asked without a
blush, nor answered without a smile. It is to ask whether it would be better
for Society, that its happiness should be great, stable, and secure; or small,
fluctuating, and accidental. There is no steady source of public or private
good, but principle; and there is, in this sense, no principle, but Virtue. To
Virtue public good necessarily appears, and is enjoined by an Authority
instinctively obeyed (the Authority of God) as a primary object of regard. To a
mind not virtuous it is, of course, and always, an object subordinate,
accidental, and solitary.

On the inhabitants of a land, universally virtuous, the peculiar blessings of
Heaven may, also, be rationally expected to descend. Where human weakness errs,
where human power falters, and where human means prove ineffectual, God may,
both on rational and evangelical grounds, be expected to open his beneficent
hand, and supply the necessary good. Here, also, Virtue may be safely
pronounced to be the stability of public happiness.

But it is not enough, that the members of a Society aim at that, which will
promote the general good; they must also know what it is. Knowledge is,
therefore, with the utmost propriety designated in the text, as another source
of this stability.

In examining this part of the subject, it will be useful to consider the kind,
the diffusion, and the effects, of that knowledge, which is intended by the
Prophet.

It will undoubtedly be conceded, that he intended that knowledge, which is
real, and not merely nominal; that, also, which is practical, and therefore
useful; and, of course, that, which is moral, or in other words, the most
practical, and the most useful.

Almost all real knowledge, and all practical knowledge, is derived either from
Experience, or from Revelation. Theories are generally mere dreams, which ought
to be placed on the same level with the professed fictions of poets, and to be
written in verse, and not in sober prose. Though dignified with the pompous title
of Philosophy, they have usually, after amusing the world, a little time, gone
down the stream of contempt into the ocean of oblivion. They cannot be
practical, because they cannot be true; and hence, being of no use, except to
please the imagination, they are of course neglected and forgotten.

There is in the human mind a faculty, called Common-sense, which, though never
in high estimation among Philosophers, seems to have originated, and executed,
almost all the plans of human business which have proved to be of any use. The
reason is obvious. Employed in forming near and evident deductions from facts,
and in closely observing facts for that purpose, contented with moderate
advances, and cautious of innovation, its step, though slow, has been sure; a
real approximation to the end in view. Theory, or the contrary, rapid, but
wild, has usually receded more than it has advanced. Untried causes, causes to
which a new application is given, and experiments in business, made either a
new, or in new circumstances, have always been regarded by Common-sense with a
suspicious eye; and a state of things* not perfectly desirable, willingly
endured, in preference to the adoption of new systems, of which the effects
were uncertain, and the operations dangerous.

The system of government, formed for South Carolina, by Mr. Lock, may stand
as a portrait of all political theories. Fair and rational on paper, but
deformed and useless in practice, it suited the real circumstances of that
Colony, just as a map, drawn by the fancy of a Geographer, would suit an
undiscovered country; or a chart of soundings, marked by the Navigator, in
sport, would suit the real state of an untraversed ocean. If this Giant in
understanding failed so entirely in an attempt to form a theoretical system of
government, reducible to practice, of what character must be the attempts of
modern pygmies?

That the knowledge, communicated by Experience and Revelation, was intended in
this prophecy, will be evident to all persons, who remember, that this was the
only knowledge in existence, when the prophecy was written. Visionary
Philosophy had not then begun to mislead mankind. The world was contented with
real knowledge; and, although its stock was small, it was genuine and
unalloyed, and therefore of a currency and use, suited to human purposes. Had
its progress been uninterrupted by war and devastation, and unbewildered by
theoretical Philosophy, we should now probably be removed, in real knowledge,
many degrees beyond our present advances.

A general diffusion of knowledge, was undoubtedly designed in this prediction.
In no other sense could knowledge be supposed to be the means of general
stability.

The effects of knowledge, thus defined, are evidently of high importance to
social happiness. The Legislator it will enable to understand the state, the
interests, and the duties, of a people; to form regulations suited to their
state, promotive of their interests, and coinciding with their duty; to
discern, with a freedom from low and pernicious prejudices, that equitable
government is the true source of honor to himself, and of prosperity to his
people; to cast his eyes abroad, without the purblind confusion of narrow
minds, and see clearly the real condition of other nations, and their proper
connection with the affairs of his own; to look back with distinctness, and
with comprehension, on the past state of human society, and forward, with
rational prediction, to events which are rising on the surface of futurity. In
a word, placed by such knowledge on a lofty summit, he stands as a Watchman for
the welfare of millions, unobstructed by mists, and undazzled by the height to
which he is elevated, with a steady eye marks distinctly the surrounding
progress of things, and is enabled with confidence, and with safety, to utter
alike the quieting voice of peace, and the timely alarm of danger.

In the same manner is the Judge enabled to understand and interpret law, to
form equitable decisions, to exercise his discretionary authority in extending
or restricting penalties, and generally to hold with an equal hand the balance
of right, between neighbor and neighbor, and between subjects and the state.

To maintain the dignity of government, to impress respect for his own office,
to secure the general approbation in the execution of punitive justice, to stop
at the bounds of law and right, and to mingle mercy with judgment by choosing
the least distressing methods of enforcing judicial decisions, are employments
which constitute the duty of the Executive magistrate; employments, which
demand, perhaps in an equal degree, clear understanding and extensive
information, and which hazard, without it, the public prosperity, and the
public peace.

Nor are the people at large less interested in the knowledge above described.
Stability of public happiness, especially in free States, depends wholly on the
character of the citizens in general. Nor can it exist, unless they understand
distinctly the rights and the duties of freemen, the duties of magistrates, the
requisitions of law, the common interest and the means of promoting it, the
ruinous nature of war, the beneficent influence of peace, the relations of men
in Society to each other, and the character, which those ought to sustain, who
are contemplated as objects of the public suffrage. Equally useful is knowledge
in teaching them the duties of Parents, children, friends, and neighbors, the
nature and importance of a happy domestic education, the advantages of mild and
obliging conduct, the universal profit of virtue, and the mischiefs of vice of
every kind, in every degree, and toward every person. Highly important is
knowledge, also, to give that personal respectability, and to secure that
rational esteem, which excites and gratifies laudable ambition; to fill with
profitable amusement the hours of leisure, and of age; to capacitate for the
discharge of useful and necessary business; and to furnish means of improvement
in the several arts and employments of life. In a word, from knowledge must, in
a great measure, be derived that steadiness of character, that possession of
comforts, and that rational estimation of things, which form the useful
citizen, and the respectable Society.

From these observations, I flatter myself, it will appear, that the stability
of public happiness is produced by Knowledge and Virtue; and that the diffusion
of these through a Community is the true and the only method of solving that
political problem, which has so long perplexed the rulers of mankind. By these
great attributes men are made good members of society; and, composed of such
members, a Society must be happy. They form, they finish, the magistrate and
the citizen alike. They teach every duty, and prompt to every performance. They
originate wise and equitable laws, just decisions and useful administrations.
They create the amiable conjugal and household offices, produce effectual
domestic education, train to early and happy habits, and conduct to family
peace, neighbourly kindness, a cheerful submission to law, a steady love of
rational government, and an universal growth of social enjoyment. Sweet and
salubrious streams, they nourish happiness wherever they pass; and, enlarging
and mingling in their progress, spread, in the end, an ocean of blessings over
the millions, who inhabit an empire.

It will not be improper to add, that the most respectable political writers
have, with one voice, declared Virtue to be indispensably necessary to the
existence of a free Government. As this sentiment has been adopted in
opposition to many prejudices, and interests, religious and secular, and
adopted by them all, it may be fairly supposed to be the result of conviction
and evidence. Perhaps it may have arisen, in part, from the following view of
the subject.

Government is rendered effectual by two great engines -- force and persuasion.
Force is the instrument of despotism, and persuasion of free and rational
government. To produce persuasion, it is always necessary to inspire
confidence. To inspire confidence in subjects toward rulers, it is necessary
for subjects to be satisfied, that their rulers are possessed of knowledge to
discern, and of virtue to aim at, the general good. To inspire confidence in
rulers toward subjects, it is necessary for rulers to be satisfied, that their
subjects possess knowledge to discern, and virtue to approve, the real wisdom
and equity of public measures. With these prerequisites, rulers will with
confidence pursue the public interest; and subjects will with equal confidence
support their administration: without them, the ruler, fearful and suspicious,
always in perplexity and always in danger, will feel himself obliged to have
recourse to art, cabal, and contrivance, to keep in motion the wheels of
government* and subjects anxious, jealous, and impatient, will continually
fluctuate between hope and fear, flock at every call to the standard of
faction, and prove the prey of every demagogue.

Facts, also, lend their evidence to support this doctrine. Sparta and Rome
were the most stable of all the ancient republics. Virtue, in the sense of the
Gospel, they had not; but, in their early periods, they were, to an unusual
degree, possessed of what is called heathen virtue. Beyond most, perhaps beyond
all, the heathen nations, they feared their gods, reverenced an oath, and
believed in a providence, which rewarded the good, and punished the evil. Their
ideas of truth and justice, however crude, were fixed; and they admitted fewer
corruptions and violations of the principles, which they esteemed sacred, than
most other nations. While this was their conduct, their public happiness,
though imperfect, was stable; and, with the fall of these principles, it
tumbled to the ground.

Among the modern nations of Europe, Switzerland, especially in some of its
Cantons, holds the highest rank in public happiness. For more than 400 years,
this distinguished country has withstood every shock from within, and from
without, and appears still to rest on firm foundations. Equally remarkable has
this country been for knowledge and virtue. In no State, in Europe, have the
inhabitants at large possessed equal information, or exhibited equal proofs of
piety and unblemished morals. To these causes their happiness is directly
traced by every enlightened traveller. Happy Switzerland! God has created for
thee thy walls and thy bulwarks. Under his good providence, thy bravery has
made thee free, and thy knowledge and virtue have made thee happy.

On this side of the Atlantic, Connecticut, by an extensive and increasing
acknowledgement, appears to hold, in this respect, the first station. The
happiness of this State, for one hundred and fifty years, has suffered, except
from external enemies, little diminution. Its government, customs, manners, and
general state of Society, have scarcely been changed, but by the gradual
progress of refinement. Formed, at first, in all the great outlines, and nearly
filled up, by men, whose distinguished rectitude of disposition, led, of
course, to justness of opinion, and whose sound Common-sense, improved by close
observation, did not lead to error, its Constitution, although, in many
respects, a violation of political theory, has been found more than any other
to be fitted for practice. Public and private happiness its inhabitants have,
in a high, perhaps an unrivalled, degree, enjoyed. In no country has Virtue,
for so long a period, been held in higher estimation, received more marks of
public regard, or more emphatically formed the general character. Knowledge, at
the same time has, in an almost singular manner, been diffused through the mass
of people. Every parent in the State has a school placed in his neighborhood;
and every child is furnished with the means of the most necessary instruction.
To aid, and to complete, these peculiar advantages, a church in every district
of a moderate size, opens its doors; to the surrounding inhabitants, and
invites every family to receive the knowledge, communicated by the Word of God.

The same doctrine might be even more strongly illustrated, if the time would
permit, from the deplorable contrast to the picture already drawn, presented by
the desolations and miseries of vice and ignorance. Almost all the history of
mankind is an exhibition of this nature; for vice and ignorance have in most
instances prevailed without a mixture, and reigned without control. Rulers
have trampled on the necks, rioted on the spoils, and sported with the
miseries, of their subjects. Subjects have fallen before them with impious
homage, and slavish brutism, or rescued themselves from oppression, to run mad
with the phrenzy of anarchy, and to wanton in plunder and blood. Nations, as if
in love with misery, and unsatisfied to see their sufferings so small, have
reached out an eager hand to grasp at woe. War has been the profession of man,
and arms his instruments of business, and of pleasure. Conquest, like a roaring
lion, has stalked round the desolated globe, seeking whom he might devour. In
his train, Ambition has smoked with slaughter; Avarice has ground the poor into
dust; and Pollution, like the messenger of death to the army of Sennacherib,
has changed the host of man into putrified corpses. Fiends have looked on, and
triumphed; Angels have wondered, and wept; and Heaven, as if discouraged from
efforts, has given up its work to waste and destruction.

The end of the observations, which I have made, is to impress on the minds of
this audience the importance of public and individual exertions to promote
knowledge and virtue in this State. If the observations are just, the value of
the object will not be disputed. But it is one thing to be convinced of the
importance of an object, and another to feel it in such a manner, as to be
roused into exertion in its behalf. Ignorance of the most proper methods of
exertion, difficulties always presenting themselves in its progress, and doubts
concerning its success, added to native indolence, easily damp the rising
effort, and incline us to shift the burden from ourselves to others, and to
rest satisfied with the general opiate of conscience, that our attempts will be
vain, and may, therefore, be safely neglected.

To strengthen this enervating conclusion in our minds, we naturally summon to
our aid the general voice of human experience. "The course of human affairs,"
we easily say, and say with some degree of truth, "has been a constant
exhibition of extreme difficulty, ever found in extending and establishing
virtue in the present world. The volume of man is written only in black; and
page after page, when carefully turned over, is seen to be marked only with
lines of vice, ignorance, and sorrow. Centuries have rolled on, without a beam
of light; and Continents, throughout their expanded regions, have reeked with
the slaughter of man, and echoed to the voice of mourning and misery. Intervals
have indeed appeared of a brighter aspect; and favored tracts have, at times,
enjoyed the twilight promise of approaching day. But how few have been these
envied exceptions to the general character of time, and to the general state of
the world! What miniatures of happiness, knowledge, and virtue must we oppose
to the gigantic figures of war, and woe, of idolatry and brutism! A few years
form the only contrast to sixty centuries; and Switzerland is that small dust
of the balance, which must be weighed against Africa and Asia."

Such is the language of sloth and discouragement. In the main it is true; but
it is not the whole truth. The few experiments, which have been imperfectly
made, to diffuse knowledge, and implant and cultivate virtue, in the mass of
mankind, have sufficiently proved, that efforts for this end may be successful;
and that, when man has prepared the ground, and sown the seed, Heaven will
refuse neither the rain, nor the sunshine.

The whole cultivation of virtue is a conflict with vice; but the warfare is
honorable, and the victory fruitful in advantage, beyond the reach of
computation. Nothing valuable comes to man, without his cooperation; and the
toil is commonly proportioned to the worth of the acquisition. As the diffusion
of Virtue over a Community is the first social blessing, so it ought, according
to the analogy of Providence, to be expected to demand greater efforts, than
any other blessing. Liberty has often been the price of lives scarcely
numerable, and of property exceeding calculation. Yet Liberty is a possession
of less importance than Virtue. Had half the efforts been made to promote
virtue, which have been made to extend war and slaughter, virtue would now,
probably, constitute the prevailing human character. But Virtue, though the
first good of man, has least engaged his attention.

Wherever exertions have been made for the extension of virtue, success has
followed. Under the superintendence, and by the labors, of the Apostles, its
progress was a greater miracle to the eye, than all those, which they
performed* as means of its existence. With the gradual decay of effort it
gradually ceased. At the Reformation, exertion rose to a character almost
Apostolic, and success attended it, like that of the Apostles. In Switzerland,
Holland, Scotland, England, and in some parts of the American States, the
growth and prevalence of Virtue has, at times, and through a considerable
period, been fully proportioned to the efforts in its behalf, and answered
every rational hope. There is, therefore, from experience, no reason for
discouragement.

It may, perhaps, be said, that Virtue is the gift of God. This is no objection
to the sentiments, here advanced. It is their support. Every blessing is the
gift of God. The harvest is as truly his gift, as Virtue. Nor is there a reason
to believe, that he will less willingly meet, with his blessing, him, who
labors to adorn the mind with moral beauty, and to plant in it the seeds of
righteousness, than him, who, with equal industry, is employed in dressing the
earth in verdure, and in filling the field with bread.

That knowledge may be effectually diffused through a Community will not be
doubted.

On the methods, by which these great attributes of the mind, these great means
of Social happiness, maybe most effectually cultivated, and established, I have
much to say; and feel it to be a misfortune, that so large a part of my time
seemed necessary to prepare a foundation, when the whole was necessary to raise
the structure. To the time, however, I must conform, and important as I deem
the subject, must dismiss it with mere hints, and heads of discourse.

The Laws of every country have all, or may have, an important influence on
this subject. The formation and establishment of knowledge and virtue in the
citizens of a Community is the first business of Legislation, and will more
easily and more effectually establish order, and secure liberty, than all the
checks, balances, and penalties, which have been devised by man. With the
Legislature this business should begin; and with reference to it most, if not
all, their important measures ought to be concerted. They wish, doubtless, to
do good to their country. In this way they can do more good to it, than in any
other. Were this sentiment, in full strength, in the mind of every Legislator,
the object could not fail of being accomplished.

In the exact execution of Law, those magistrates, to whom this duty is
entrusted, may find an extensive field for the employment of this most
honorable patriotism. It is not an uncommon, nor unfounded opinion, that the
duties of executive officers are, here, less punctually performed, than the
public good demands; and that too strong a spirit of accommodation is become
their customary character. Little crimes appear, unhappily, to be passed over
with inattention, and thus prepare the way for those which are greater. It is
desirable, that no Laws, beside necessary ones, should exist; but is equally
and even more desirable, that every existing Law should be executed. In an
effectual Grand Jury this State is unhappily and singularly defective, and
suffers daily from the defect. Until this evil shall be remedied, one wide door
to immorality and unhappiness will be unnecessarily left open.

Calumny against the several Officers, employed in governmental duty, is one of
the most obvious methods of weakening government. The esteem of the Community
is, in all countries, an object of no small importance to persons in public
agency; but, in this country, it is of the highest importance. The magistrate,
here, is raised above others by his office only; and the esteem, which he
wishes to obtain, is the esteem of his peers and companions. To deprive him of
this esteem is to deprive him, in a sense, of his all; and to do it wantonly
and maliciously is to act the part of an enemy, and a savage. "Thou shall not
speak evil of the ruler of thy people" is equally a law of Revelation, and of
Common sense. If Rulers transgress, and act with fraud, or injustice, the path
of regular impeachment is open, and ought to be pursued. Mere political slander
is the result of ambition, or of malice; and is as mischievous in its effects,
as base in its origin. The length, to which it has already proceeded, is great;
the length, to which it will proceed, cannot be calculated. A small degree of
foresight, will, however, enable us to decide, that, should it not be checked,
the possession of office will, of itself, be esteemed, ere long, an adequate
proof of dishonesty.

But as Public happiness depends, in this country, at least, on the personal
character of its inhabitants at large, so the promotion of public happiness
must, in a great measure, rest on personal exertions. Men of every description,
who wish the end accomplished, must unite to furnish the means.

The primary mean of this end has, I flatter myself, been proved to be Virtue.
States may be rich, powerful, and free; and yet not be happy. Antiquity
furnishes us with a long and pompous list of rich and powerful States; but
scarcely with one, in which the great body of citizens in this State would not,
if fairly informed in the history of those States, be wholly unwilling to live;
life, in our view, being hardly worth possessing, if it must be passed in so
wretched a state of Society. The same observation, with nearly the same force,
may be applied to almost all the present States of Europe. The Grisons, allies
of the Switzers, are, by their Constitution of government, the freest people,
perhaps, of any on the Eastern Continent. Still they are an unhappy people.
They have neither virtue to desire, nor knowledge to understand, the common
interest. Justice, suffrages, and the whole public weal, are, among them, sold
annually, like goods in the market. Hence, with the fullest possession of
liberty, they are equally contemptible and wretched.

There are two great means of promoting virtue; Religious Education and Public
Worship. Religious education prepares the mind to love, to attend, and to
profit by public worship; and public worship supports and regulates religious
education. Without public worship, children would cease to be religiously
educated; and without religious education, public worship would cease to be
attended.

To render public worship useful, it must be frequented; and, to make it
frequented, it must, so far as consists with its nature, be made pleasing. For
this purpose, the ministers of this worship must, so far as the circumstances
of men will allow, be persons of knowledge, virtue and dignity. To secure, in
any country, a succession of such ministers, their support ought to be
comfortable; the source neither of splendor and luxury on the one hand, nor of
suffering and meanness on the other. Opulent livings would invite, and would be
filled by those, who most covet opulence; the aspiring, and the unprincipled. A
bare living would be lest to sloth, and ignorance. A rich and proud ministry
would be inaccessible to the poor, and the humble; a ministry struggling under
penury would tremble at the frowns of the rich, and the great. The support of
ministers ought also to be secure, and endangered by nothing, but their
misconduct. Precarious livings, beside their exposure to all the evils of
scanty ones, would furnish, to the incumbents, daily temptations to sacrifice
conscience and duty to the whims, and the vices, of those, from whose goodwill
they hoped to derive their daily bread. No Youth, possessed of learning,
dignity, and worth, can be expected to venture himself on the ocean of life, in
a bark, which so evidently announces a speedy and certain shipwreck, by its
total want of strength, and safety, for the voyage.

Religion is always estimated by the character of its ministers. If they are
generally vile, the religion, which they profess, is generally abhorred; if
contemptible, it is despised; but, if worthy and dignified, it cannot but be
respected. Thus intimate and inseparable is the permanent and sufficient
support of the ministers of religion with virtue, and of course with the
existence, and the stability, of public happiness.

Religious education, in the first instance, is domestic. To the early mind,
parents are the ministers of religion appointed by God himself, and invested by
him with authority, and advantages, wholly peculiar. On that mind it is in
their power to make impressions, of the highest importance, and the most benign
efficacy; impressions, which extend to all the great concerns of man, which
mould the whole future character, and which stand, through life, as prominent
features in the conduct of every day. "Even a child may be known by his
goings," says Solomon; or, as in the Hebrew, "By the goings of a Child may be
known his future character, when a man." In the earliest stages of childhood
may be implanted such a sense of right and wrong, of truth and falsehood, of
honesty and fraud, of good will and malice, of accountableness and judgment, of
heaven and hell, of the glorious character of the Redeemer, of the presence,
inspection, agency, and government, of God, as will remain, influence, and
govern, through every succeeding period; such a sense, as will, in a great
measure, form for every social duty, and preclude the necessity of most
political restraints, and of all political violence. To communicate a religious
education to their children is the greatest blessing, which parents can usually
confer upon them; the highest service, which they can render to society; and
the most important duty, which they can perform to God. Yet there is, perhaps,
no duty more neglected.

To the efforts of parents those of Schoolmasters ought to be added. Where
parents perform this duty, the Schoolmaster may happily increase, and rivet,
the impression: where they neglect it, he may, in no small measure, supply the
defect. Moral instruction of every kind ought invariably to form a material
part of school education. To this end, it ought to be exacted of every
Schoolmaster, that he be, in the public eye, a virtuous man.

For this, and every other purpose, which is expected from schools, it is
necessary, that the Legislature should steadily interfere. Private efforts may
do much; but they cannot do all. Where the suffrages of all concerned are of
equal influence, measures are merely the effect of compromise, and incapable of
system, or regularity. Hence the absolute necessity of some superior control.
Visitors, under Legislative authority, ought to be empowered, and obliged, to
inspect the knowledge, and the morals, of the teachers, the system of
education, the diligence with which it is pursued, and the progress of the
pupils in knowledge, manners, and morals. Regular returns ought to be made to
Commissioners of Government, concerning the whole state of education; and
public benefits should invariably reward such persons, as originate essential
improvements.

Example, Union, Concert, are primary wheels in every system of improvement.
All things flourish, where all hearts are engaged. The great object, here
urged, has never been, but very imperfectly, made a national object* It ought
to be the first end of all measures national and personal. Power, wealth, and
splendor, cannot be more certainly acquired. It is as easy to bless, as to
conquer; to enrich a land with virtue, and to adorn it with knowledge, as to
store it with silver, and load it with villas and palaces. Man may as easily be
a Saint, as a Savage; and Nations as easily enlightened with Millennial glory,
as overcast with the midnight of Gothicism. All that is necessary, on the part
of man, is to bring the subject home to his heart, to feel its inestimable
importance, to realize its practicability, and to make it the chief aim of his
fixed endeavors.

Confident of the justice, and of the interesting nature, of these
observations, let me ask, Is there in the wide region of human concerns, is
there in the wider regions of the universe, an object, which ought more to
engross the attention, and the labor, of man? Is there a more honorable
patriotism, or a truer friendship to liberty, than thus to aim, and thus to
labor? Ought it not to seize the heart, to inspire the voice, and to command
the hands, of every citizen? Who can say, and say with truth, "I have no
concern in this employment"? Who can say, "My labors will be useless"? Who is
so poor, so lowly, so ignorant, as not to be able to cast in to the public
stock his two mites? Who among the richer, the more enlightened, the more
dignified, can, to any other purpose, so nobly contribute, of his abundance?

Connecticut can never be distinguished for extent of territory, superior
wealth, or great numbers of inhabitants. This, instead of being a misfortune,
ought to be esteemed a blessing. A nobler distinction is thrown by a good
Providence into its hands. It may rise to preeminence in knowledge, virtue, and
happiness. We need not grudge the dross, while the gold is ours. It may be the
Athens, not of a savage, idolatrous, and brutal world, but of a world
enlightened, refined, and christian. Let its citizens unite in well concerted
and determined efforts, for this end; and it will be accomplished.

How honorable, how enviable a task, how glorious a crown of patriotic labors
already undergone, would it be to the officers of an Army, distinguished by
unprecedented and most public-spirited efforts, in the cause of their country,
to stand foremost in the pursuit of this first interest, this supreme glory, of
that country? With that courage with which they braved a foreign invader, that
patience of suffering with which they encountered toil, and want, and that
perseverance with which they surmounted difficulty and discouragement, to meet
every foe employed to attack, every art exerted to undermine, and every
obstacle raised up to hinder, our public prosperity? What a wreath of laurel
will be twined around their memory, whenever it is rehearsed, that they were,
alike, the best soldiers, and the best citizens? The path to this glory, I
flatter myself, I have disclosed.

Such efforts are visibly demanded of all citizens to preserve, as well as to
increase, the happiness, for which that Army so bravely fought, and so largely
bled. Our very Government, so mild, so useful, and so harmoniously adopted, has
been attacked by intrigue, calumny, and insurrection. This evil has existed,
while the chair of Magistracy has been filled by a Man, who, under God, has
probably wrought for this country more blessings, than were ever wrought by any
man for any country: whose wisdom has proved superior to every perplexity,
whose patriotism to every temptation, and whose fortitude to every trial: a
Man, who can pass through no American States, survey no field, and tread on no
spot of ground, which he has not saved from devastation; who can mix with no
assembly, visit no family, and accost no person, who must not say, "Our
freedom, our peace, our safety, we owe first to God, and next to you:" who can
turn his ear to no sound of joy, which he has not a share in exciting; and open
his eye on no scene of comfort, which does not trace him as its origin; a man
to whom poets, orators, sages, legislators, and the nations of two worlds, have
eagerly paid their tribute of esteem, admiration, and love. Against this very
man have these evils been directed. What then must be looked for, when the same
seat shall be filled by inferior talents, sustained by a patriotism less
unequivocal, and sanctioned by a popularity less complete? What, but an event,
at which philanthropy shudders; and, with the existence of which, the hopes of
the wise, and the good, will be extinguished forever? To avert such a
catastrophe, and under the banner of such a leader, his illustrious companions
in the field will cheerfully unite, and call to the standard every virtuous
citizen, every friend of man, to preserve all that, for which they fought, and
to increase all that, in which they glory. Thus will they secure the peace of
an approving conscience, enjoy the transports of an expanded benevolence, and
commence a career of honor which will know no end.


