Entertaining Novelist OR, New Pocket Library, OF Agreeable Entertainment.

THE Entertaining Novelist OR, New Pocket Library, OF AGREEABLE ENTERTAINMENT.

CONTAINING, A Variety of ENTERTAINING STORIES, MIRACULOUS and INTERRESTING
ADVENTURES, etc. Founded on WELL-ATTESTED FACTS.

Here Stories Wonderful are told,
To fill with joy the Young and Old --
And while Events most Strange we find,
Delight shall with Surprise be joined.
NEW YORK: PRINTED and SOLD by JOHN HARRISSON, (YORICK'S HEAD) No. 3,
PECK-SLIP. -- 1795 --

CONTENTS.
THE Heir of the House of Oldfield, Page. 1 ^tory of Patty Ashford, Page. 27
The Vicar's Tale, Page. 35 Volkmar and Fanny, Page. 53 The Force of Love, Page.
60 The Castle of Costanzo, Page. 61 ^olyman and Almena, Page. 71 ^ahmut and
Idris, Page. 78 The Chevalier Bayard and Madame de Randan, Page. 87 ^eladon and
Amelia, Page. 107 ^dmund and Maria, or the Peaceful Villa, Page. 117 The
Honorable Seducer, or the History of Olivia, Page. 128 ^nny, or the Happy
Repentance, Page. 140
THE HEIR OF THE HOUSE OF OLDFIELD. A MORAL TALE
IT is a maxim recognized by every observer of depraved human nature, "that he
who has been base enough essentially to injure the innocent, never forgives
them." We may add, that miscreants of this description frequently pursue, with
relentless hatred, even the posterity of those whom they have thus offended.
Yet let it be remembered, that if implacable villainy kindles with malice
against the injured victims; it is because their presence, and even their
existence, reminds him of his guilt, and makes him tremble for the dreaded
retribution.

David Sinister had been forty years stewar^ and solicitor to Henry Oldfield,
Esquire one of the richest and most respectable families in the county of Hereford;
and, at the time of that gentleman's decease, he had contrived to amass a
fortune of about as many thousand pounds. This ample sum however, served only
to inspire him with the diabolical desire of completely plundering his master's
heir of the family-estate, a desing which he soon found means effectually to
execute. To enumerate the various artifices by which this abominable plan was
accomplished, would be but to lay open those dreadful scenes of iniquity which
are every day practicing, and against which no human laws can possibly protect,
with certainty, the hapless victims of an infernal confederation.

The young man struggled but a short time with his hard fate; but he lived long
enough to leave behind, at the age of twenty-five, a fine boy only two years
old, whose mother had, about three months before, fallen the victim of a
pulmonary complaint.

Her father, the curate of a small village, in the county of Cambridge, took
the infant under his protection: and not only made him acquainted with the
rudiments of learning; but, what was of far higher value, implanted in his
tender mind, the unfeigned love of virtue, and a firm reliance on Providence.
He was himself of a consumptive habit; and had long looked forward to the event
which was to send the poor heir of the house of Oldfield houseless into the
world. Yet he would suddenly check the tear of apprehension, which his pious
soul deemed sinful; and pressing the poor youth to his breast, as he sustained
him on his trembling knees, he would sing with the most celestial sweetness and
fervor as if under the immediate inspiration of Heaven --

He who the raven's wants supplies.
For all his creatures will provide;
To him I raise my ardent eyes,
In him my trembling lips confide:
And He, when my frail spirit's fled,
Shall give my boy his daily bread.
The fatal hour at length arrived; and Harry, then little more than fifteen
years of age, having wept over the grave of his last earthly friend, bowed to
the will of the Father of the fatherless, with astonishing resignation. The
effects of the worthy old gentleman were barely sufficient to discharge his
trifling debts, and defray the funeral expenses; and with something less than
ten pounds in his pocket, this well-educated little orphan had the prudence to
consider by what means he should obtain more, before this small sum became
exhausted. At first, he thought of trying his fortune in London; but this
design was abandoned, the instant he recollected what his grandfather had said
respecting the vices of the metropolis, and the many dangers to which
friendless innocence and inexperienced youth are there exposed. Some employ,
however, he resolved, to seek; and his heart sighed to visit the family state
of Oldfield Hall, which he had heard so frequently and so feelingly described.
He was sensible of the height from which his poor father had fallen; and felt
an ardent desire to visit the cene of his family's prosperous days. He
flattered himself, some person might be left in the neighborhood, who would
kindly afford him food for his labor; and, at any rate, he conceived that he
could sustain every hardship, on the spot where Heaven had formerly showered
for them so many blessings. "Surely," thought he, "I shall not be driven from
fields, that were once theirs, without a few scattered ears of corn! I shall
not be denied some small portion of the fruits that are free for "Nature's
commoners." Not Heaven, that has hitherto provided for me, will not there
forsake me! My footsteps may sometimes press the paths where they have trod; my
eyes will behold views with which they have been delighted. I shall there eat
the bread of health, I shall there drink the waters of temperance, and be
happy!" These were the reflections that impelled him to set out for
Herefordshire; and that enabled him to "go on his way rejoicing," during a
tedious journey of near a hundred and fifty miles.

He reached the abode of his ancestors late in the evening; and crept,
unperceived, into (...) outhouse, where he slept peacefully till the morning.

He arose soon after the sun; and walked musing over the delightful grounds;
and his eyes now suffused with tears, and now brightening with pleasure,
surveyed every object with a secret but melancholy satisfaction. Ardently di^
he long to behold the internal parts of the family mansion! but this was a
gratification not to be expected; at least for the present.

In this manner did he wander several days; sometimes sleeping in the shed
where he had reposed the first night, and sometimes reaching a small and lonely
alehouse, about a mile distant, the only habitation he could find in the
neighborhood.

The present owner of Oldfield Hall, he knew, had been the former steward of
the family; and he knew that his grandfather could never bear to hear the name
of Sinister mentioned, without visible emotion; But he little thought that his
father had been robbed of his inheritance by the machinations of the cruel
monster, and his heart entertained not the smallest prejudice against a man who
he supposed had become the legal purchaser of the estate.

David Sinister happened at this time to be from home. He was attending the
assizes at Hereford, where he had been to convict a man for sheep^ stealing;
and who, though he had a wife and seven children almost starving, and it was
his first offense, immediately received sentence of death, and was ordered for
execution.

Having performed this act of justice, he returned with great satisfaction. It
was a fine summer's evening; and, as he drew near home, he expatiated largely,
to his servant, on the value of honesty; and on the turpitude of criminally
appropriating another's property, however trivial, even from the absurd plea of
necessity, which the malefactor had alone urged in his defense -- "Property,"
cried he, "is so sacred that I would hang my own brother, were he living, if he
robbed me of a shilling to save himself from starving!"

Scarcely had he uttered these words, when Harry Oldfield, who happened to be
in the field next the road, where he was at that moment debating with his
conscience the propriety of drawing a turnip for his supper, and who now
resolved to run away from the temptation, hastily ascending the style,
presented, across the road, the shadow of his father, to the astonished eyes of
this stern dispenser of justice. The glance was transitory, as the electrick
stroke; but, like the stroke of electricity, it thrilled through every fiber of
his frame. The momentary check which it occasioned to his horse, and the
deprivation of his speech which it instantaneously effected, gave the youth
time to leap over the opposite style, before Sinister could be thoroughly
satisfied whether what he beheld was reality, or the effect of some
supernatural appearance, the possibility of which he had never till that
instant believed. As soon as he regained the power of utterance, though he
feared to look back, he ventured to ask his servant if he had seen any thing,
and desired him now to ride a little before. The servant had been surprised at
his master's sudden taciturnity; and he was now astonished at his question, as
well as his request: advancing his horse, however, he instantly replied, that
he had seen nothing but a poor boy, who had just hastily crossed the road. "Are
you sure it was a boy?" said Sinister: "the shade appeared like that of a very
tall man." -- "La! Sir," replied the servant; "our shadows, you know, always
grow longer at sunset!" -- "That Is true," replied Sinister: "but still -- "

Here he paused -- to consider whether he was not about to say, what he might
afterward wish retracted: and, as they had now approached within a half a mile
of the house, not another syllable did he risque till they arrived there.

At home, though he was surrounded with elegance, he had never possessed any
other enjoyment than that of amassing wealth, which he had not the spirit to
enjoy. For innocent amusements he had no relish; reading was a waste of time;
and reflection was death. He was beloved by no human being: even his son, whom
he waded through iniquity, and even blood itself, to ennoble, at once dreaded
and despised him. His wife had long since fallen the victim to his cruelty; if,
indeed, her death had not been hastened by an artful strumpet whom she had
indiscreetly made ^^her companion, and with whom he now openly cohabited. She,
indeed, it is true, produced him a couple of children; but, if he had not been
blinded by his absurd attachment, he might have beheld what every one else
plainly perceived, that in the countenance of his French valet, and not in his
own looking-glass, their resemblance was to be discovered. Monsieur's features
were large, and his face was the rouged bronze of his country; his master's
unpleasingly dimenutive, and his countenance the palid hue of condemned guilt.
With this base woman did Sinister spend most of his time; and, though her
features were coarse, her sentiments grossly vulgar, and her voice harsh as the
raven's; so that it was impossible he could have loved her, had he beca^^
susceptible of love; by submitting to the tyranny of his temper, and pretending
to an excess of affection for his person, she entertaining hop^^ that her
children would in the end possess Oldfield Hall, in spite even of his son, who
might full a victim to the dissipation into which she had provided he should be
tempted, while he wa^ now making the tour of Europe.

To such a companion, with all his weakness, he was much too cunning to unbosom
himself. He had no appetite for the provision that was set before him; and,
having labored to drow^ reflection, by swallowing a plentiful quantity o^
brandy and water, he retired to his chamber.

It was in vain, however, that he endeavor^ to compose himself to rest: his
eyes were (...) sooner closed, than the shadow of Harry Oldfield appeared
before him. He opened them, fancy conducted to his ear sounds of criminal
accusation, and of menaced vengeance. He closed both his ears and eyes, yet
voices seemed to speak from within him; and the cries of the sheep-stealer's
wife and children, now imploring pardon, and now reproaching him with superior
guilt, while to his mind's eye they seemed shrieking around the agonized man,
who was about to be launched into eternity; proved together too powerful for
him; and leaping out of bed, with a loud cry he fell down in a swoon.

Though his housekeeper lay in the next room, and neither she nor Monsieur were
asleep, they did not think proper to hear him: weltering, therefore, in his
blood, for he had cut his temples by the fall, he continued till nature gave
him strength sufficiently recruited to reach the bell; when he immediately gave
an alarm, to which they knew the certain consequence of being deaf.

Having put some balsam to the wound, which appeared trifling, notwithstanding
the effusion of blood was great, his tender housekeeper now affectionately
entreated permission to sit up with him for the remainder of the night. But,
though her presence took off much of the horror he had before felt, it was in
vain that he endeavored to procure sleep; and in a state of restless
stupefaction he continued till the welcome appearance of morning.

The morning, however, broke out with the splendour of the proceeding day. The
cloud^ were heavy, there was a brisk wind, and the dawn was quickly overcast.
The rain soon began to descend; and, though not violent, seemed likely to prove
lasting: so that Sinister, instead of taking an early ride, as he had intended
according to his usual practice, was under the necossity of remaining at home.

But the rain, which had prevented his ride could not prevent the wife of the
unhappy malefactor and their seven children from visiting the stern prosecutor
of their too anxious protector, and imploring him to sign their petition for a
pardon before the judge quitted the city. He had just raised to his lips the
first morsal of his breakfast, when the whole groupe, having been refused
admission, knelt at his gate, and with their affecting cries began to realize
what i^ had so recently been tormented with by imagination.

He began now to conceive, that the appearance of Harry Oldfield's ghost the
preceding evening -- for such he had now made up in (...) mind it must
necessarily be -- was merely to wan^ him against putting to death a man who was
b^ no means so criminal as himself; and that, therefore his peace of mind would
return the moun^^^^ he had forgiven this man. In fact there was b^ little for
him to forgive; since he not lost a single shilling on the occasion. The
imprudent fellow was detected in selling this solitary sheep, which he had met
with straying in the road, at a time when he had neither money, nor work, nor
food for his family. He had, therefore, for the first time of his life, yielded
to the temptation; but he would not for the universe, have taken it home to his
family, or have let them know that he had by improper means procured the value
of a farthing. In this frame of mind, Sinister desired the petition might be
brought in; and to the surprise of the servants, whose tears ran down their
faces for joy, he immediately signed it. At the transporting, but unexpected
intelligence, the poor woman faiinted away; for a pardon had been promised by
the judge, provided the prosecutor would sign the petition: and, when she
recovered, the fervor with which she prayed to Heaven for blessings on her
husband's preserver, and the artless manner in which she was joined by her
little ones, had an effect far beyond any conception.

Sinister, having thus cheaply satisfied his conscience, spent the remainder of
the day in cheerfulness; and, at night, enjoyed a more calm and delightful
repose than he had for many years experienced.

In the morning he rose early; and looking out at a window, while his horse was
getting ready, what was his astonishment, on perceiving the very boy issue from
a little shed, whose shadow, as he was now fully persuaded, had occasioned him
so much alarm!

He had but a few minutes to reflect on this incident, before he was informed
that the horse waited; and, immediately mounting, he thought he would direct
his ride to that part of the park in which he had lost sight of the boy. Having
proceeded about a quarter of a mile, he discried him at a distance, near a wood
on the verge of the park; and, calling to his servant -- "Look there, (said he)
is not that the boy you saw the other evening?" -- "Where, Sir?" replied the
man, looking in a different direction. "There, blockhead!" cried his master,
pointing to just spot. But it was too late, for the youth had the just entered
the wood; and the servant began to think his master's senses had taken leave of
him.

It is astonishing what trifles alarm a guilty mind! Sinister's happiness was
again fled; all his terrors returned. Yet the object that excited this
commotion was but a child; a poor friendless child! who had a heart too tender
to trample wantonly on a worm.

Young Harry had seen Sinister at the window; and he was persuaded that he had
been seen by him when he quitted the shed. He now began to fear, that he had
taken an unwelcome, and perhaps an unjust liberty, in lodging without express
permission, where certainly any animal in the creation might ungrudgingly been
suffered to repose: anduch was the delicate propriety of his mind, that he
would have disdained even the shelter of a hedge, if he felt the smallest
indication that he might possibly be acting wrong.

Alas! he could feelingly say, with the only "perfect Being" ever on earth --
"Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the son of man has not
where to lay his head!"

For several days he remained concealed in the woods, subsisting merely on the
nuts and berries he found there: and, each night, climbing a thick tree, he
fastened his body, with a handkerchief, to one of the firmest branches, where
he fearlessly reposed till awakened by the cheerful harmony of his early and
innocent neighbors.

Sinister, during all this time, was suffering every horror of a mind awakened
to a sense of it is guilt. Each day was spent in anticipating the terrors of the
coming night; and such were his augmented apprehensions, that he could not
endure to be left a moment in the dark, and had a servant constantly awake in
his chamber. The wound on his temples too, either from the agitation of his
animal spirits, or in consequence of his tender housekeeper's balsam, a secret
composition of her own began to exhibit alarming appearances: but she persuaded
him that her infallible plaster must soon do the business; and his mental
wound gave him a thousand times more pain, than he either felt or dreaded from
so insignificant a hurt.

The servant, who accompanied him from Hereford, and on his airing in Oldfield
park, endeavored to assist the kitchen council's enquiry into the cause of
their master's malady, by relating what he had witnessed respecting the boy;
who had been observed looking earnestly toward the house and contemplatively
traversing the grounds, several times. But there was, they all agreed, so much
of the gentleman in the little fellow and he looked so innocent, good-natured,
and handsome; that they were certain he could neither have any bad design, nor
belong to any persons who had; and they would have invited hi^ into the house,
even at the risque of their m^tor's displeasure, if they had not thought tha^
they might disturb him, as he seemed shy, an^ desirous of avoiding company.
They had no^ however, the smallest idea of the youth; though they thought they
had seen somebody like hi^ and they ended, as they began, with many nod^ winks,
and deep sighs of selfgratulation, the though they had not some folk's money,
they (...) not, they thanked God, some folk's conscienc^ Monsieur, who was of
this party, in his tet^ tete with the housekeeper, the same evening mentioned
what had passed in the kitchen: and (...) who had heard more of her master's
moans a^ half-uttered expressions, than any of the oth^ servants, began to
spell and put together; (...) last she guessed, rightly enough, what was at the
bottom. To satisfy herself, she fetched from the lumber garret, where a large
collection of family portraits had been long locked up, the portraits of the
two last Oldfields; and, sum^oning into her apartment the servant who had
oftenest seen the youth, she began, first bribing his secrecy with a glass of
cherry-brandy, to enquire if the boy he had seen was like either of those
pictures. The fellow, at the sight of the youngest, which was in fact Harry
Oldfield, (the father) started back with affright; his eyes seemed inclined to
quit their sockets, and his hair standing erect -- "'It Is as like, it is as like,
madam, (he stammered out) as, as, as -- are you sure it is not him himself?"
This was sufficient. She carried the portraits again up stairs; and, giving him
another glass of her favorite cordial, to restore his spirits, with a few hints
of what he ^ight expect if he was wise enough to hold his tongue, she dismissed
him back to the kitchen: where, though certainly he did not utter a single word
on the subject, with his tongue, he took (...) literally to hold that member
between his ^mb and finger, and to practice many signif^^^nt contortions of his
face, elevations of his hand; and eye, shrugs of his shoulders, and other
plea^^nt pantomimical contrivances, all tending plain^ to demonstrate that he
could say a great deal (...) he d^red.

Sinister being retired to his chamber, the housekeeper soon began to
administer her consolation. She represented the cruelty to himself in
smothering any secret that oppressed him, and mildly reproached his want of
confidence inner so long experienced affection. There was nothing, not even her
life, that she would hesitate to sacrifice for the dear object to whom she had
already forfeited what was to a woman of her honor and breeding so much more
precious than life itself. What would become of her, what would become of his
sweet babes, if he gave way to such causeless but ruinous regrets! If he died,
Heaven knew, they must all go to the workhouse; for, to be sure, his fine son
would soon turn them out of doors, and perhaps not long have a house over his
own head! With this kind of language, to which he but little attended, she
contrived to keep her tongue in motion for some hours; and he who was all the
time pondering on the means by which he should effectually get rid of the last
heir of the house of Oldfield, began to ask what she thought of Monsieur.
Conscience hastily interpreting this question; she tartly replied, that he was
an ugly wretch, and that she could never abide him. "I do not mean, (says
Sinister) to ask your opinion of his beauty: But do you think his fidelity can
be depended on! Can he keep a secret?" -- "O, yes! (replied she, glad to find
there was no jealousy): I have tried him many and many's the time; and you
would be really astonished, if I were to tell you how well he can keep a
secret! No, hang him! though he is certainly not handsome, to give the man his
due, I must say, he is as fit to be trusted with secrets as any fellow I ever
knew, and I have known many in my time." -- "Not so fast; not so fast!
(interrupted Sinister) I have been thinking of a plan. If this boy could be
privately secured, and sent somewhere abroad, so that I might never see him
again, cost what it would, I should be happy enough." -- "Give yourself no more
trouble about it, (said she) you may reckon the thing done, and sleep in peace."

She told Monsieur, in the morning, what had passed between her and her master;
and he consented, though with some reluctance, to undertake the task.
Accordingly, he spent the whole of that day, in making minute enquiries after
the youth. He even traced him to the little alehouse, where he had been
refreshed; but the landlord and his wife protested they had seen nothing of him
for several days, and they were anxious to know what could be become of him.
They declared he was the gentlest and best creature in the world: and they
never loved so well a child of their own, for they believed he was an angel.
Monsieur now told them, that if he came again, he begged they would send him
word; and, if they would promise to keep the secret, he would tell them the
truth. The boy, he said, was his own son; and had run away from his mother, in
France, who was breaking her heart at his absence. All he wanted was, to secure
the young rogue, and send him back to his mother, till his own father died;
when he should return to his dear wife, and live like a gentleman, on his own
family estate. The good souls, who believed every syllable Monsieur said,
promised to do as he had told them; and they would have religiously kept their
word, had Harry unfortunately furnished them with any opportunity. But
Providence was pleased to dispose of him in a different way.

He was, one morning, descending from a tree in which he had all night reposed,
when he was perceived by an old man, sitting on the ground at a little
distance, who was binding together a few sticks, to form a small faggot. There
was something wonderfully benign and attractive in the countenance of the old
man: Whose silver beard swept his bosom; and whose head, though rendered bald
by age, still retained a few scattered locks of snowy hair. His whole form was
manly; and his dress, though coarse, clean and neat in the extreme. He was a
man of whom no stranger could hesitate to say, that he had seen more prosperous
days. Harry, though naturally diffident and distant, was attracted, as it were
involuntarily toward the old man; who while the youth approached, looking
steadfastly in his face, with a union of surprise, of doubt, and of transport,
no sooner saw features once so familiar to his eye, than he rose on one knee,
and exclaimed -- "Gracious Heaven, I am not deceived; this is surely my dear
young master! it must, it must be, Harry Oldfield!"

Harry acknowledged that his name was Oldfield; and a few minutes acquaintance
endeared them to each other. The good old man had in his youth been valet to
Harry's grandfather. He afterward rented for many years, a respectable farm,
on the Oldfield estate, from which he was cruelly ejected by Sinister, who had
laid six farms into one, and thus driven so many families into distress and
obscurity.

When the poor man understood the situation of Harry, from his simple
narrative, his aged ^yes rained a shower of tears; and he sobbed as (...) his
heart were breaking. "O, my young master, (said he) live with me: I have a
small ^ottage which I can call my own; and I have a ^^od or two of ground,
which I cultivate. In ^y best days, I took little heed for the future: and much
sickness in my family; I had many ^sses; and I endeavored to do some good, for
^^o is there that has never done some evil? ^et, on being turned out of my
farm, with the p^duce of my stock I purchased a spot of ground, ^^d built my
little hut; the remainder bought a^^ut seven hundred pounds in the funds, which
^ings me twenty guineas a year; and with this I and my little girl contrive to
live comfortably enough." To this generous offer, Harry could only reply, that
he believed Heaven had brought them together; and if it pleased the same
gracious Power, he could wish nothing might ever divide them.

Harry lived for some weeks in this retreat; and, by the advice of the old man,
they seldom approached Sinister's grounds. He knew the malice and implacability
of the wretch, by sad experience; and he dreaded the lengths to which the
villain might proceed against the heir of Oldfield estate. They had, however
been seen together; and, one evening, just after they had retired to rest,
three men in soldiers clothes came to the door and demanded admittance. The old
man told them, from a small window, that his family were in bed; that he knew
nothing of them; and that they could clearly have no business there. One of
them replied, that they belonged to a recruiting-party; and that, having come
from Hereford, after a deserter, whom he harbored, they were resolved not to
go away without him. The young man, they swore, was about five and twenty: He
was one of the finest fellows in their regiment, being full six feet without
his shoes; much scarred with the small pox; and had red hair: he was, therefore
remarkable enough, and they were not to be deceived in the person, though they
well knew h^ went by different names. Harry, the old man, and his daughter,
having slipped on their clothes, and agreeing there would be no harm in
permitting the soldiers to search for the person they described, the door was
unsuspectingly opened by Harry, whom two of the soldiers immediately dragged
away, crying out -- "This is him; this is him, safe enough! I thought we should
be too cunning for the old fox, and the young cub too!" The old man, in a state
of distraction, rushed out of the house, and pursued after them; but it was
with difficulty he could discover even the road they had taken. That discovery
however inspired him with hope; for he went across the fields, of which they
were clearly ignorant, and was thus enabled to get into the public road, and
porcure assistance from two or three farm-houses, full a quarter of an hour
before they reached the end of the lane. Ten stout men with guns and
pitchforks, therefore, lay in ambush for their arrival; and suddenly bursting
out surrounded and disarmed the three villains, and safely delivered Harry into
the arms of his old friend. The fellows being thus taken and secured, soon came
to a confession: from which it appeared that Sinister's French valet had
employed and instructed them; and that they received twenty pounds a piece for
undertaking the business, and where to have these sums made up by five hundred
whenever it should be completed. They owned they were smugglers, and not
soldiers; and the design was first to carry him into Wales, and from thence to
transport him to the continent, where he was to be left without a shilling in
his pocket, and consequently there would have been no great chance of his ever
getting back again. The old man went next day to Hereford, with the three
soldiers, and Harry Oldfield; and obtained from the majistrates, a warrant for
the apprehension of Sinister, as well as his valet. But Monsieur had just taken
leave of Oldfield Hall; and his master had, a few hours before, set out to
appear before the bar of a still more tremendous tribunal! It appeared that,
for some days, either in spite or in consequence of his skilful housekeeper's
infalible plaster, a gangrene had evidently taken place; and, while she and
Monsieur were gone to instruct the ruffians, old Sinister, beginning to suspect
the truth, called his servants together, and taking his will, which contained a
legacy to the housekeeper and her children, of ten thousand pounds, immediately
thrust it in the fire; declaring that the law would dispose of his property
exactly as he wished, by giving every shilling to his son. Notwithstanding the
injunctions of secrecy, this intelligence reached the ears of the copartners in
iniquity, within half an hour after their return; and they accordingly took
care, in the course of the night, to make ample preparation for the event. Long
before daylight, every thing of value, that was easy to be concealed, found its
way to a distant secret depository; and old Sinister, whose dreadful groans for
a great part of the night kept most of the family awake, was in the morning
discovered to have breathed his last. It was the intention of Monsieur, and his
tender housekeeper, to carry their depredations still farther; but, in
consequence of a letter, which at noon arrived from young Sinister, mentioning
that he had just landed in England, and would be at Oldfield Hall the next day,
they judged it most expedient for Monsieur immediately to decamp into Wales;
whither she was to follow him, the moment she could prevail on young Sinister
to make her the handsome legal settlement, she entertained no doubt of
obtaining from his generous and unsuspecting disposition.

Harry Sinister reached Oldfield Castle the following day; and soon learned the
most important particulars of the various transactions. For the miserable death
of his wretched father -- "Some natural tears he dropped, but wiped them soon."

But when he heard, from all tongues, the piteous story of Harry Oldfield's
sufferings; and, from the perusal of some of his father's papers, became
completely satisfied that the estate had been obtained by the most infernal
practices; though a young man of a gay turn, and a stranger to what are
softened by the appelation of fashionable follies and youthful dissipation, he
dropped on one knee, and with his expressive eyes lifted to Heaven,
energetically deprecated it is vengeance; and solemnly vowed never to possess,
what it was impossible to enjoy, a single shilling of that property which his
father had, as he dreaded to reflect, purchased at the price of his immortal
soul!

In this just resolve he was strengthened by the Power to whom he had wisely
appealed; and, filled with a transport, which no vicious gratification had for
a moment ever conveyed to his bosom, he hastened to fetch Harry Oldfield to the
mansion of his forefathers.

The interview which now took place, was a spectacle for angels: presumptuous,
indeed, must be the pen which attempted to give it tongue. It was the celestial
communication of kindred souls, purged from every terrene grossness; in which
each look, each motion, each feature, each accent, and even silence itself,
spoke a language beyond the highest flights of human rhetoric.

Let it suffice to add, that from this moment all the wealth of old Sinister
was at the disposal of Harry Oldfield. Every argument that could be adduced
proved insufficient to prevail on the son to acceet the smallest portion of
what he insisted would, in his custody, contaminate every penny he might
hereafter honestly acquire, and carry with it a curse to the latest posterity.
It was by these participations, he was convinced that Heaven chiefly "visited
the sins of the fathers, upon the children from generation to generation." Nor
would he consent that a shilling should be given to his father's infamous
housekeeper, which he insisted would only be encouraging vice; and she was
dismissed, with her children, to follow him whose duty it was to support them.
It turned out, however, that Monsieur had gone off for America, with the whole
booty.

At his own earnest request, Harry Sinister was appointed to his father's
original situation, as steward of the estate; and never was that important
trust confided to more able or faithful hands. Harry Oldfield built for him a
noble house in his park; and, erecting another for his adored old man, he
procured the widow of a worthy clergyman to educate the daughter: and, it is
generally thought, as he now usually calls her his little wife, that this good
old domestic's daughter, notwithstanding her father's delicate scruples and
remonstrances, will probably become the happy partner of the Heir of the House
of Oldfield.

STORY OF PATTY ASHFORD. A TALE FOUNDED ON FACT.
LET not the proud look with a scornful eye on the humble heroine whose story
solicits attention. Though nurtered in indigence, and educated but in the
school of sorrow; she was the care of Heaven, and man cannot be degraded by
tracing it is wonderful hand in her preservation from irremediable misery.

Patty Ashford's parents were two of those thoughtless young people, who enter
early into the cares of life, without sufficiently reflecting on the
consequence. They knew, that their intentions were virtuous; and, whatever they
might suffer, they determined to suffer together. Their union, though
honorable, was a stolen one; and Patty, before her entrance into life, betrayed
the secret of her parents. They were both, on this discovery, rendered
destitute of a home. Her father was dismissed by the uncle who had brought him
up: her mother, by a rich, but cruel father; who cut her off with a shilling,
and left the whole of his property to her brother, whom his brutality had
driven abroad in the capacity of a common sailor. Thus, like our first parents,
but with the superior consolation of innocence in their bosoms -- The world was
all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.
MILTON.

With a few shillings in their pockets, and their whole wardrobe in a couple of
handkerchiefs, they set off they knew not whither. After traveling many miles,
and furmounting innumerable hardships, a worthy farmer compassionated their
distress; employed the husband as a labourer; and gave them a little shed to
live in, which their industry soon rendered a comfortable residence. In this
shed Patty Ashford was born. But, as if life had been retained by the mother,
only that she might give it to her infant; the father was no sooner told he had
got a daughter, than it was added, he had lost his wife. This was too severe a
stroke. His agony was beyond all description; and, in three days, a fever at
once closed his miseries and his existence.

The farmer was worthy, but he was not rich. His rent had been nearly doubled,
by the offers of manopolizing neighbors, eager to "lay field to field:" and,
with a heart feelingly alive to the sufferings of others, he had often been
plunged in difficulties which rendered himself a genuine object of compassion.
His wife was his true counterpart: she was, in humble life, the Lady Bountiful
of the surrounding country; a primitive practiser of physic. She had a balsa^,
for every wound; and a diet-drink for every disease; and they were literally
given to all who needed them. This worthy couple laid their heads together. The
result was, that they buried the unhappy pair in the same grave; and agreed to
bring up, with their only surviving son, an infant not a year old, the tender
orphan whom they were persuaded Heaven had sent to claim their protection, and
whom they named after her mother.

Little Patty, as she grew up, was admired much for her beauty, but still more
for the amiable mildness of her disposition. Her bosom was the sent of all that
is tender and good; and she began to make considerable progress in the various
domestic employments, though only about eleven years of age, when the f^rmer,
who had suffered by becoming security for a friend, had his goods seized, and
was himself sent to the county-g^o^. This event broke his wife's heart; their
son was taken by a poor relation, for the rich would have nothing to do with a
person so extremely weak; and little Patty having no friend in the world, was
conveyed to the parish workhouse.

In this miserable place, she remained until about fifteen; when she was taken
out by a lady, then on a visit to her relations in the neighborhood, but who
had married in London, and who wanted, a neat girl to assist in the nursery.

Poor Patty had been treated but indifferently by the unfeeling mercenaries who
kept the poor-house. She had been made to labor much, and permitted to eat but
little: yet, at the thought of parting from those with whom she had been long
accustomed to live, and probably reflecting on what she knew of her past
history, she shed many tears.

Her mistress, however, was a woman of good character, and of a very affable
disposition. She took pains to comfort her; told her of the many fine things
she would see in town; how well prudent young women frequently did there; and
above all cheared her by the reflection, that she was going to the place which
had given birth to her deceased parents. This was at once a solace and a shock.
The gleam of sunshine it conveyed to her bosom, was that of April; it darted
through a gloomy cloud and was accompanied by a copious shower of tears.

In her new situation, she was universally beloved. The children, in
particular, were as fond of her as of their parents; and she began to enjoy
comfort, at least, if not felicity. She could not but occasionally reflect on
her lot, in being deprived of both parents at her birth; and the cruel
circumstances which had deprived her for ever from her kind foster-father, who
was all this time languishing in confinement. From the first moment in which
she could pen a letter, she had corresponded with him. She now sent him every
shilling she could scrape together, and his truly parental letters were her
chief consolations. He murmured at nothing; he was thankful for every thing:
and still, with pious and a patient eye, contemnplated hope through the bars of
his prison. "Alas! alas! should any prison in a civilized country confine such
a man?"

Patty had lived two years in town, when her mistress, who had long been ill,
died in a decline. This was a new calamity: it was, indeed, a greater one than
she imagined. Her master had for some time cast a criminal eye on her beauties;
and scarcely had his deceased lady been a month deposited in her tomb, when his
cruel intentions became abundantly manifest even to the unsuspicious innocent
whose destruction he meditated. On the first insult, she prudently rushed out
of the house; and nothing could ever induce her again to enter it. She sent for
her clothes, which the bounty of her mistress had made considerable, as soon as
she had taken a lodging; and, with the small part of her wages due, resolved to
live with the greatest frugality, till she should be able to procure another
place. What she felt, on contemplating her forlorn state, is easier conceived
than expressed; but the outrage she had suffered, with the reflection of what
she had so narrowly escaped, brought on a fever.

A nurse was now necessary, and a nurse was obtained. But this cruel wretch,
while the poor unhappy girl lay insensible, purloined most of her little
property; so that on her recovery, she had scarcely a decent change of apparel;
and the apothecary, as well as her landlady, though no strangers to her
misfortunes, were both clamorous for their bills. Thus was this poor young
creature, by the brutality of him whose children she was rearing not only to
health but to virtue, torn from every gleam of comfort, and plunged in the
depths of distress. She was soon instructed in the shocking practice of
pledging her clothes for trifling sums, to appease her unfeeling creditors; and
it now became necessary for the supply of sustenance. Ten days did she pass
with no other food than bread and water, before she would consent to part with
the only gown she had that was not on her back; nor could she even then have
been brought to acquiesce, but that her landlady significantly intimated, that
she could not pay her rent with such lodgers. It was therefore the dread of
being houseless, more than that of death, which finally prevailed; nor did a
morsal thus dearly purchased ever reach her lips, that was not first bathed
with her tears. At length, all that modesty could spare, was by degrees
disposed of; and it was suggested by her landlady, that she must part even with
modesty itself. The specious arguments she used to lessen the value of virtue,
were lost on her miserable inmate; who petrified with horror at her infamous
proposal; became instantly motionless as a statue. This dreadful shock cost her
another sit of illness; in which she languished without food, without medicine,
and without attendance. Nature, or rather the God of Nature did every thing for
her. She recovered slowly; but it was soon enough to be told, that she must eat
the bread of infamy, as ten thousand women, once her betters, every day did, or
be content to rot in a prison, where she would, after all, no doubt, suffer by
compulsion, the evil she so greatly dreaded.

Partly by persuasion, and partly by force, was this miserable creature,
tottering with her own weight, led out to the street, in the gloom of the
evening, and told that she must bring money, or not expect readmission. As the
door closed upon her, she wrung her hands in agony; but the fountains of grief
refused to flow. Her soul was poured out to Heaven; and she prayed with fervor
to be delivered from life's direst calamity. But, alas! she seemed destined to
experience every horror. The thunder began to roll, and the lightning fl^shed
around her. The heavy clouds, thus divided, poured down in torrents: she durst
not return home; a dark unfrequented passage at a little distance, she
recollected to have seen, and thither she hastened for shelter. It was at the
same moment occupied by a plain man; who seeing her a cleanly looking girl, and
taking her for a common prostitute, accosted her in language which happily she
did not comprehend; and to which she returned no answer, but seemed inclined
rather to brave the storm, than continue in such company. He seized her with
ardour, but not with roughness; and began to address her in more soothing
accents. But her trembling and agitated frame, and her pathetic voice, soon
convinced him that she was no daughter of infamy; and, though a man of
frailties, he would not for the universe have loaded his soul with the guilt of
a deliberate seduction. He told her frankly what was his first design, but
added, that he would endeavor to make her amends for the insolence of his
intentions. As the storm still continued, he began to enquire into her history;
of which she heartily told him all she knew. He appeared greatly affected by
her narrative; and soothed her with the attentions of a parent. She had no
sooner brought her sad tale to a conclusion, than he exclaimed -- "And is not
your name Patty A^^ford?"

"Yes, Sir!"

"Be not alarmed, (cried he) my love! my child! (clasping her with vehemence to
his breast) -- This is the work of Heaven! for I am your uncle; the brother of
that dear saint, your mother."

She became lifeless in his arms; and it was long before she was restored to
animation. The instant she revived, he procured a coach, and that evening
conveyed her home to his house.

In a few days, she began to recover health; and her uncle being a widower, and
having lost all his children, assured her that she should, at his death, have
the whole of his very ample fortune.

In the mean time, they agreed to visit instantly the poor farmer, and liberate
him from his cruel confinement.

They found him with his Bible before him; and his son by his side, an elegant
and manly youth. Patty could not refrain from embracing them both: she knew,
she said, their worth; and with her uncle's permission, if the young man had no
objection, he should be her husband.

To describe the joy of all the parties is impossible: from that day they
constantly lived together, and their posterity inherit their virtues.

THE VICAR's TALE.
"The short and simple Annals of the Poor."

GRAY.
BEING on a tour to the North, I was one evening arrested in my progress at the
entrance of a small hamlet, by breaking the forewheel of my ph^^ton. This
accident rendering it impracticable for me to proceed to the next town, from
which I was now sixteen miles distant, I directed my steps to a small cottage,
at the door of which, in a woodbine arbor, sat a man of about sixty, who was
solacing himself with a pipe. In the front of his house was affixed a small
board, which I conceived to contain an intimation, that travelers might there
be accommodated. Addressing myself therefore to the old man, I requested his
assistance, which he readily granted; but on my mentioning an intention of
remaining at his house all night, he regretted that it was not in his power to
receive me, and the more so, as there was no inn in the village. It was not
till now that I discovered my error concerning the board over the door, which
contained a notification, that there was taught that useful art, of which, if
we credit Mrs. Baddeley's Memoirs, a certain noble lord was so grossly
ignorant. In short, my friend proved to be the schoolmaster, and probably the
secreaty to the hamlet. Affairs were in this situation when the Vicar made his
appearance. He was one of the most venerable figures I had ever seen; his
time-silvered locks shaded his temples, whilst the lines of misfortune were,
alas! but too visible in his countenance. Time had softened, but could not
efface them. On seeing my broken equipage, he addressed me; and when he began
to speak, his countenance was illumined by a smile. -- "I presume, sir, said
he, that the accident you have just experienced, will render it impossible for
you to proceed. Should that be the case, you will be much distressed for
lodgings, the place affording no accommodations for travelers, as my
parishoners are neither willing nor able to support an alehouse; and as we have
few travelers, we have little need of one; but if you will accept the best
accommodation my cottage affords, it is much at your service." After expressing
the sense I entertained of his goodness, I joyfully accepted so desirable an
offer. As we entered the hamlet, the sun was gilding with his ^eparting beams
the vilage spire, whilst a gentle breeze refreshed the weary hinds, who, seated
be^^^th the venerable oaks that overshadowed their cottages, were reposing
themselves after the labors of the day, and listening attentively to the tale
of an old soldier, who, like myself, had wandered thus far, and was now
distressed for a lodging. He had been in several actions, in one of which he
had lost a leg: and was now, like many other brave fellows,

" -- Doomed to beg
"His bitter bread through realms his valor saved."
My kind host invited me to join the crowd, and listen to his tale. With this
request I readily complied. No sooner did we make our appearance, than I
attracted the attention of every one. The appearance of a stranger in a hamlet,
two hundred miles from the capital, is generally productive of surprise; and
every one examines the next comer with the most attentive observation. So
wholly did my arrival engross the villagers, that the veteran was obliged to
defer the continuation of his narrative, till their curiosity should be
gratified. Every one there took an opportunity of testifying the good will they
bore my venerable host, by offering him a seat on the grass. The good man and
myself were soon seated, and the brave veteran resumed his narrative, in the
following words: -- "After, continued he, I had been intoxicated, I was carried
before a justice, who was intimate with the captain, at whose request he
attested me before I had sufficiently recovered my senses to see the danger I
was encountering. In the morning when I came to myself, I found I was in
custody of three or four soldiers, who, after telling me what had happened, in
spite of all I could say, carried me to the next town, without permitting me to
take leave of one of my neighbors. When they reached the town it was market
day, and I saw several of the people from our village, who were all sorry to
hear what had happened, and endeavored to procure my release, but in vain,
after taking an affecting leave of my neighbors, I was marched to Portsmouth,
together with 100 more, and there embarked for the coast of Africa. During the
voyage, most of our number died, or became so enfeebled by sickness, as to make
them unfit for service. This was owing partly to the climate, partly to the
want of water, and to confinement in the ship. When we reached the coast of
Africa, we were landed, and experienced every possible cruelty from our
officers. At length, however, a man of war arrived, who had lost several
marines in a late action, and I, with some others, was sent on board to serve
in that station. Soon after we put to sea, we fell in with a French man of war.
In the action I lost my leg, and was near being thrown overboard; but the
humanity of the clergyman preserved my life, and on my return to England
procured my discharge. I applied for the Chelsea bounty, but it was refused me,
because I lost my limb when acting as a marine: and as I was not a regular
marine, I was not entitled to any protection from the Admiralty: Therefore I am
reduced to live on the good will of those who pity my misfortunes."

The village clock now striking eight, the worthy Vicar rose, and slipping
something in the old man's hand, desired me to follow him. At our departure the
villagers promised to take care of the old man. We returned the farewell
civilities of the rustics, and directed our steps to the vicarage. It was
small, with a thatched roof. The front was entirely covered with woodbine and
honeysuckle, which strongly scented the circumambient air. A grove of ancient
oaks, that surrounded the house, cast a solemn shade over, and preserved the
verdure of the adjacent lawn, through the midst of which ran a small brook,
that gently murmured as it flowed. This, together with the bleating of the
sheep, the lowing of the herds, the village murmurs, and the distant barkings
of the trusty curs, who were now entering on their office as guardians of the
hamlet, formed a concert, at least equal to that on Tottenham-court-road. On
entering the wicket we were met by a little girl of six years old. Her dress
was simple, but elegant; and her appearance such at spoke her destined for a
higher sphere. As soon as she had informed her grandfather that supper was
ready, she dropped a curtesey, and retired. I delayed not a moment to
congratulate the good old man on possessing so great a treasure. He replied,
but with a sigh, and we entered the house, where every thing was distinguished
with an air of elegant simplicity that surprised me. On our entrance, he
introduced me to his wife; a woman turned of forty, who, still possessed great
remains of beauty, and had much the appearance of a woman of fashion. She
received me with easy politeness, and regretted that she had it not in her
power to entertain me better. I requested her not to distress me with
unnecessary apologies, and we sat down to supper. The little angel, who
welcomed us at the door, now seating herself opposite to me, afforded me an
opportunity of contemplating one of the finest faces I had ever beheld. My
worthy host, observing how much I was struck with her appearance, directed my
attention to a picture which hung over the mantle. It was a striking likeness
of my little neighbor, only on a larger scale. That, sir, said he, is Harriet's
mother. Do you not think there is a vast resemblance? To this I assented, when
the old man put up a prayer to Heaven, that she might resemble her mother in
every thing but her unhappy fate. He then started another topic of
conversation, without gratifying the curiosity he had excited concerning the
fate of Harriet's mother, for whom I had already felt myself much interested.

Supper being removed, after chatting some time, my worthy host conducted me to
my bedchamber, which was in the ground-floor, and lined with jessemin, that
was conducted in at the windows. After wishing me good night, he retired,
leaving me to rest. The beauty of the scenery, however, and my usual propensity
to walk by moonlight, induced me to leave my fragrant cell. When I sallied
forth, the moon was darting forth her temperated rays through the shade that
surrounded the cottage, tipping the tops of the venerable oaks with silver.
After taking a turn or two on the lawn, I wandered to the spot,

"Where the rude forefathers of the hamlet slept."

It was small, and for the most part surrounded with yew trees of an ancient
date, beneath whose solemn shade many generations had mouldered in the dust. No
sooner did I enter, than my attention was caught by a pillar of white marble,
placed on the summit of a small eminence, the base of which was surrounded with
honeysuckles and woodbines, whilst a large willow overshadowed the pillar. As I
was with attention perusing the epitaph, I was not a little alarmed by the
approach of a figure, clothed in a long robe. The apparition continued
advancing toward me with a slow a step, and its eyes fixed on the ground,
which prevented it observing me till we were within ro^^^ of each other. Great
was my wonder at recognizing my worthy host in this situation; nor was his
astonishment less at finding his guest thus courting the appearance of goblins
and faries. After each had expressed the surpise he felt, I proceeded to
enquire whose dust was there enshrined? To my questions he returned answer --
There, sir, sleeps Harriet's mother, an innocent, but unfortunate woman. Pardon
me, sir, said he, if for a moment I indulge my sorrow, and bedew my Harriet's
grave with tears -- a tribute that I often pay her much loved memory, when the
rest of the world are lost in sleep. Here he paused, and seemed much agitated.
At length he requested my permission to defer the recital of Harriet's woes
till the next day, as he found himself unequal to the task of proceeding in the
painful detail. To this proposal I readily acceded, and we returned home. I
retired to my room, but every attempt to procure sleep proved ineffectual.
Harriet had so wholly occupied my thoughts, that no moment of the night was
suffered to pass unnoticed. At length, "when soared the warbling lark on high,"
I left my couch, and rejoined my worthy landlord, who was busily employed in
the arrangement of his garden. Though I declined mentioning the subject of our
last night's adventure, yet he saw the marks of anxious expectation in my
countenance, and proceeded to gratify the curiosity he had inspired. It will be
necessary, said he, before I proceed to relate the woes that befell my daughter,
to give a short sketch of my own life. -- Six and twenty years ago, Mrs. --
came hither for the benefit of her health, the air being recommended as highly
salubrious. On her arrival, she gave out that she was the daughter of a
clergyman, who was lately dead, and had left her in narrow circumstances. I
thought it my duty to visit her, and offer her any little attention in my
power. She received me with politeness, and expressed a wish to cultivate my
acquaintance. I continued to repeat my visits for some time without suspecting
that there was any thing particular in her history, till one morning I found
her in tears reading a letter she had just received. On my entrance she gave it
to me: it contained a notfication from Lord B -- 's agent, that her usual
remittances would no longer be continued. On opening this letter, I was led to
suppose that her connection with Lord B -- was not of the most honorable nature.
But all my suspicion vanished on her producing several letters from Lord B --
to her mother, with whom he had been long connected. -- From these letters I
learnt, that Mrs. -- was the daughter of Lord B -- by Miss M --, sister to a
Scotch baronet, whom he had seduced and supported during the remainder of her
life. But he had, ^t seems, determined to withdraw his protection from the
fruit of their connection. Mrs. -- declared she new not what step to take, as
her finances were nearly exhausted. I endeavored to comfort her, assuring her
that she should command every assistance in my power: -- On hearing this she
seemed a little satisfied, and became more composed. After fitting with her
some time, I returned home to consider in what manner I might most easily
afford protection to the young orphan, whose whole dependence was on my
support. -- If I took her home to live with me, as I was unmarried, it would
give offense to my parishioners.

My income was too confined to admit of my affording her a separate
establishment. Thus circumstanced, I determined to offer her my hand. You will,
no doubt, say it was rather an imprudent step for a man who had seen his
fortieth year to connect himself with youth and beauty: but as my brother was
then living, it was impossible for me to render her the least assistance on any
other plan. She received my proposal with grateful surprise, and accepted it
without hesitation. -- In a few days we were married, and have now lived
together six and twenty years in a state, the felicity of which has never been
interrupted by those discordant jars which are so frequently the concomitants
of matrimony: though, alas! our peace has received a mortal wound from one, the
bare mention of whose name fills me with horror! But not to digress: Before the
return of that day which few me blessed with the hand of Emily, my happiness
received an important addition, by the birth of a daughter, who inherited all
her mother's charms. It is superfluous to add, that she was equally the idol of
both her parents; and as she was the only fruit of our marriage, she became
every day a greater favorite. My wife had received such an education as
rendered her fully capable of accomplishing her daughter in a manner far
superior to any thing her situation required, or perhaps could justify. To this
agreeable employment, however, she devoted her whole time, and when Harriet had
reached her eighteenth year, she was in every respect a highly accomplished
woman. She was become what that picture represents her. With an amiable temper
and gentle manners, she was the idol of the village. Hitherto she had
experienced a state of felicity unknown in the more exalted stations of life
unconscious, alas! of the ills that awaited her future years.

It is with reluctance I proceed in the melancholy narrative. -- One evening,
as a young man, attended by a servant, was passing through the village, his
horse startled, and threw him. Happening to be on the spot at the time, I
offered every assistance in my power, and conveying him to my cottage,
dispatch^d his servant in quest of a surgeon, who declared our patient was not
in any danger, but recommended it to him to delay his departure for a day or
two. His health, however, or rather his love, did not admit of his traveling
for near a fortnight; daring which time he established his interest with
Harriet by the most pleasing and unremitting attention to her slightest wishes.
When about to depart, he requested leave to repeat his visit on his return from
his intended tour, dropping, at the same time, some distant hints of his
affection for Harriet, to whom she was by no means indifferent.

Mr. H -- (for so our guest was named) informed us, previous to his departure,
that he had a small independent fortune; but that from a distant relation he
had considerable expectation. -- After bidding an affectionate adieu to
Harriet, he set out on his intended tour which lasted for a month.

During the time of Mr. H -- 's absence, Harriet appeared pensive; and I
observed with pain, that he had made no slight impression on her heart. At
length Mr. H -- returned, and Harriet's reception of him left us no room to
doubt her attachment. During his second visit he was very affiduous to secure
the favor of all the family: with Harriet he easily succeeded; nor was Mrs T
-- nor myself disposed to dislike him. His manners were elegant, and his wit
lively. At length he obtained from Harriet the promise of her hand, provided
her parents should not object. Hitherto I had never been induced to make any
inquiries concerning his circumstances and character. Now, however, by his
direction, I applied to a Mr. E -- ns, a clergyman of his acquaintance. This
gentleman, now in an exalted station in the church, then chaplin to Lord C --,
informed me, that Mr. H -- was in every respect a desirable march for my
daughter; and that whenever his cousin should die, he would be enabled to
maintain her in affluence and splendour; he added, that his character was
unexceptionable. Little suspecting the villainous part Mr. E -- ns was acting,
I readily consented to the proposed union, and performed the ceremony myself.
Mr. H -- requested that their marriage might be kept a secret, till the birth
of a son and heir. This proposal rather alarmed me, but it was too late to
retreat, and knowing no one in the great world, it was impossible for me,
previous to the marriage, to procure any account of Mr. H --, but such as his
friend cammunicated to me. Thus circumstanced, I could only consent; and as
Harriet readily adopted every proposal that came from one she so tenderly
loved, the matter was finally agreed on.

After staying a few days, he set off for London, but soon returned, and passed
the whole ^rinter with us; and in the spring Harriet was de^ivered of that
little girl you so much admire. I now pressed him to acknowledge my daughter as
his wife. To this he answered, Had she brought him a son he would readily have
complied with my request; but that his cousin was so great an oddity, that he
could not bear the idea (to use his own expression) "of having his fortune
lavished in a milliner's shop:" But, added he, if you insist upon it, I will
now risk the loss of all his fortune, and introduce my Harriet to his presence.
Harriet, however, again interfered, and desired that Mr. H -- might not be
forced into measures that might in the end prove destructive of his future
prospect, and induce him to regret the day he ever saw her. These arguments
prevailed, and Mr. H -- was suffered to continue as a member of the family
without any farther notice being taken of the subject.

In this manner had three years elapsed, undistinguished by any remarkable
event, Mr. H -- generally passing half a year with us, and the remainder in
London, attending, as he said on his cousin; when one day, as he was sitting
with us at dinner, a chaise and four drove up to the house. The servants
enquired for Mr. H --, and on hearing he was there, opened the carriage-door. A
gentleman, dressed like an officer, jumped out, followed by a lady in a
traveling dress; they rushed immediately into the room. Their appearance
amazed us; but Mr. H -- betrayed the most visible marks of consternation. The
lady appeared to be about thirty. She was a woman by no means destitute of
personal char ^s. The moment she entered the room she seized upon Harriet, and
loading her with every ho^^ble ^pithet, proceeded to indulge her passion by
striking her innocent rival. On seeing this, an old servant of mine seized the
lady, and forcibly turned her out of the house, then fastened the door. It was
not till now that we perceived the absence of Mr. H --, who had, it seems,
retired with the lady's companion. Whilst we were still lost in amazement at
the transaction we had just witnessed, we were alarmed to the highest pitch by
the report of a pistol. Harriet instantly fainted. Whilst Mrs. T -- was
recovering her, I flew to the spot from whence the sound proceeded, and there
found Mr. H -- weltering in his blood, with a pistol lying by him. I
approached, and found him still sensible. He informed me, that the lady's
brother and he had fought, and that seeing him fall, they had both escaped as
fast as possible. I instantly procured assistance, and conveyed him to the
house, where he was put to bed, and a surgeon was sent for. Mean time, Harriet
had several fits, and we were apprehensive that the hour of her fate was
approaching. On the arrival of the surgeon, he declared the wound Mr. H -- had
received would probably prove mortal, and recommended the arrangement of his
affairs. Mr. H -- received the news with great agony, and desired that I might
be left alone with him. No sooner was this request granted, than he adressed me
in the following terms:

"In me, sir, behold the most unfortunate, and, alas! the most guilty of men.
The lady, whose ill-timed visit has lost me my life, is -- I tremble to
pronouce the word -- my wife! (Seeing me pale with horror, he proceeded.) No
wonder, sir, that you should behold with horror one who has repaid unbounded
hospitality by unequalled villainy. The bare remembrance of my own guilt
distracts me. The awful hour is now fast appreaching, when I must receive my
final doom from that Heaven whose laws I have so daringly violated. To redress
the injuries I have committed, is, alas! impossible. My death will be an
atonement by no means sufficient. I cannot, however, leave this world till you
shall be informed, that ten thousand pounds, the whole of my property that is
at my disposal, has long ago been transferred by me into the hands of trustees
for the benefit of my much-injured Harriet, and her unhappy infant. In my own
defense I have nothing to urge. Suffer me only to remark, that my misfortune
arose from the avarice of my father, who forced me into a marriage with the
woman you lately saw, and whose brother has been the instrument in the hand of
Providence to inflict on me the doom I so much merited. If possible, conceal
from Harriet that I was married. Picture, for her sake, an innocent deception,
and tell her that I was only engaged to that lady. This will contribute to
promote her repose, and the deception may possibly plead the merit of
prolonging a life so dear to you. For the elevated mind of my Harriet would
never survive the fatal discovery of my villainy. But, oh! when my unhappy
child shall ask the fate of him who gave her being, in pity draw a veil over
that guilt which can scarcely hope to obtain the pardon of Heaven."

There he ceased, and uttering a short prayer, expired. Happily for Harriet,
she continued in a state of insensibility for three days, during which time I
had the body removed to a neighboring house, there to wait for interment.
Having addressed a letter to Mr. H -- 's agent in town, he sent orders for the
body to be removed to the family-burying-place, where it was accordingly
interred. Harriet recovered by slow degrees from the happy insensibility, into
which the death of Mr. H -- had plunged her. Her grief became silent and
settled. Groans and exclamations now gave way to sighs, and the bitter tears of
desponding grief. She seldom or ever spoke, but would cry for hours together
over her hapless infant, then call on the shade of her departed Henry, little
suspecting the irreparable injury he had done her. It was with infinite anxiety
I beheld the decline of Harriet's health. Prone as we ever are to hope what we
ardently desire, I now despaired of her recovery. Whilst in a state of hopeless
inactivity, I was doomed to witness the lingering death of my lamented Harriet,
I received a visit from an old friend. On his arrival I allotted him the
apartment formerly occupied by Mr. H -- and Harriet. About midnight he was
awakened by some one entering the apartment. On removing the curtain, he
discovered by the light of the moon, my adored Harriet in a white dress. Her
eyes were open, but had a vacant look that pl^inly proved she was not awake.
She advanced with a slow step; then seating herself near the bed, remained
there an hour, weeping bitterly the whole time, but without uttering a word. My
friend, fearful of the consequences, forbore to awake her, and she retired with
the same deliberate step she had, entered. This intelligence alarmed me
excessively. On the next night she was watched, and the same scene was
repeated, with this difference, that after quitting the fatal apartment, she
went to the room were her daughter usually slept; and laying herself down on
the bed, wept over her child for some time; then returned her to apartment. The
next morning we waited with anxiety for her appearance ^t breakfast; but, alas!
-- Here a flood of tears afforded to my friend that relief which he so much
needed; and we returned to the house. After passing some days with this worthy
couple, I proceeded on my tour, quitting, with relectance, the abode of sorrow
and resignation.

Those whom the perusal of this tale may interest, will, if ever they visit the
banks of the Al^a, find that the author has copied his characters from nature.

WOLKMAR AND FANNY. A FRAGMENT.
The place I know not where I chanced to rove;
It was a wood so wild it wounds me sore
But to remember with what ills I strove;
Such still my dread, that death is little more.
But I will tell the good which there I found.
High things 'twas there my fortune to explore.
HAYLEY.
****** IT was evening when Wolkmar and his dog, almost spent with fatigue,
descended one of the mountains in Switzerland: the sun was dilated in the
horizon, and threw a tint of rich crimson over the waters of a neighboring
like; on each side rocks of varied form, their green heads glowing in the beam,
were, swarded with shrubs that hung feathering from their summits, and at
intervals was heard the rushing of a troubled stream.

Amid this scenery, our traveller, far from any habitation, wearied, and
uncertain of the road, sought for some excavation in the rocks, wherein he
might repose himself; and having at length discovered such a situation, fell
fast asleep upon some withered leaves. His dog sat watching at his feet, a
small bundle of linen and a staff were placed beside him, and the red ray of
the declining sun, having pierced through the shrubs that concealed the
retreat, gleamed on the languid features of his beloved master.

And long be thy rest, O Wolkmar! may sleep fit pleasant on thy soul! Unhappy
man! war has estranged thee from thy native village; war, unnatural war,
snatched thee from thy Fanny and her infant. Where art thou, best of wives? thy
Wolkmar lives! 'twas error spread his death. Thou fled'st; thy beauty caught
the eye of power; thou fled'st with thy infant and thy aged father. Unhappy
woman? thy husband seeks thee over the wilds of Switzerland. Long be thy
rest, O Wolkmar! may sleep sit pleasant on thy soul!

Yet not long did Wolkmar rest; starting, he beheld the dog, who, seizing his
coat, had shook it with violence; and having thoroughly awakened him, whining,
licked his face, and sprang through the thicket. Wolkmar, eagerly following,
discerned at some distance a man gently walking down the declivity of the
opposite hill, and his own dog running with full speed toward him. The sun yet
threw athwart the vale rays of a blood-red hue, the sky was overcast, and a few
big round drops rustled through the drooping leaves. Wolkmar sat him down, the
dog now fawned upon the man, then bounding ran before him. The curiosity of
Wolkmar was roused, he rose to meet the stranger, who, as he drew near,
appeared old, very old, his steps scarce supporting with a staff; a blue mantle
was wrapped around him, and his hair and beard, white as snow, waving to the
breeze of the hill, received from beneath a dark cloud, the last deep crimson
of the setting sun.

The dog now ran wagging his tail, first to his master, and then to the
stranger, leaping upon each with marks of the utmost rapture, till too rudely
expressing his joy, the old man tottering, fell at the foot of a blasted beech,
that stood at the bottom of the hill. Wolkmar hastened to hi^ relief, and had
just reached the spot, when starting back, he exclaimed, "My father, O my
father!" Gothre, for so the old man was called, saw and knew his son, a smile
of ecstacy lighted up his features, a hectic flushed his cheek, his eyes beamed
transport through the waters that suffused them, and stretching forth his arms,
he faintly uttered, "My beloved son!" Nature could no more: The bloom upon his
withered cheek fled fast away, the dewy luster of his eye grew dim, and
straining Wolkmar with convulsive energy, the last long breath of aged Gothre
fled cold across the cheek of his son.

The night grew dark and unlovely, the moon struggled to appear, and by fits
her pale light streamed across the lake, a silence deep and terrible prevailed,
unbroken but by a shriek, that at intervals died along the valley. Wolkmar lay
entrance upon the dead body of his father, the dog stood motionless by his
side; but at last alarmed, he licked their faces, and pulled his master by the
coat, till having in vain endeavored to awaken them, he ran howling dreadfully
along the valley; the demon of the night trembled on his hill of storms, and
the rocks returned a deepening echo.

Wolkmar at last awoke, a cold sweat trickled over his forehead, every muscle
shook with horror, and, kneeling by the body of Gothre, he wept aloud. "Where
is my Fanny," he exclaimed, "Where shall I find her; oh! that thou had told
me she yet lived, good old man! if alive, my God, she must be near; The night
is dark, these mountains are unknown to me." As he spoke, the illumined edge of
a cloud shone on the face of Gothre, a smile yet dwelt upon his features;
"Smilest thou, my father," said Wolkman, "I feel it at my heart; all shall yet
be well." Wolkmar, retiring a few paces from his father, threw himself on the
ground.

He had not continued many minutes in this situation, before the distant sound
of voices struck his ear; they seemed to issue from different parts of the
valley, and two or three evidently approached the spot wh^re Gothre lay; the
name of Gothre was at length loudly repeated, and Gothre! Gothre! mournfully
ran from rock to rock. Wolkmar, starting from the ground sighed with anxiety
and apprehension, leaning forward he listened with fearful apprehension, but
the beating of his heart appalied him. The dog who, at first alarmed had crept
to his master's feet, began now to beark with vehemence; suddenly the voices
ceased, and Wolkmar thought he heard the soft and quick tread of people fast
approaching. At this moment the moon burst from behind a dark cloud and shone
full on the dead body of Gothre. A shrill shriek pierced the air, and a young
woman rushing forward fell on the body of Gothre. "Oh, my Billy," she exclaimed
to a little boy, who ran up to her out of breath, "see your beloved Gothre! he
is gone for ever, gone to Heaven and left us: O my poor child! (clasping the
boy, who cried most bitterly) what shall we do without him, what will become of
us, we will die also, my Billy! Gothre is gone to your own dear father, and
they are both happy yonder, my Billy," pointing to the moon.

Wolkmar, in the mean time, stood enveloped with shade, his arms stretched out,
motionless, and fixed in silent astonishment; his tongue clove to the roof of
his mouth, and he faintly and with difficulty uttered, "My Fanny, my child!"
His accents reached her ear, she sprang wildly from the ground, "It is my
Wolkmar's "spirit," she exclaimed* The sky instantly cleared all around, and
Wolkmar (...) upon her sight. They rushed together, she fainted. "God of
mercies!" cried Wolkmar, "if thou will not drive me mad, restore her to life:
She breathes, I thank thee, O my God, she breathes! the wife of Wolkmar lives!"
Fanny recovering, felt the warm embrace of her beloved husband; "Dear, dear
Wolkmar," she faintly whispered, "Thy Fanny -- I cannot speak; my Wolkmar, I am
too happy; see our Billy!" The boy had crept close to his father, and was
clasping him round the knees. The tide of affection rushed impetuously through
the bosom of Wolkmar, "it presses on my heart," he said, "I cannot bear it. The
domestics, whom Fanny had brought with her, crowded round: "Let us kneel," said
Wolkmar, round the body of aged Gothre:" They knelt around, the moon shone
sweetly on the earth, and the spirit of Gothre passed by; he saw his childern,
and was happy.

THE FORCE OF LOVE.
THRASIMEDES, a young Athenian, had the audacity to force a kiss upon the
daughter of Pisistratus his king, as she was walking in public procession at a
religious solemnity; transported by the violence of his passion, and
considering that he had already committed an unpardonable offense, he seized
her person, and forcibly conveying her on board a ship, put to sea with her on
his passage to Aegina; the sons of Pisistratus pursued and overtook him,
bringing him in person before her father. Thrasimedes, without betraying any
marks of fear, immediately declared himself perfectly prepared to meet any
punishment Pisistratus should think fit to decree; for having miscarried in his
attempt, and lost the object for which alone he wished to live, all
consequences became indifferent; disappointment, not death, was his punishment;
and when the greater evil had been suffered, he had little apprehension for the
less. Having said this, he waited his sentence: When Pisistratus, after long
silence, breaking out into admiration at the resolution of Thrasimedes, instead
of punishing his audacity, rewarded his passion by bestowing his daughter upon
him in marriage.

THE CASTLE OF COSTANZO. AN ITALIAN STORY.
AMONG the Italian Nobles who embraced the French interest, and along with it
were banished from Lombardy, the Count de Constanzo was of the first
distinction. On the establishment of the Imperial arms there, his estate fell
to the Duke of Modena, and himself, with an only child, withdrew into France,
where he remained until he introduced Nicolo his son into the French army.

Nicolo, by gallantry and conduct equal to his birth, ran a considerable length
in the career of military advancement, till his progress was prematurely
stopped, by a wound he received in one of the Flemish campaigns, which disabled
him from the exercise of his commission. Upon this he retires, with a wife and
daughter, into an honorable privacy in a village of Auvergne, where he lived
upon a provision allowed him by the King for some years, until the death of his
wife, combining with other circumstances, induced him at length to remove at
the age of 50 to the place of his birth.

On his arrival there under another name, which he assumed to prevent suspicion
or disturbance, he found the possessions of his father occupied by Manfredi, an
officer placed over them by the Duke of Modena; and not far from the castle of
Constanzo, in a small and solitary house, he and his daughter took up their
residence.

His delight, his employment, his consolation, centered in Leonora. To trace
the dawning of her charms, and to assist the growth of her virtues, were his
only relief from that dejection, which the idea of a lost wife, and the sight
of a forfeited inheritance hourly inspired. Often would he take her through the
woods of Costanzo -- but the scene was still too powerful for him. At every
object he would gaze in pathetic silence, or break into mysterious ejaculation
-- "But what do we here, Leonora!" would he exclaim -- "these are not our
grounds -- O cruel usurpers! have ye robbed her too? what had she done? Unborn
innocent! was she also your enemy?" Alarmed, his lovely companion would inquire
the meaning, but the fate of his family was still concealed from her.

Their mode of living was as recluse as their situation. Leonora never went
abroad without her father, except to a neighboring convent, where she learnt
of the Nuns some female accomplishments; nor did she ever appear in public,
except at church. However, it was her fate to catch the greedy eye of Manfredi.
She was then scarce fifteen, and though her beauty was not ripened into its
full luxuriance, yet then it appeared a most alluring blossom.

Manfredi, though enslaved to lust and revenge (for these were the two most
forward features of his character) was nevertheless both able and obliged to
maintain in his conduct the utmost rigor of decorum. 'Twas by such an
appearance, that he at first won the esteem of his Prince, and to such he then
owed his situation at Costanzo; for the Duke, generous to romantic excess,
thinking that the welfare of his vassals, which was the ruling object of his
life, would be promoted by ^^^ng such a character as Manfredi over that part of
his domain, sacrificed an umbrage he entertained against him, to such a noble
consideration.

Stung by the fascinating eyes of Leonora, which, in spite of her purity, could
look nothing but love, Manfredi at first conceived the base^t designs on her
innocence, and made some clandestine efforts to accomplish them; but by the
fond vigilance of her father, he was always baffled, though never detected. At
length his appetite (for it was not love) grew too unruly for constraint; and
one night he went in disguise to Costanzo's house, where reconnoitering the
window of Leonora's apartment, he attempted through it to gain admission to her
bed. The window was in the upper story, and looked into a small enclosure
behind the house, which served for a garden. The wall, on that side, was
covered to the top with i^ies, which on his applying the ladder whereby he was
to get up, made such a sudden rustling as roused Leonora from sleep. She
remained, however, trembling in her bed, till she heard and saw a person
breaking open her casement. Alarmed, she sprung up, flew to the window, and, by
an impulse of desperation, thrust the ruffian and his ladder down together. But
the exertion exhausted he^, and she sunk on the floor in a swoon, during which
Manfredi, though miserably bruised, made shift to escape.

The disturbance awoke Costanzo -- Leonora rushed into his thoughts; he rose
up, went into her apartment, and there, with unutterable terror, found her
extended, senseless, at the soot of her bed. By his tender aid, however, she in
a short time recovered, and satisfied him with regard to the occasion of her
fright; but who the person was, or how she delivered herself from him remained
inexplicable. The affair, at length, was costrued into a purpose of robbery --
things were set in security; she removed into her father's apartment, and the
remainder of the night was spent in repose.

Next day Leonora, as usual, repaired to the convent, and was engaged among the
holy sisters till evening; but then, when she returned home, what was her
horror to find the house desolate and empty, no father, no furniture there --
the doors torn off their hinges, and the wind whilstling dolefully through the
dismantled windows! The poor young forlorn, ran distractedly through every
room, calling on her father; and shricking unregarded, till a monk, who was
passing that way to the convent, heard her, and drew nigh, when learning the
circumstances of her distress, he endeavored to appease her anguish,

He went with her to all the cottages around, but nobody could give them any
tidings of Costanzo, or account for the strange calamity. The Peasants
declared, some with looks of suspicion, others of surprise, and all of pity,
that they had not seen that day any glimpse of such an affair. Their search
continued till midnight? and Leonora would have traversed every inch of ground
in the Duchy, ere she stopped unsatisfied, had not the benevolent father
insisted on her accompanying him to the convent.

When she arrived there, her affliction assumed a new form. Such terror and
exertion brought on a fever of the most dangerous aspect, during which she
raved, day and night, about her father and her misery. The efforts of medicine,
however, promoted by her youth, overcame the disease; but though her health was
in some measure restored, the wound of sorrow was still fresh in her heart, for
nothing as yet had been heard of Costanzo.

As soon as her enfeebled body could reach the distance, and her religious
protectors would allow her, she ventured forth to the desolate house. There was
something so dismal in the air of that premature ruin, as would damp the most
indifferent spectator; what then must its effect have been on Leonora? Her
heart sickened within her, when on entering, she behold the lower apartments
employed in penning a few sheep, and the floors of the upper defiled by the
feathers and excrements of crows. But when she entered her father's chamber,
the shock became too mighty for her feelings. Recollection furnished its empty
walls with every thing they once contained: her eye, in a frenzy of sorrow,
seemed to devour the melancholy blank: when it came to that corner where
Constanzo's bed used to lie, a thousand thoughts crowded into her fancy -- she
thought she saw him expiring there -- murderers and poignards, and blood
aggravated the idea -- she recoiled from the phantom which she formed; and ran
down stairs, trembling at the echo of her own footsteps.

At the threshold she sunk down, and there gave vent to an accumilation of
tears, till interrupted by the approach of a stranger on horseback. This was no
lower a personage than the Duke of Modena, who being then on an annual visit to
that part of his dominions, resided at the castle of Costanzo, where Manfredi
still lay confined by his bruises. The Duke happened that day to be hunting in
the neighborhood; and observing at some distance, the beautiful young creature
in a posture of picturesque affliction, rode up to her. An heart, so humanely
noble as his, must be a party at such a spectacle. He enquired her story, and
she told it with such melancholy sweetness, as both wet his eyes, and warmed
his heart. The circumstance of the nocturnal assault drew his keenest attention
-- "a thought has struck me" said he "pray, was the window high?" Alas! so high
Sir, "she replied, I tremble at the mischief the person may have received --
but, if you please, I Will show it you." They went round; and, as they were
surveying the window, one of the Duke's hounds, that had overleap'd the hedge
of the enclosure, returned, bearing in his teeth a scabbard enclosing half the
blade of a sword. The Duke's suspicions were strengthened. He went with Leonora
into the garden, and found, under the window that had been assailed, the
remaining part of the sword lying among some shurbs. Snatching it up, and
observing a crest, engraved on the hilt, "ha! I am righ -- it was, it was
Manfredi -- This is the ruffian's sword broken in the fall -- his bruises
confirm it. Courage, thou lovely sufferer! thy father may yet be restored to
thee. The monster that could attempt thy ruin, would not shrink from his. Not a
hole in Costanzo but shall be ransacked, till we find him -- let us go thither
instantly -- deliberation were now madness." Leonora, lost in astonishment and
hope, suffered herself to be placed on the Duke's horse, who attended her on
foot to the castle.

When they arrived there, he instantly repaired to Manfredi's chamber; and
introducing Leonora, asked him whether he knew that lady -- "No, (replied the
alarmed criminal) -- nor this sword?" -- "What? that sword: -- why" -- but
guilt shackled his tongue, and unhinged his dissimulation. "Attrocious wretch!"
cried the Duke, "is this the honor, that the humanity that won my favor? -- But
where is her father? -- Monster of revenge! -- that he should suffer for the
hurt his daughter occasioned, a hurt you more than deserved! -- But where is
he. -- On your life produce him safe." Manfredi, having by this time
recollected himself, hardily denied any knowledge or concern in the affair;
but, on the demand of his Prince, was obliged to deliver up the keys of the
castle.

The Duke went himself, with Leonora and two officers, through every apartment,
but could not find Costanzo. Hope shrunk away from their bosoms, and suspicion
began to follow it. Returning, however, through a passage under ground, they
heard a deep groan proceeding from a contiguous vault which had escaped their
search. The door, though curiously concealed, they at last found out; but as
none of the keys that were given them, could unlock it, the Duke impatiently
ordered it to be forced open with a crow; and, entering with lights, found the
ghastly figure of Costanzo stretched on the floor, he could scarce lift up his
emaciated form ere it was clasped in his daughter's arms; -- "my father," --
"ha, my Leonora! -- but the tears and transports of the interview description
must not attempt. At last, says Costanzo, art thou come, my child to see me
dying in a dungeon of my father's castle, -- "what, interrupted the Duke, art
thou Costanzo, thou the son of that unfortunate nobleman whose estate my father
seized? -- Yes, yes, the same, the companion of my youthful studies at Ferrara
-- every feature of Nicoli still languishes in that visage, in spite of years
and distress I can trace them; let me share with thee, Leonora, in that
embrace. They immediately left that place of horror, and repaired to Manfredi.
The Duke could not speak the tumult of his benevolent joy; what angel, cried
he, has put so much of Heaven in my power, as to restore a parent from the jaws
of murder to the embrace of his child, to restore an Earldom, from the custody
of a villain, to the possession of its heir. Costanzo, you are henceforth
master here; I quit all property in whatever you were born to enjoy; your
sufferings have atoned for your father's hostility to our house. Costanzo, in
amazement, threw himself at his feet -- "my sovereign," cried he -- "my
friend," interrupted the Duke -- stifle these acknowledgments; and, it you
would be grateful to your Prince, be a father to your vassals, -- As for thee
lustful revengeful hypocrite, but thy punishment is within thee -- Duty,
however, demands me to disburden my dominions instantly of thy guilt, -- hence,
-- and hereafter avoid these regions, as thy life shall answer it -- hence, and
let thy detection and debasement declare to other states, as well as this, that
providence, can draw good from the depths of vice, for thy lust has rent the
veil of dissimulotion, and thy revenge stopped the abuse of authority.

SOLOMON AND ALMENA. AN EASTERN STORY.
IN a pleasant valley of Mesopotamia, on the banks of the Irwin, lived Solomon,
son of Ardavan, the sage. He was early instructed in all the oriential
languages; but, as his understanding opened, like the flower in the morning,
when Aurora dawns in the east, he thirsted only for the knowledge of mankind.
He prevailed on his father, with much importunity, to permit him to travel. The
morning was spread upon the mountains, and Solomon prepared to depart; but
first prostrating himself toward the sun, he addressed that glorious luminary
in devotion, and then passed over the Tigris, into the kingdom of Persia.

There is some secret attraction in the place, where we have passed the
cheerful innocence of childhood. No sooner had Solomon ascended an eminence
which gave him a retrospective view of the valley of Irwin, than he turned his
eyes on his native fields, and gazed on them with a kind of pensive
complacency, till the declining day called him to proceed.

When he had reached the foot of Mount Taurus, he sought to repose himself in
the valley of Abdat; but he was stopped by an exclamation of sorrow which
proceeded from an ajacent wood. As he was in hopes of relieving some distress,
he drew near, and discovering two lovers, who had stolen a secret interview
before their final separation. Being made acquainted with the cause of their
sorrow, and finding it proceeded from the avariciousness of the lady's father,
who had sold his daughter to a Khan of Buckharia, he offered them his
assistance, which being accepted, he conducted them back to the banks of the
Tigris; and, recommending them to his father, continued his travels, till he
arrived at Ispahan.

The beauty and magnificence of that city engaged his attention for many days;
but his greatest pleasure derived from the conversation of an English merchant,
from whom he learnt many things relating to the manners and pursuits of men in
different countries, particularly in Great Britain. With this merchant, he
afterward set out for the court of Bassora; but, being driven by the heat of
the sun to seek for shelter on the declivity of a neighboring mountain, they
were led by accident to the cave of a hermit. The good old father at first
retreated from them, fearful of the effects of human ferocity; but being soon
convinced they were only inoffensive travelers, he afterward acquainted them
with the history of his life.

The hermit told them that he was born of competent fortune; but, being left an
orphan, was deprived of it, partly by the chicanery of a court of equity, and
of the rest through the treachery of a friend. This obliged him to enter as a
common soldier in the army of the Sophy, where he fell in love with the
daughter of the commanding officer, which plunged him again into new
misfortunes, and at last ended in his betaking himself to those solitary
mountains for a retreat.

After having finished his tale, the travelers took their leave, and, about
the close of the day, arrived at the village of Arden. At their entrance, they
were met by a person in a plain dress, who invited them to partake of his house
and table that night. The hospitality they received from him, gave Solomon very
different ideas of the dispositions of mankind, from what his own partial
observation, aided by the adventures of the two lovers, and the tale of the
hermit, had enabled him to form. When the dawn of the morning broke, Solomon
and the merchant left the village of Arden, and after a few days travel,
arrived on the plain, on which stood the once glorious Persepolis. The
contemplation of its ruins filled their minds with proper reflections on the
instability of human grandieur, and from thence they proceeded to the court of
Bassora.

The merchant here finding the vessel he expected, told Solomon he could
accommodate him, if he pleased, with a passage to Europe, which the desire the
latter had of seeing foreign countries induced him to accept: but as the ship
was to remain some time in the gulf, he took that opportunity to make the tour
of India, and, in his way visited the isle of Ormus. There he met with an exile
from Isp^^an, who had been doomed to spend his life in that dreary spot, for no
other crime, than that he had said at court, he thought the Sultana Moratte
extremely beautiful. The unmerited severity of his sentence moved the tender
heart of Solomon. He promised him his liberty, at his return from the excursion
he was making, and continued his route for India.

Being come to Delhi, the capital of the Mogul's empire, his heart, which had
hitherto been a stranger to love, fell a victim to the charms of the
accomplished Almena. He thought no more of performing his voyage to Europe; but
the unhappy fate of the exile at Ormus recurring to his mind, he determined to
fulfill the promises he had made him, and, quitting Almena, returned to Bassora.
Having settled every thing relative to the departure of the exile, he took the
opportunity of the ship's delay in setting out, to visit his father, from whom
he learned the sequel of the adventures of the two lovers who had been
recommended by him to his care. Almena, however, still continuing uppermost in
his mind, and the time for the departure of the vessel drawing near, he again
left Arden, and, having seen the exile safely embarked at Bassora, proceeded to
Delhi.

Solomon and Almena, being now a second time together, mutual professions of
love and friendship ensued, in consequence of which they agreed to quit Delhi,
and to retire for the remainder of their days to the valley of Irwan. But a war
at that time raging in India, and the lovers unhappily taking their passage in
a vessel belonging to one of the contending parties, they had scarcely got five
leagues out to sea, before they were pursued by the foe, and after an obstinate
engagement, made prisoners. The enemy stripped the vessel of every thing
valuable, then dismissed it; but they carried off Almena.

What pen can describe the grief of Solomon! his fair one carried he knew not
whither, and the ship, unable ^o proceed on her intended voyage, obliged to
return to the coast of India. Here he was told, that the vessel, which had
taken them, belonged to the King of Sund^^h; and having informed himself of the
situation of that country, he went in quest of Almena. For a long time he
continued his miserable search in vain; but at length discovered by accident,
that she was confined in the castle of Sevasor. This discovery only served to
increase his misery. The governor, who was in love with Almena, finding him to
be the person whom she had long languished after, and considering him, of
course, as the principal obstacle to his wishes, ordered him to be confined. He
found means to break from this confinement just in time to rescue Almena from
the brutality of the tyrant, whom he killed; but the guards coming upon him in
that instant, they were both made prisoners, and shut up in the castle, till it
was taken by a party of the King of the Kanarians.

This incident, from which the two lovers might have hoped for deliverance,
only added to their woes. They were again separated, and Almena selected for
the pleasures of the King of Kanaria. Solomon, however, having found means to
introduce himself into the King's service, repaired to the palace, and
acquainted him with the whole story of their passion. A violent struggle at
first arose in the King's breast between love and virtue; but the latter
triumphed, and Almena was restored to Solomon.

The two lovers being thus, once more, miraculously brought together, and
unwilling to risque their happiness again upon the seas, dedetermined to travel
by land for the valley of Irwan. After many days tedious journey, they arrived
at Delhi, from whence they continued their route to Ispahan, where Solomon
found his old friend the merchant. The customary congratulations over, and the
merchant being informed of the particulars of their adventures, Solomon then
gave him an invitation to accompany him to the valley of Irwan, which was
accordingly accepted. In their way, they visited the two lovers mentioned in
the preceding part of the story, whom they found completely happy. Having been
witnesses of their felicity, they proceeded to the valley of Irwan, where
Ardavan received them with the greatest tenderness; and Solomon and Almena,
happy in themselves, and in each other, closed the returning day with prayer
and praise to that Providence, which had preserved them in all their dangers.

MAHMUT AND IDRIS. AN ORIENTAL TALE.
AMONG the dancers of the palace, in the reign of Abbas the Great, King of
Persia, there was a young maid, named Idris, whom the master of the revels, on
the report of her charms, had sent for from Casbin to Ispahan. Her mother being
of the same profession, she had followed the same way of life; but as she
honorably distinguished herself from her female-companions, she demonstrated
that virtue is practicable in every situation of life, however slippery or
dangerous it may be.

Scarcely had Idris appeared in the theater of the capital, but she found
herself beset by the grandees, who strove to please her by the same means that
had won others in that station. One exhausted all his rhetoric, in commending
her shape and manner; another extolled the form of her face; her complexion,
and the regularity of her features. --. third, to give weight to the encomiums
he had bestowed upon her voice; repeated an air he had heard her sing, and
declared his distraction to arive at that grace with which she gave life to her
words. -- A fourth, boasting his precision and skill in dancing, exhibited
instantly some of the attitudes he had learned of her. A first-rate Sir
Fopling, gave her a list of the pretty women he had deserted, from the moment
he first saw her. A young Iman, by birth entitled to become a Mollah, silently
displayed his figure and his dress. And old fingerer of the public money,
dazzled her eyes with a diamond of the first water, and offered it, besides the
perquisites of the contracts, which it was his custom to bestow upon his
mistress. -- An officer of the crown made pompous descriptions of the presents
with which he had recompensed the friendship of the little Zazi. In fine, every
one exerted his faculties, and his address, in order to gain the preference
over his rivals.

But Idris was not to be caught by such baits. At the palace, at assemblies, in
the public walks; and in all places, the discourse turned upon the new dancer,
every one talked of her beauty, her wit, her engaging behavior; and, which was
more than they had said of any other of her profession; they agreed in
acknowledging her to be very virtuous. It is the property of none but the most
exalted virtue to gain the respect and admiration of young courtiers. Mahmut
concieved a high opinion of Idris's virtue, from the extraordinary effect it
produced.

Mahmut bore among the lords of the court, the same character which Idris
maintained among the dancers of her sex; proof against the defects of his
equals, and the vices of his station.

As soon as he began to appear in the world, he became sensible of the
ridiculousness of that noisy obstreperous giddiness, which most young people of
quality affect; and being happily prejudiced against the idle life he saw them
lead, he took care not to follow their example, yet without seeming to condemn
them. While their days were divided between the toilet, the table, visits, and
gaming, he spent the morning in the closet among his books; or, with those
whose conversation could instruct him better.

In the afternoon he frequented the manufactories, and working places about the
palace; talked with the ablest hands in the several arts; and observed, with
the utmost attention, how they proceeded in their works.

In the evening was at some or other of the public entertainments, which he
enjoyed with a moderation that is ever inseparable from taste and discernment.
After which he repaired to some of the most brilliant assemblies of Ispahan, as
well to avoid a singularity that would have rendered him odious as to acquire a
greater share of the complaisance and politeness which reigned in them.

Mahmut's wit, and the use he made of it, rendered him superior to those who
were his equals in birth; and, besides the advantage of a good figure and
graceful air, he distinguished himself no less among them by his natural and
acquired talents. Idris could not behold this amiable Persian without emotion
-- she shunned all her importunate suitors, and complacently fancying him free
from all their faults, she secretly wished that the beauty which they so highly
extolled, might make an impression on him. Her wishes were met more than half
way. Mahmut soon let her know that he loved her most passionately; and her
answer to his declaration, on account of its singularity, deserves to be given
entire.

"Doubtless you give the name of love, (said she, with a charming smile) to
that which is only an effect of your taste for novelty: I will not, my lord, go
farther, at present, on this head; it is your business to fix my judgment. I
will ingeniously confess, though it will give you some unfavorable opinion of
me, if you are not the man I take you to be, that I am not displeased at your
liking me: but if ever I see occasion to alter the idea I have conceived of
you, hope not that I shall, in the least, indulge my inclination. I shall not
take it ill if you give your heart to a woman more virtuous hand, therefore, do
not complain of your lot, if I dispose of mine, in favor of any man whom I may
find superior to you in virtue."

Mahmut, struck with admiration, and overflowing with joy, labored to rise to
such a pitch as might oblige Idris to be constant to him. He applied himself,
with fresh vigor, to acquire the arts and sciences necessary for a man in his
station. He made it his business to relieve indigent merit and unfortunate
virtue. His humanity, generosity, capacity, and modesty, were equally
conspicuous; and Idris abundantly rewarded him for all the pains he took to
please her. Praise grounded on truth, and coming from the mouth of so charming
a person, filled the tender Mahmut's heart with joy and satisfaction. He read,
in the eyes of his beauteous mistress, how dear he was to her. He talked of his
passion, and described its violence. Idris listened to him with pleasure, vowed
she would make him a just return; and thus animated him to give her no occasion
to repent her engagement. In these overflowings of their hearts, which none but
true lovers can know, and feel the sweetness of, they laid open to each other
the most secret recesses of their souls. Mahmut was grieved when he took leave
of Idris, nor could she bear his absence without a visible concern. -- They
always parted under the greatest impatience to meet again.

Between two neighbors, so powerful, as the Grand Signor and the King of
Persia, there can be no long peace, a war soon broke out, and Mahmut was
obliged to set out for the army. He waited upon Idris to deplore with her the
dire necessity that forced them assunder; but whilst he lay at her feet, he
durst not disclose to her all his grief. The fortitude of the fair-one daunted
him. He was afraid of lessening himself in her esteem, by discovering any
weakness. -- Idris perceived the sore conflict in his breast, and loved him for
it more intensely.

Mahmut had not been gone a month when he gave way to his desire of an
interview with Idris. He slipped away privately from the army, and with the
help of relays, which he had got ready on the road, he was at the gates of
Ispahan before they missed him in the camp. Alighting at the house of one of
his old servants, he disguised himself in the habit of a peasant, that he might
not be known in the city; and, impatient for an interview with his Idris, he
slew to her house.

The charming maid was sitting at a balcony, as Mahmut was advancing, and knew
him, notwithstanding his disguise. Grieved to see him thus neglect his glory,
and his duty, she ran directly to her closet, charging her slave to admit no
visitor whatever. She melted into tears at the weakness of her lover; but soon
recovered herself, and wrote him the following billet:

IDRIS TO THE PEASANT.
Friend, I know thou art to be forthwith at the army. Call upon Mahmut, and
tell him from me, that I desire him to remember the conditions on which the
heart of Idris is to be secured.


Mahmut was too much confounded with these words to ask any questions of the
slave that delivered him the billet. He went back to his domestic's house, to
put off his disguise; and fluctuating between admiration, grief, and fear, he
repaired again to the army with as much haste as he had traveled up to
Ispahan, his chief study being to make amends for the fault he had committed:
he behaved the rest of the campaign with so much ardor, bravery, and conduct,
that he was deservedly promoted to a higher post, which the King conferred on
him with the most honorable eulogies at the head of the army. Idris wrote him a
congratulatory letter on his promotion, in which, without mentioning his
weakness, she gave him to understand that she had forgiven him.

Mahmut, transported with joy, hastened back to Ispahan, as soon as the army
was ordered into winter quarters, and listened to no other considerations but
his esteem for this virtuous girl. He entreated her to complete his happiness
in becoming his wife. "Your wife, my lord, (cried Idris, with an emotion that
once discovered the tenderest passion and concern for the glory of her lover;)
what! would Mahmut forget himself so far? In disposing of your heart you may,
indeed, consult nothing but your inclinations; but when the question is to
choose a partner in your dignity and fortune, you are accountable to those of
whom you hold both. I have the deepest sense of gratitude for this signal
testimony of your esteem; but what will your relations say? What will all
Persia say, whose eyes are upon you, and who see nothing in me but the mean
profession I was bred to? -- No; Mahmut, it must not be! -- I see my error; I
am ashamed of my weakness. -- I that am ready to sacrifice my life, were it
necessary, to preserve your glory, cannot be instrumental myself in sullying
it."

Sentiments like these made the passionate Mahmut only more pressing. -- "What
are those things, (said he) which create so great a disparity between us? An
instant may deprive us of them; but the dowry which you will bring me, charming
Idris, is a blessing that depends not on men, nor fortune." In uttering these
words, his countenance began to be clouded with grief: fresh denials drove him
to despair. -- He drew his poignard, and was going to plunge it into his
breast. The tender Idris could hold out no longer. "Ah! Mahmut, (cried she)
stop your hand and live. -- Tomorrow I shall be yours. -- Grant me this short
respite!" She could utter no more. -- Tears put an end to her surprise, and
stopped her breath!

The news of their marriage soon took wind; and those who envied him the
possession of so much beauty, abused him for his meanness, while the sober and
thinking part of the world extolled their virtues; and only lamented that her
birth and fortune had not rendered them more conspicuous and attracting. She
was presented to the king, who was charmed with her person! and finding her
heart, and her sentiments would not disgrace the highest quality, added that
which reconciled all parties -- a title and place at court.

THE CHEVALIER BAYARD, AND MADAME DE RANDAN.
A Tale of the Fifteenth Century.
MADAME de Randan, of the illustrious house of Miranda, became a widow at
twenty years of age, and was inconsolable. What grief was ever like here is, and
whose eyes, so young and so charming, ever shed so many tears for a dead
husband! The whole talk at court was of the mourning of the young widow. She no
longer consulted her mirror; she despised the decorations of dress, and vowed
to the shade of her husband that she would never more use them: she muffled
herself up in a hood like a nun; and yet, in that disadvantageous attire,
Madame de Randan was the loveliest of all the women of her time.

The Chevalier Bayard, at the age of thirty, had already attained the
appellation, of Bayard, the dauntless and irreproachable. Palice was proud of
having been named with universal applause to the command of the army at
Ravenna. These two preux chevaliers, who acted a conspicuous part in the field,
were hardly known at court, and they resigned to the gentle Bonnivet and many
others, the entire possession of court favor, content themselves with military
fame. Bonnivet, however, sometimes courted the conversation of Palice and
Bayard; his frigid soul came to warm itself at the fire which animated them
when they talked of honor, and royalty, and deeds of arms. Bonnivet repayed
them with tales of gallantry, with the news and anecdotes of the court. The
fair widow had her turn. "What think you," said he one day to the knights, "of
Madame de Randan?" "By this hand, said Bayard, I never saw so fair a dame."
"Beshrew me, added Palice, but it is too much to weep so long for the dead."
"Don't you know, replied Bonnivet, that I have undertaken to put a speedy
termination to her widow hood? yes, indeed, the fair widow, let me tell you in
confidence, will not be displeased when I attempt to dry her tears." "Thou art
a vain creature, said Palice," "He is a braggart," rejoined Bayard. "Very well
gentlemen, said Bonnivet, observe the end," and he took his leave.

What a strange man, said Palice, is this Admiral Bonnivet! When I consider,
replied Bayard, his behavior to a lady of high rank, into whose chamber he
introduced himself by a stratagem I am convinced he is enterprising.

After these short reflections, the two knights sat for some time silent;
strange thoughts were passing in their minds, for they were both in love. It
was the first instant of their passion, and that instant is certainly sometimes
very embarrassing. "It would be a meritorious act, said Palice, to touch the
heart of so fair and accomplished a lady." "Certainly, said Bayard, and highly
honorable:" and they relapsed again into silence. They looked at each other,
and perceived that they were rivals. "Let there, however, be no difference
between us, said Palice. Let us swear by St. Dennis, that whosoever shall be
the unsuccessful lover, shall immediately yield without complaint; and that if
a third shall enter the lists, the discared candidate shall assist the other,
and be his companion in arms. Let us promise, on the faith of true knights, to
relate our success without reserve." "I swear," said Bayard. They embraced and
separated.

The one took the road on the right hand, the other that on the left, but both
directed their steps to the hotel of the fair widow. Bayard had already set his
foot within the threshold of her gate, when he saw Palice coming. He had all
his life been above suspicion or reproach. "Enter, my friend, said he to
Palice, you are my senior; good night and success to you; I will return
tomorrow." At these words he retired, and Palice was to be announced to the
widow.

How shall I describe Madame de Randan. -- She wore a gray robe; her hair was
unpowdered, and concealed beneath an immense hood which covered her face. A
small machine for weaving silk lace stood before her, and a young girl, who was
reading certain select pages from the story of Godfrey of Boulogne, was often
interupted by the widow with many a sigh. This was the Helen for whom these two
brave chevaliers were about to contend. She acknowledged the honor of the
Captian's visit, but it made her neither more talkative nor more at ease. "You
see before you," said Palice, "a true knight, who has just devoted himself
wholly to your service." "How say you?" said she, with surprise. "It is true,
fair lady: My hand, my heart, I lay at your feet." At this the widow wept and
was silent. Palice was affected, and had almost shed tears. The girl, by a
sign, brought forth the picture of M. de Randan, and the widow, as her only
answer, pointed with her finger to this inscription, I LOVE HIM STILL. Palice
interpreted this dumb refusal, and took his leave for that time by declaring
that he would never cease imploring God to dispose her heart to forget the
dead, and to have pity on the living.

Bayard waited his return with a degree of impatience. "Alas!" said Palice,
"she was all in tears, she showed me the portrait of her husband, and I have
been obliged to retire without hope!" Bayard knew the worth of Palice, and did
not flatter himself. "I will however go tomorrow, said he, and you shall know
the event."

The interview between our chevalier and the widow was not altogether the same.
Bayard was younger than Palice, and his fame was greater. The beauteous widow
wept; she showed the portrait, but she listened to Bayard; and when he said to
her, "Madam, I will return," she replied, in a low voice; "You will do me a
great kindness.'

The chevalier related to Palice the conversation faithfully. "You will be the
happy man," said the Captain;" she did not speak half so much to me." Palice
made another attempt. -- The widow was still in tears; the picture was again
presented. Bayard returned; and while Palice was always treated in the same
way, the Chevalier was making advances daily. The fair widow began to turn her
eyes now and then to her mirror. There was however no change of dress, no kind
looks; but she wept no more, and always prolonged the conversation by questions
that demanded long answers, which the Chevalier never gave with sufficient
precision. -- "Tell me," said she, one day, "the story of your being made
prisoner in Milan, by Ludovic." I was, said Bayard, at the head of a party of
French; we were met by a party of Italians who attacked us vigorously; both
sides were so animated that the one did not know they were retreating, nor the
other that they were advancing, till we were at the gates of Milan, where the
cry of turn, turn, was repeatedly and eagerly uttered. I, who was intent upon
victory, was deaf to the cry, and thoughtlessly pursued into the heart of the
city. Immediately soldiers and citizens, and the very women attacked me; but a
brave fellow, who had always defended himself from my strokes, surrounded me
with his party, and took me prisoner. Ludovic had seen my behavior from his
window and sent for me. "What brought you hither, Chevalier?" said he, "The
desire of victory," I answered. "And did you expect to take Milan alone?" --
No, my Lord, but I thought I had been followed by my comrades." "Though you
had, you could not have succeeded." -- "They were wiser than I; they are free,
and I am a prisoner." -- "What is the strength of the French army" -- "We never
reckon by numbers; but I can assure you the soldiers are all chosen men, before
whom yours will never stand." -- "That time will determine; a battle will
prove their valor." -- "Would to God it were tomorrow, and that I were free."
-- "You are free; I like your freedom, and your courage; if you have any thing
further to ask of me, it shall be granted." -- I fell at his feet and besought
him to pardon the rudeness of my replies. I begged my horse and my arms and
took leave. Thus ended my adventure at Milan. It was easy for Ludovic to give
me back my liberty; but that which I have lost with you it is impossible to
recover.

Palice was informed of this long conversation; for Bayard, faithful to his
oath, concealed nothing from him. The next visit he paid the widow he thought
to make his court by detailing the circumstances of the battles he had fought
from Marignan to Ravenna; but his labor was lost; what interested the fair
widow when told by Bayard, was insiped when related by Palice. This at last he
perceived. "The honor of this conquest," said he, "is yours, Chevalier; I
yield and retire. If a third rival appears, behold me your companion in arms."

The fair widow grew insensibly enamoured of Bayard; and his conversation,
which at first was only a pleasure, became at last a necessity. She had quitted
her gray attire, and had gradually resumed her former dress. One would have
said that the certainty of being beloved inspired her with the wish to please.
She took a fancy to reappear at court, with a view of observing whether she did
not still retain the pre-eminence over all the beauties there. Bayard was the
only man who forgave the widow her return to the world, and she was accordingly
always called at court the lady of the Chevalier.

Spain having at that time renewed a truce with France, the ambassadors of that
power were received at Paris with the greatest pomp. The entertainments given
by Francis corresponded with the idea which the Spaniards entertained of his
magnificence. The widow was one of those who were chosen to figure in the
ballets, and she was always the most applauded. One of the noble Spaniards who
attended the embassy, became enamoured of her. But all his serenades, and other
efforts of gallantry, were fruitless; and Don Alonzo soon learnt, that the
heart, which appeared to him imprognable, had a weak side which lay open to
Bayard. The high reputation of his rival did not intimidate him. The more of
difficulty and of danger that appeared, but stimulated him the more to the
attempt.

Don Alonzo according challenged Bayard to single combat, which the latter did
not refuse. Judges were appointed, and Palice had the guard of the lists. The
news of the duel was soon spread, and the Spaniards, considering Don Alonzo was
the champion of their country, were anxious for his fate; while the French made
vows for the triumph of Bayard; and thus a private quarrel became almost a
national concern.

But who can describe the grief of the widow? She was the innocent cause of the
combat, and accused herself for having appeared beautiful in the eyes of Don
Alonzo. How interesting a moment was this for the soul of our Chevalier, who
heard the soft confession which he had never dared to ask for, now uttered
amidst a profusion of tears, of sighs and sobbings! He wiped away her tears,
and spoke comfort to her. As a pledge of love she tied round his arm a ribband
and gave him a picture. It was a Cupid removing a widow's veil and wiping off
her tears with leaves of roses. The Chevilier received this picture on his
knees, and after having kissed it a thousand times, and a thousand times kissed
the fair hand that gave it, he placed it in his bosom, and took his leave.

Palice led his friend to the lists, mounted on a stately courser; but the
Spaniard choosing to fight on foot, the Chevalier dismounted; the judges
distributed the arms to each, and both before engaging recommended themselves
to God. -- Then rising and making the sign of the cross, they proceeded to
combat.

I shall not detain the reader with a particular account of the prowess and
address of the respective combatants, nor with a description of the hopes and
fears that agitated their friends. -- Let it be sufficient to say, that, after
an obstinate and bloody encounter, the Chevalier Bayard slew his opponent and
came off victorious. He immediately threw himself upon his knees, and returned
thanks to God, three times kissing the ground. He was led away in triumph with
the sound of trumpets to the church, again to give thanks for his victory, and
thence he proceeded to the fair widow.

No one can paint the joy of this lady, but one who could paint her charming
eyes, and her whole person. All was soul, and all, even her very sighs, was
joy. From this moment love united their hearts with his strongest bonds.

Madame de Randan, surrounded with a crowd of importunate lovers, now began to
dread the effects of her beauty. The life of Bayard was become so dear to her
that she could not think of exposing it again to another hazard.

She therefore resolved to retire to a sequestered mansion that belonged to her
in the country. She did not however inform Bayard of her resolution, but she
said to herself, HE WILL PERHAPS COME; and she furnished a magnificent
apartment for him in the castle.

The ladies of our age, so decent and so delicate, will perhaps be astonished
that the widow should provide an apartment in her house for one not a husband:
but this was the custom, in days of old, preux Chevaliers were discreet and
respectful lovers, and never failed to say, honni soit qui mal^y pence.

Our widow was occupied with Bayard alone: the ladies of these times are
distracted with so many lovers that they can afford to one but a small portion
of sensibility; and this distraction no doubt is the safeguard of their honor.
But alas! when one thinks of none but one, how necessary does that one become!
especially when that one is a Bayard!

The lady departed for her retirement in the country, and the Chevalier, it is
needless to say, did not remain behind. They arrived in great state at Ferte,
where magnificent preparations had been made for their reception; the old
soldiers welcomed the gallant Chevalier with honest hearts and military
honors, while the young girls, of all the neighboring villages, in their best
array, came out to meet the widow, and presented her with flowers.

How happy were our two lovers! How short did the days appear to them, those
days which others think so tedious in the country! Reading, and rural
amusements were their most serious business. In short, the widow consented to
be a widow no longer. She had sworn never to relinquish the name of Mons. de
Randan. -- She could not break her oath. Her marriage therefore with Bayard was
performed in private, and long remained a secret.

To judge of the happiness of this fond pair, is it necessary to have seen
them. Madame de Randan had brought the Chevalier a daughter, destined to
inherit her mother's beauty, and her father's honor. To see Bayard, like
another Hector, take of his helmet not to frighten with its black and spreading
plumes, the little infant which his wife, in an ecstacy of conjugal love and
maternal affection, held out to him; to see Bayard, the flower of chivalry, and
the dread of the foes of France, lying on the green sod, with a little child on
his knees, playing with the hilt of his sword; one must be a father one's self
to conceive it.

One day as he was amusing himself in this way, his friend Palice came to
summon him to the field. He was not surprised to find Bayard thus employed.
People in those days had not deviated from nature so far as we have, and there
is a penetrating charm which attends every action referable to her. The captain
saw at once how matters stood. "This is your daughter, Chevaier, said he: what
a charming little innocent!" and he lifted her up, and pressed her to his
heart. Bayard blushed, "I give you joy, my brave friend, said Palice; allow me
to pay my respects to your wife. -- Madame de Randan, was in some confusion,
but she soon recovered herself, and accepted the salutations of the Captain
with a good grace. "You are going, said she to take the Chevalier from me, and
to lead him to the field of danger." "To the field of honor, Madame." "The
King's will shall be obeyed," returned she with a sigh. She went immediately
and prepared with her own hands the field equipage of the Chevalier; and she
communicated to Boudin, his faithful squire, the secret of dressing all sorts
of wounds: with a box of medicines carefully made up from herbs of sovereign
virtue by herself.

Bayard departed. Let us pass over the adieus. In the first battle he was
wounded at the beginning of the action: he was carried off the field and taken
to the house of persons of quality, whose fears he calmed by his discourse, and
by the precaution of placing two soldiers as a guard, to whom he gave a present
of eight hundred crowns as an indemnification for the pillage of the house to
which they were entitled. When his impatience to join the army rather than his
cure, which was not completed, determined him to depart, the mistress of the
house threw herself at his feet. "The right of war, said she, makes you master
not only of our property but of our lives; and you have saved our honor: we
hope however from your generosity, that you will not treat us with rigor, and
that you will accept of a present more suited to our fortune than to our
gratitude. At the same time, she presented him with a box full of golden
ducats. Bayard looked at her, and asked how many there were.

"Two thousand five hundred, my Lord, said she; but if yor are not satisfied,
we will do every thing in our power to procure something more." No, Madame,
said Bayard, I will accept of no money; the care you have taken of me is beyond
any recompense I can make to you; I only ask your friendship, and beg you to
accept of mine." A moderation so unusual affected the lady more with surprise
than with joy. She threw herself again at the Chevalier's feet, and said she
would not rise if he did not accept of that proof of her gratitude. "Since you
will have it so, said Bayard, I will not refuse you; but cannot I have the
honor of saluting your daughters before I go?" When they came in he thanked
them for their attention to him, for their company and their kind endeavors to
amuse him in his distress. "I would willingly testify my acknowledgements to
you, said he; but military men seldom have any jewels fit for persons of your
sex. Your mother has made me a present of two thousand five hundred ducats; I
hope each of you will accept of a thousand as an addition to your dowry. I
destine the remaining five hundred to the Nuns of this city who have been
plundered, and I beg you will take the trouble to see them properly
distributed."

It was thus that Bayard endeavored to soften the horrors of war. But while he
thus did honor to his country, and was gloriously shedding his blood for the
state, there were not wanting persons at court who were forming plots against
his domestic peace. Certain favorites who remained with Francis I, in a
shameful inactivity, and who attacked, at their pleasure, the reputations of
the brave and the beautiful, did not spare the fair inhabitant of the castle in
Forte. Francis chid the calumny of that quarter, but still he believed more of
it than he ought to have believed. He loved the sex, and Madame de Randan was
so beautiful, that he grew desirous of seeing her; and as he was an amiable, a
gallant prince, and a king, was it not natural for him to indulge some pleasing
hopes! but as he was ever courteous, he wrote the lady a letter informing her
of his intention to pay her a visit with only two attendants. The lady answered
respectfully, and the monarch soon arrived at the castle, where he found her
ready to receive him without the court. As soon as he saw her he dismounted,
took off his hat, and coming up, pulled off his glove, then kissing the hand
she presented to him, led her into the castle.

After the first compliments had passed and the king had refreshed himself with
a slight collation, the two noblemen who attended him, on various pretenses,
withdrew. Francis immediately began to address the widow in a tone of
gallantry, and nobody knew better how to assume the monarch or the lover as
occasion required. But on finding in the present case an unexpected resistance,
he threw himself at the lady's feet. "Sire, said she, bursting into tears, you
must have a very contemptuous opinion of me when you put yourself in that
humble posture before me. Have you forgotten that I am the widow of Mons. de
Randan, who formerly rendered you such signal services?" The king piqued at
this unexpected catastrophe, forgot for a moment the respect he always showed
to the sex. "And have you, Madam, said he, not forgotten M. de Randan?" These
words brought a blush into the cheeks of the lady. "Ah! Sire, said she, what
have you been told of me?" Madam, said he, instantly aware of his imprudence,
and assuming as much respect as possible, I have been told that you are as
virtuous as you are fair." "I know, Sire, returned she, that it is to other
reports of me, that I am indebted for the honor of this visit; you have been
flattered, you have been imposed upon. Yes, Sire, you have been imposed upon:
it is true I have forgotten M. de Randan; the Chevalier de Bayard is now -- my
husband." At these words she opened a casket and took out the contract of
marriage written by the Chevalier's own hand. The king read it. "I know, said
she, and I am happy in thinking, that it was not the wife of Bayard that you
meant to seduce." "No, Madam, replied Francis, no; upon the honor of a
gentleman, justice shall be done to your reputation. I own I have been imposed
on, but I shall repair my fault. Bayard shall always find a second in me when
the honor of his fair spouse is attacked."

So saying he summoned his attendants and mounted his horse: "Gentlemen, said
he as he took leave of the lady, I have been paying a visit to the wife of the
Chevalier Bayard; Honi soit qui mal y pense."

The lady, satisfied with the manner in which this visit had terminated, waited
with impatience for the return of the Chevalier; but alas! she was never to see
him more.

Innumerable faults, committed in that campaign by Bonnivet, to whom the king
had given the command of the army, made it necessary for the troops to abandon
their enterprise. The flower of the French army was given in charge to Bayard,
in order to secure their retreat, which he effected, but at the expense of his
own life. He was mortally wounded by the shot of a musket, then used for the
first time; and having fallen from his horse he was carried to a little
distance and laid at the foot of a tree.

Here, with his face turned to the enemy and his eyes fixed on the cross of his
sword, he recommended himself to Heaven and patiently waited his end. But did
he forget Madame de Randan? No: he dictated a letter to Boudin; his whole soul,
tender and full of those virtues that dignified the character of the ancient
cavaliers, was poured forth in that letter. "Take, said he, take the name of
Bayard, and thus honor the memory of a true knight who has loved you while he
lived, and who was all his life without fear and irreproachable, ever zealous
for glory, faithful to his king and true to his love."

The constable of Bourbon, as he was in pursuit of the fugitives, passed by him
and was ^^eply affected with his fate. "I am not to be pitied, said this brave
man; I die in performance of my duty; but it is you who deserve pity, who are
in arms against your country, your king, your friends, your oath, your honor
and your interest." At this moment a page arrived from the king with a letter
for the Chevalier. By this Francis invited him to return to court that he might
acknowledge his wife in public; and in consideration of his marriage, the king
conferred on him the government of Burgundy. "Ah! my most gracious liege, cried
Bayard; how well do you deserve the love I ever had for you! I would now die
content but for the though it of leaving a widow in despair." Pescaire, the
greatest enemy of the French, but full of admiration for Bayard, had no sooner
learned that he was wounded than he ran to him and cried, "Ah! Chevalier, would
to God I had kept you safe and sound as my prisoner, that you might have
experienced by the civilities I would have shown you, how much I esteem your
valor and high prowess; but since there is no remedy for death, I pray God to
receive your great soul into his hands, as I am sure he will." He then set a
guard over the Chevalier, with orders on pain of death, to defend him, and not
to quit him as long as he had life. Bayard soon after expired.

Madame de Randan, in her retirement at Ferte, was wholly employed in thinking
on her honored Lord, whose return she was fondly anticipating, without
dreaming of the sad tidings that were about to be announced to her.

Francis had been informed by a page of the death of the Chevalier. This
considerate prince took measures for preventing the fatal news from reaching
her by surprise, and went to pay her a visit that he might weep with her, and
endeavor to comfort her when it should arrive.

In a short time Palice suddenly entered the castle; the widow met him with
looks of joy which she saw were not returned: "Alas! said she, I know it, my
husband is dead." "He is, said Palice; he has fallen in the field of glory; the
pride of his friends, the admiration of his enemies. He recommended you to
Heaven with his latest breath, and his last request was that you would live for
the sake of his child."

The widow made a sign to Palice to leave her alone for a few moments; after
which she sent for her child, took her in her arms, and kissed her; then
recommending her to the care of the king and of Palice, she fell back in her
chair and expired.

CELADON AND AMELIA.
Avaunt, ye frail, inconstant, faithless race,
Nor with pretense sweet friendship's name disgrace,
If with the veering wind of fortune's change
Your tutored hearts from breast to breast can range,
Sweet love nor friendship's powers you never have tried,
But devious roved with folly for your guide!
Henceforth adore her shrine -- nor dare pretend
TO assume the name of lover or of friend:
Say, what is love, but friendship's brightest ray,
Which fate's severest frowns can never allay.
CELADON, a young man of fashion and fortune, paid his addresses to the
blooming Amelia, and as his character was as unexceptionable as his manners
were elegant, she made no objection to his proposals, nor were they disapproved
by her friends; they were, indeed, like himself, very worthy of her acceptance;
the hymenal rights were performed and the birth of a son in the first year of
their union considerably increased their conjugal felicity, all was joy and
gladness within their happy habitation, and their rural excursions awakened
feelings, so beautifully expressed by the poet --

-- "Oh! speak your joy,
"You whom the silent tear surprises often,
"When nothing meets your eye but sights of bliss!"
As they were mutually attached to each other in consequence of the sincerest
mutual affection, they reciprocally endeavored to oblige each other on every
occasion; but as all sublunary enjoyments must have their alloy, the happiness
of this affectionate pair began at last to diminish, and each grew less
solicitous to please: They felt the same affectionate regard for each other,
but it wanted its first animation! Time, which alleviates afflictions, by
rendering them habitual, produces, by making happiness familiar, the diminution
of our pleasures.

Celadon, though amiable, was rather inclined to be suspicious, and could not
bear the least trifling: Amelia, though in general extremely agreeable, was
sometimes rather haughty and capricious. The delicate apprehension of giving
offense in the slightest degree, gradually wore off, they took less pains to
conceal their respective foibles, and at length, from mere inattention and
negligence, suffered them to appear in as strong a light as their good
qualities. -- This unpleasant reversion became disgusting to both parties, and
gave birth to little cavals and disputes, which naturally prompted them to vent
their disquiets to a third person.

Amelia's confidant was her sister, younger than herself and of a lively
pleasant disposition, too much attached to her sister not to condemn her
brother's behavior, she very kindly however, strove to bring about a
reconciliation between them. Of a different and an opposite temper was the
confidential friend of Celadon -- a man of family, nearly of his own age,
young, fond of women, (av^rse to marriage) artful and designing. Of Johnson's
real intentions Celadon's frankness harbored not the least idea; but Charlotte
suspected the sincerity of his favored friend. She had resided with her sister
from the time of her father's decease; on her Johnson had designs, but his
inclination led him first to attempt a conquest over Amelia. Charlotte with a
great share of discretion had also a great share of sagacity, and felt a
particular aversion to Johnson on account of his character. And his principal
pleasure was to seduce every female who fell in his way, he took no small
delight also in corrupting those men whose minds were better framed. Actuated
by this propensity, he was at this very time practicing upon a young fellow
related to Celadon, who had lately come there on a visit.

Neville was not only an agreeable but a worthy young man, but not having seen
so much of the world as those with whom he now resided, and their acquaintance;
he was not at first aware of Johnson's character, he supposed, indeed from the
air of gallantry in his behavior to Charlotte, that he intended to make
honorable proposals to her, though he was always ridiculing matrimony to him.

Neville soon conceived a violent passion for Charlotte, which made his
uneasiness great with ^egard to Johnson, who had a very attractive ex^erior,
which the general turn of his carriage to ^he fair-sex, greatly prepossessed
them in his favor. Alarmed however, and disquieted as Ne^i^le was, with all the
agitations and anxieties of (...) sincere lover, he received some satisfaction
^^om observing, that Charlotte did not discover ^e slightest par^iality for his
rival, as he took ^m to be; but the difference with which he him^^lf was also
treated by her, contributed to ^engthen his apprehension, l^d Johnson should,
win a heart which he should, he imagined, find it extremely difficult to
obtain. However, though Charlotte outwardly discovered no particular favor for
Neville, she very clearly distinguished him^^^ a moral, view, from Johnson; but
she was somewhat afraid lest the la^er might, from his insinuating manners,
prevail on the former to become as finished a libertine as himself.

Celadon indeed saw not Johnson in his true colors, yet he was far from
thinking as he did upon any subject of a very interesting nature: He still
loved his wife with a sincere affection; though their disputes had weakened the
force of his first ardour; yet he was sufficiently sensible of the value of
domestic felicity, to wish for its return; for that he often sighed, hourly
lamented the change discernable in his lady, and the change which he felt in
himself.

By a dispute in which they were one day warmly engaged, concerning their
little son, the breach between them was considerably widened. Celadon, in
direct opposition to his wife's judgment, took him from her, at an age when
boys usually remain under the tuition of the female part of the family, in
order to place him at a boarding school, though his own fondness could scarcely
brook the separation -- Amelia, on the other hand, who loved her husband's
likeness in miniature, sighed at the absence of her amiable little Harry, but
knew that her solicitations for his return would be to no purpose; domestic
debates at length became so frequent, and so fierce, that the former began to
drop hints about a separation: Amelia, though she trembled at the sound of that
word, was too proud to let him who uttered it see that it affected her.

Johnson, who was ever upon the watch, and ever spiriting up his friend to
proceed with the greatest violence, determined to seize this very favorable
opportunity (as he imagined) to pay his court to Amelia, resolving at the same
time, to prevent Neville from forming an alliance with Charlotte. To facilitate
the execution of the last design, and prompted also by his consumate vanity, he
carelessly hinted one day, that he was sure of the heart of Amelia, and that he
had no doubts with regard to the possession of her sister's, whenever he should
have leisure to to attempt such a conquest: This bold assertion justly raised
Neville's indignation, and he threatened to acquaint each party with what he
had delivered.

Johnson answered him first with a loud laugh, and then dared him to the
commission of so capital a folly, as he called it, assuring him that there was
nothing particular in what he had affirmed, as all people who knew any thing of
life, thought and acted precisely in the same manner? adding, that he would
make himself appear in the most ridiculous light, by publishing any thing of
his rustic and obsolete notions, which were quite contrary to the ton.

Neville, who had by this time formed his plan, made a short reply: He then
left him and went in search of Charlotte, whom he found ready to reproach him
for his attachment to Johnson, and who declared, that she had a worse opinion
of him than of any other man in the world.

Transported at this declaration, which cofimed the falsity of Johnson's
assertions, he seized that moment to tell every thing he had been saying, and
to press his suit with more ardour than ever. She gave him in return the most
flattering encouragement, but not 'till he had promised her to break off all
connexions with Johnson, and to assist her in paving the way for a
reconciliation between her brother and sister; vindicating the latter in the
warmest terms, and assuring her lover, that whatever faults she had, they all
proceeded from an excess of sensibility, and from an uncommon delicacy of
disposition, which she was afraid had been carried too far.

Highly pleased with having put things in this promising train, she flew to her
sister, and informed her of all she had learnt from Neville, who would, she was
certain, endeavor to make her husband sensible of the mistakes into which he
he had been led by Johnson, his false friend in every sense of the word.

Amelia thanked her sister for her information: and asked her if she thought
the interposition of her little Harry might not also be of considerable
service: "Though we have long ceased to be fond of each other," continued she,
"we both dote on our child, I will go and fetch him this moment from school;
Celadon cannot be offended at my love for my dear boy; when he has made us
friends, he may be sent again to school if his father chooses it." Accordingly
she set out with her sister, but when she arrived at the school, she was told,
that Celadon, accompanied by Mr. Neville, had just carried her son away. The
latter of these gentlemen, indeed, had prevailed on the former to listen to
reason, and to be reconciled to his lady, who had been basely misrepresented to
him by Johnson, whose infamous designs, both upon her and her sister, were no
longer of a questionable nature.

As soon as Celadon was convinced of the falsehood of his pretended friend, he
began to doubt whethe^ Amelia who had been, he was thoroughly sensible, very
ill treated by him, would ever forgive ^^m. Upon his expressing this
apprehension, Neville told him that the sight of her son would, in his opinion,
disarm her resentment. The little fellow was rejoiced to come home. -- On his
eagerly flying to look for his mamma, Celadon stopped him, and bade him conceal
himself in the closet till he sent for him; the boy whimpered and obeyed: In
the mean while Amelia and Charlotte returned very much dissatisfied from the
school.

Charlotte, by questioning the servants closely, soon found out the little
Harry, and brought him privately to his mother. While she was caressing him,
Johnson, who began to suspect that he was found out, but who also believed he
had still sufficient power to impose on Celadon, came and discovered him with
Neville. Very soon after his arrival, Amelia, followed by her sister, led in
Harry, and bade him regain his father's heart for her. Celadon could not
immediately recover from his surprise and embarrassment, especially as Johnson
stood close at his elbow, stimulating him to reject every offer toward a
reconciliation; but the modest appearance and tender behavior of Amelia, a
recollection of every thing that Neville had told him, and the sight of his
engaging child, who discovered the greatest fondness both for him and his
mother, quite softened his heart. He embraced his wife and child with
unutterable transport, and then turning to Johnson, forbade him the house. He
quitted it in a rage, and Charlotte gave her hand to Neville soon after.

Celadon and Amelia, now as sensible of their own errors as of Johnson's
criminal conduct, were perfectly reconciled, and the revival promised a lasting
source of their connubial happiness.

EDMUND AND MARIA: OR THE PEACEFUL VILLA.
Here, wrapped in studious thought, let fancy rove,
Still prone to mark suspicion's secret snare,
To feel where envy nips the bloom of love,
Or trace proud grandeur to the dome of care.
HAIL native stream, said Edmund, setting himself down upon the grassy plot,
thy slowery banks invite me here to rest my weary limbs -- Thy gentle murmers
cannot however sooth my sorrow. Oh! scenes of my juvenile amusements, you bring
not along with you your former endearments. An old man approached him, he
leaned on his staff, his silvered locks waved to the gentle breeze, experience
and benignity marked his venerable countenance: -- You seem to be faint with
travel, said Mr. T --, to Edmund. I am very much so, replied Edmund, If you
please to retire to my house, which is just at hand, a little rest and
refreshment will enable you more agreeably to pursue your journey. I intended
to have gone a few miles farther before I had stopped, but, as I find myself
exceedingly fatigued, I cheerfully accept of your friendly invitation. So
saying, he rose and followed Mr. T -- to his villa.

You are a stranger, I suppose, in this part of the country? said Mr. T --. I
was born at a vallage no great distance from this; I believe, however, very few
here will now know me, I am much altered, besides I am poor: I have brought
nothing home with me but a few scars, received in the service of my country,
looking at: stump, the remains of his left arm. Oh, those are marks of glory,
exclaimed the old gentleman infinitely more valuable than riches: May I be
allowed to ask your name? My name is R --, if you have resided here any
considerable time, you perhaps are not a stranger to my family -- Do you know
my father? I have often heard of him, but never had the pleasure of his
acquaintance. From your parlour window I can see the gently slooping hills
where roam his snowy flocks and the spreading groves which shelter his little
farm; Oh! delightful spot, residence of exalted virtue, place of my nativity,
inexpressibly endeared to me by the indulgence of the best of parents -- a
parent, perhaps ere now intombed in earth -- Dreadful thought! Why was I torn
from him, in his old age? Torn from him, did you say? Yes in the cruellest
basest manner. I feel myself interested in your concerns, do favor me with your
company till tomorrow, and a recital of your story. Edmund yielding to his
entreaties proceeded.

My mother died when I was but a boy, my father remained a widower: Though but
little acquainted with the world, or the sciences, by a close attention to
nature he acquired some of the most important principles of useful knowledge;
The cultivation of his little farm afforded him ^n agreeable exercise, the
enjoyment of a select circle of friends sufficiently occupied his leisure
hours: He early impressed me with the principles of virtue; my mind, naturally
susceptible, from his example, acquired a relish for social enjoyments: As he
intended me to succeed him in his property and profession, he took care to give
^ne an education suitable to such a station. At the grammar school of our
parish I contracted an intimacy with a lad about my own age, the son of a
gentleman in our neighborhood; this connection in time advanced to a most
perfect friendship,

Having one day taken the diversion of hunting, the pursuit of our game carried
us f^rther from home than we intended; hunger reminded us that it was dinner
time; I carried Mr. Williams, which was the name of my friend, to the house of
a widow lady in that neighborhood, where I had before once visited. We were
received in the politest manner. It was then I was first blessed with a sight
of my Maria! Blessed did I say? No surely, it deserves another appellation,
since it proved the commencement of my misfortunes. I will not attempt to
discribe this lovely maid, any representation I could delineate would fall
infinitely short of the original. Her charms inspired me with the sincerest
passion, and I had every reason to think it mutual. Oh! I was mistaken, she was
not sincere; at least, she was not proof against the solicitations of another.

By permission of my father, whom I had made acquaintaned with the whole
matter, I went one day to visit her. At my arrival I found the family in the
utmost disorder; Maria was missing! She had gone the day before on a visit to a
lady, who resided at a little distance, and had not from that time been heard
of. I was so struck with this intelligence, that I remained for some time in a
manner insensible; I soon however recollected myself: Concluding she must have
been forced away, I resolved not to loose a moment in attempting her recovery.
I dispatched a short note to my father, and one to my friend, briefly
acquainting him with what had happened, directing him to take a different route
from that which I intended, and appointing a place where to meet. This done, I
took leave of the family.

Having spent the day in fruitless inquiries, I arrived late at night at the
place of rendezvous, Mr. Williams was not come; I waited with impatience till
next morning. Have you heard any thing of Maria? cried I, as soon as he
appeared. -- I have -- Where is she? -- At Mr. Osburn's -- I stretched forth my
arms to embrace him. Repress your joy, Edmund, said he this discovery only adds
to your misfortunes. -- What do you mean? -- She is there by her own choice! --
Impossible. -- That will but too well convince you of its reality, said he,
putting a letter into my hand, which he said he received from herself. I tore it
open -- its contents informed me, that she had particular reasons for
discontinuing her correspondence with me, and at the same time advising me to
think no more of her. The letter dropped from my hand, I stood for some time
motionless with surprise: I had, it is true, never before seen her hand
writing, but I had the utmost confidence in my friend. Come, Mr. Williams, said
I, I must see the faithless Maria once more; I shall at least have the pleasure
of punishing her seducer. -- Take care, said he, that instead of chastening
your rival, you do not receive an additional injury: You know he is a professed
libertine; A man who can commit a crime like this, will not hesitate to crown
it with another, perhaps of a worse nature. I remained firm to my purpose.
Having found I was determined, he agreed to accompany me. When we were within a
little distance of Mr. Osburn's he said, it was through one of the domestics of
the family, with whom he had a slight acquaintance, he had got access to Maria;
and if I pleased, he would go a little before and endeavor to procure me an
interview by the same method. I approved of his proposal. He was hardly out of
sight, when several men rushed suddenly from, a concealment, one of them seized
my horse by the bridle; while I struck at him with the but end of my whip, I
received a blow on my head which brought me senseless to the ground. When I
recovered I found myself in a paltry looking apartment, surrounded by a number
of fellows, whose countenances told me I had no good to expect from them. I
asked them the meaning of all this, and was answered, I should know that in
proper time. I was soon after forced into a carriage, one of the fellows placed
on each side of me carried to Portsmouth, and put on board a transport which
sailed next day for Germany.

Time will not permit me to relate particularly the various circumstances which
happened during the different campaigns in which I have served. Surrounded by
the enemy, I should certainly have fallen a victim to their ferocity, had not
Mr. Douglass, who perceived my situation, come to my relief. The victory was
glorious, it was decisive, but I lost my friend: He was certainly killed, or at
least taken prisoner, for from that hour to this I never could learn what
became of him. The loss of so much blood, and a long and tedious recovery, made
a return to my native country necessary, in order to recruit my debilitated
constitution. In the bosom of a parent, in the company of my friend, Mr.
Williams, I now expect to find a solace to my affliction: This remaining
happiness, how is it embittered by the recollection of Maria, once the sum of
my felicity, and scource of my misery; now, as I was long since but too well
informed, hid in the shades of death for ever from my view!

I see, said Mr. T --, you expect the highest pleasure from the enjoyment of
your friend. -- I do indeed: Oh, how sweet at this moment is the recollection
of our past endearments, how pleasing the hope of their revival. -- How vain is
such a hope! Him you call your friend is the blackest villain. -- What do you
say? said Edmund, with a look of astonishment and indignation, you certainly do
not know him. -- I should indeed be ashamed of such an acquaintance; you may
however be assured of what I tell you, that he is the basest of villains and
the worst enemy you ever had. -- My enemy, exclaimed Edmund, what do you mean?
Sure I can read sincerity and benevolence in your countenance, you would not
impose upon me, nor willingly make me wretched- Oh! for Heaven's sake explain
yourself.

Know then, Williams betrayed you and your Maria! Excited by a guilty passion,
and finding her proof against every delusive art, he found means to carry her
off by force. The letter he brought you was a base forgery: In case you should
be inclined to examine more fully into the matter, as he apprehended you would,
he hired those ruffians, who carried you away in the manner you have yourself
related. I need say no more; this is the truth of the matter; for the
confirmation of which I can produce the most undeniable proof, if you demand
it. -- Edmund trembled and turned pale; a thousand minute circumstances now
rushed on his memory, which tended to shake, in some degree, the confidence he
had placed in his friend -- Mr. T -- perceived his distress, and attempted to
soothe the agitations of his mind. -- May I be allowed, said Edmund, to ask
you, by what means you became acquainted with those circumstances. -- You
behold in me the father of the unfortunate Maria. -- The father of Maria! cried
Edmund, in the utmost astonishment, and can you behold with such a placid
countenance, the wretch, who has, though unintentionally, been the occasion of
her misfortunes? -- You was deceived, you was cruelly disabled from discovering
the deception. The lady with whom Maria resided, continued Mr. T --, is my
sister; she wrote me concerning your visits, and her apprehension of the
consequences: The day after receiving her letter I set out to see my daughter;
I had not got half way when I was alarmed with cries from a carriage which
drove past; fortunately I had brought a servant along with me, by whose
assistance I rescued my child. We returned home: I questioned Maria concerning
your correspondence with her; she gave me a circumstantial detail of the
matter, concluding with an account of her being seized and carried off by two
men, whom she had never seen before, not a quarter of a mile from her aunt's
house. I was inclined to think this to be a contrivance of yours, and not
hearing any more of you, confirmed me in that opinion. It was but very lately I
was undeceived: A severe illness produced a confession, of the whole affair,
from the wretch whom you fondly call your friend.

Oh! how am I disappointed, exclaimed Edmund, betrayed by one whom I esteemed
as my bosom friend. Maria -- lost for ever! Distracting thought -- What now
remains for me? Oh! heavenly friendship, soul of happiness, where shall I now
find thee? Who shall now lead me to thy abode? Young man, said Mr. T --. you
need not go far to find her, she dwells beneath this humble roof; you have yet
a friend. -- Edmund stretched out his hand to the old gentleman, his feelings
were too big for utterance, the tear started in his eye. Look on me as your
father, continued Mr. T --, I have yet a daughter, perhaps in her you may find
some traces of your Maria. Edmund remained silent, except the sigh which
bursted from his agitated bosom. -- Mr. T -- retired, but soon returned leading
in a woman. Heavens, what do I see, exclaimed Edmund, the moment he set his
eyes on her. -- My Maria -- Sure I cannot be mistaken. -- You are not, said Mr.
T --, it is she herself, though brought indeed by sorrow to the brink of the
grave, Heaven was pleased to restore her to her aged parent, to preserve her as
a blessing to her Edmund, as the reward of his virtues, as the compensation of
his suffering.

Sweet was the embrace of love, beyond the power of words to express; the
charming Maria hid her modest face in her Edmund's bosom, while the tears of
sensibility flowed plentifully from her eyes. He appeared not now the sprightly
youth she had once beheld him -- The bloom of health glowed not on his cheeks
-- Care had silvered over his ^^axe^ locks, and grief had marked his manly
countenance. A messenger was dispatched to Mr. Roberts, who arrived next day.
In the midst of a scene which displayed in the strongest, the tenderest manner,
the power of parental and filial affection: Edmund was struck with the
appearance of a gentleman who accompanied Mr. Roberts, he suddenly quitted the
embraces of his father, and rushed with ardour into the arms of the stranger.
It was Mr. Douglass! He had been taken prisoner, but, on his parole, had
returned home, and called on Mr. Roberts in his way. Edmund was united to his
Maria, her father removed along with them to Mr. Roberts's, where they where
long blessed with every domestic felicity and social endearment. Heavenly peace
dwelt in the bosom of Edmund, joy ever sparkled in his Maria's eyes; happiness
increased with their increasing years, and diffused his richest sweets through
their rural habitation.

THE HONORABLE SEDUCER: OR, HISTORY OF OLIVIA.
(Extracted from the life of an unfortunate female.)
OLIVIA was born in a remote part of England, and was the eldest daughter of
parents who lived in a style of gentility bespeaking competence indeed, but not
affluence. As the family was numerous, much she could not expect to be
proportioned with; but if her pecuniary expectations were slender, nature
seemed to compensate for the want of wealth, by treasuring in her person every
female charm, which ought perhaps to be considered rather as a misfortune than
an advantage, since it lays us the more open to seduction; add to this, her
being mistress of many polite accomplishments, with a heart formed in nature's
most delicate mould, endued with a sensibility too exquisite to guard against
the snares of the world.

At the age of seventeen she left the school, and lived under the eye of a
mother, whose fondness for her she requited with every token of filial
affection. Many were her admirers, but no suitor appeared amongst them; no
lure, however, was thrown out, no extravagance of dress indulged in to assist
her native attractions; indeed she seemed "when unadorned, adorned the most."

A ball given upon some public occasion was the first opportunity that offered
for introducing her to the public eye. Among the company present was a student
belonging to one of the Universities, and then on a visit to some person of
note in that part of the country. His address was genteel, his person elegant;
he hoped the pleasure of being her partner for the evening, and was gratified:
An acquaintance from that moment and circumstance commenced, which led to
overtures of a tender kind.

The respectable connexions, and honorable views he was supposed to have,
added to the unbounded confidence placed in Olivia's discretion by her parents,
made them indifferent about the addresses paid to her without their consent;
and, indeed, such a sanction is a needless ceremony where the affections of the
child has been previously bestowed, as was her case; her heart was disposed of
but not without an equivalent, his was given in exchange; yet no proposal of
marriage was made, and an union of hands, which disarms the censorious, was
unthought of by either in the delirium of happiness they were in, as if no
moment could be borrowed for that end from the time they spent in the
interchange of every token of unfeigned affection.

Olivia was at last waked from this lethargy of love, but not until the fear of
dishonor had removed the mist from her eyes. She proposed a day on which he was
to solicit the concurrence of her parents to their nuptials; her proposal was
received with demonstrations of unabated ardour; but, he that had been so
assiduous in his attendance till then, absented himself that day and returned
to the pursuit of his studies without even taking leave of her family, by whom
he had been always treated with respect and hospitality. They were surprised;
she, as may be imagined, was alarmed, the more as he departed after having
triumphed over that which gives dignity to love, and to native beauty an
additional luster. She was in an agony of despair, which discovered it in the
effects it had upon her health. Her mother marked the progress of a pain that
undermined her daughter's peace, and endeavored to alleviate it by arguments
calculated to comfort her under her disappointments, all of which failed of the
end proposed. She did not suspect the cause of her daughter's affliction to be
so serious as it was; yet finding her continue disconsolate, she urged her not
with the authority, but the tenderness of a fond parent, to be explicit in
revealing the minutest circumstances relative to her situation. Poor Olivia's
tongue faultered in the attempt, but at last, after having confessed a
partiality for Mr. --, (which was visible enough) owned the advantage that had
been taken of it, with an ingeniousness that showed self-gratification had not
made her swerve from the path of virtue so much as her inability to refuse to
the man she loved the last pledge of her ardent passion for him.

Having got over the painful task of self-accusation, she swooned in the arms
of her afflicted parent, whose situation seemed now as pitiable as her child's;
yet, sensibly as she was affected by the idea of her Olivia's ruin, and the
disgrace that would inevitably be reflected on a family hitherto unblemished,
she forbore to torture with unavailing reproaches a breast already ^acked with
the most poignant feelings; and after having disclosed the heart-rending secret
to her husband, it was resolved, as the best expedient to banish the melancholy
which might endanger the reason or health of a child still dear to them, as
well as to place her beyond the reach of malevolent aspersions, to send her to
London, whither she soon after came, and was apprenticed to a miliner. Here she
found me, and disburdened her heart of part of its sorrow, by making me privy
to its secrets.

Not long after she had been in town, a miscarriage was the consequence of a
hasty and fatiguing journey; during the illness that attended it, I was happy
enough to endear myself to her by every little kind office in my power to do
her, which she was grateful for, and returned on every occasion, until a faux
pas threw me at a distance from her; shame would not have been my portion had I
followed her example, which was strictly virtuous. Many have been the attempts
made to seduce her to a violation of her chastity, but to no overtures would
she listen; her first lover, though supposed faithless, retained possession of
her heart, which fluttered whenever she mentioned his name.

In the mean time he had returned to that part of the country whence he so
abruptly departed, and made many fruitless enquiries; and being disappointed in
his researches, as his course of ac^^^^^ical learning was completed, he
returned to the metropolis, and resided in the house of his mother, a widow
lady of fortune and fashion. A settled gloom appeared on his countenance, which
she could not account for, and in order to dispel it, she advised him to
travel; agreeably to her advice, he prepared for his tour, and having been to
make some farewell visits, one evening overtook a genteel girl with a band-box
in her hand, whom he politely accosted, but without being able to extort a word
from her; still he followed, and she, to get rid of his importunity, beckoned a
coach off a stand, while he listening to learn the place of her residence,
after he had heard her voice, exclaimed, "Gracious Heaven! it is she, it is my
Olivia -- I have lost her again!"

At his return, his mother told him she expected every moment from the
miliner's some articles which she intended as a present for him. The words were
hardly uttered when a footman brought word that a young woman from the
milliner's was in the next room, and waited her pleasure; "Let me see the
ruffles and frills I bespoke," said the lady, upon which he brought in a box
that excited a strange emotion in the young gentleman; indeed he thought it
could be no other than the one his fair fugitive carried, and she being desired
to walk in, as soon as they recognized each other, she fainted, which had an
effect upon ^im little short of frenzy; however, the mystery was soon
unravelled -- and he, instead of traveling, conjured his mother, if she valued
his happiness, to consent to their union, which in a few days after took place.

After having given his beloved Livy the most unequivocal proofs of the
sincerity of his attachment in an union c^^ented by mutual affection, the
delicacy of his sentiments which was intended by nature to enhance all
enjoyments, was, however, a bar to the exquisite happiness he promised himself,
as he secretly upbraided himself with the gratification of a passion, which,
though he had atoned for to the daughter, must still, he thought, be remembered
with anguish by her parents; and to alleviate the disquietude their fondness
for her would probably prolong, was a duty that honor, as well as the
relationship he now stood in to them, rendered indispensible: His first care,
therefore, after a tumult of joy that succeeded an event as unexpected as it
was coveted, had subsided, was to prepare for a visit to that part of the
kingdom in which they resided, in order to a reconciliation.

Olivia's concurrence, you may imagine, was easily obtained to an excursion
that originated from so generous a motive, exclusive of the pleasure she hoped
to feel in her parents retracting their opinion of him on whom she had fixed
her affections: Vanity, in some degree, cleave^ to the best of us, and what can
be so soothing to it as to be deemed capable of making a prudent choice at
Olivia's age, in a concern so precarious as matrimony, wherein so many of our
sex, in particular, are apt to be unsuccessful. Their intended journey, and the
object of it, were no sooner proposed to the old lady for her approbation that
she acquiesced in the propriety of the purpose; not without applauding the
generous principle that actuated her son upon this occasion, for in what
regarded an inviolable fidelity to the fairsex, uninfluenced by lucrative
considerations, she professed an enthusiasm that would have done credit to the
days of chivalry. To give the whole weight of her sanction to a measure she so
highly approved of, she not only insisted on their making use of her equipage
on the occasion, in token of her respect toward her daughter-in-law, as well
as in testimony of her hearty consent to their nuptials, she resolved to
accompany the young couple, thereby adding much to the satisfaction of their
journey; which accordingly took place, after sufficient time had been allowed
for acquainting Olivia's parents and kindred what visitants they were shortly
to expect.

Olivia, urged by the impulse of a sanguine temper, natural to youth, was for
surprising the old folks with the happy vicissitude of her fortune, and
elevating their spirits with a jerk, as suddenly as they had been depressed;
"No child," remonstrated the old lady; "your dutiful disposition, and tender
concern for them, must not misguide you in prescribing so violent a remedy to
blunt the edge of sorrow: let not your youth envy my maturer years the
consolation of knowing by experience what will be best received by those of
riper years, and what, indeed, is properest for any stage of life under the
like circumstances; I mean a gradual, at least a previous intimation of the
change a little time has made in your condition; for a sudden transition from
sadness to joy has been observed to have more fatal effects on the spirits than
from excessive joy to its opposite extreme; as though it were intended by
nature that we should bear adversity better than prosperity." Great as was
Olivia's impatience to be the messenger of comfort to her afflicted parents,
she had too great a share of understanding not to allow the impropriety of
bursting upon them with the full splendor of happiness, before a letter had,
in part, dispelled the cloud of melancholy with which they were overcast, and
relinquinshed her desire with becoming resignation, to the will and advice of
her mother-in-law, who, unwilling to put Olivia's patience to a trial, too
severe, retarded their journey but for a week. This was keeping Olivia a
tedious fortnight from a place whither her eager wishes had flown before her,
for the journey could not be performed in less than a week. In the mean while,
a letter reached the mansion of her father, who immediately dispatched the glad
tidings to his wife, then at Bath, where she had been advised to spend some
time to recruit her health and spirits; he had the same time hinted a desire
that, if her health would permit, she would not a moment delay her return,
which he by no means would have insinuated, were he not convinced that all the
sanitive properties ascribed to that fashionable rendezvous of infirmity, would
be less conducive to the re-establishment of her health, than folding to her
bosom her long absent, and beloved child.

This amiable young lady, with her husband and mother, had arrived within a few
stages of the town that gave her birth, anticipatig the happy meeting, and
reviewing in Fancy's glass, scenes which she had every reason to hope would
soon be realized, when an event happened that deranged in an instant all her
immagination had been framing during the journey. -- A loud shriek was heard to
proceed from a stage coach that stopped at the inn where they were changing
horses, a something like sympathy made Olivia return it; her husband shared her
emotion, for they were united in every sense of the word, and what discomposed
her, was conveyed to him by that ivisible link which couples hearts in unison,
one with the other as no untoward accident was known to cause the alarm, you
will suppose, I make no doubt, that either Olivia's sensibility made her feel
for the person whom she thought a sufferer, or that some former acquaintance of
here is, unable to suppress her joy on having a transient view of one she
recognized, vented it in the foregoing manner: indeed, the shriek was uttered
by no other than Olivia's mother, whom chance led to the inn at so critical a
juncture, and whose well-known voice thrilled through the bosom of her
daughter, causing the agitation she was suddenly thrown into. They, who a
moment before seemed unnerved, and whose spirits were unequal to the tender
scene nature was preparing, now flew to each other's embrace as if attracted by
a magnetic power, and gave way to effusions which hearts of a coarser mould
than were those of Olivia's husband and mother-in-law, would have been affected
by it: this debt being paid to sincere and reciprocal affection, and serenity
restored, Olivia's mother and mother-in-law contracted and acquaintance with
less ceremony than cordiality: her husband, conscious of having violated the
laws of hospitality, was not forward to solicit a hasty forgiveness, which he
did not think himself entitled to, the less, after he had witnessed the
transport of his mother in-law, on seeing her daughter rescued from infamy, and
thence inferred the pangs that must have preceded such demonstrations of joy;
yes, his conscience smote him, and his heart was too honest to harbor the
impudence of a professed libertine, and brazen it out: which Olivia's mother
observing, she would spare him the humiliating task of exculpating himself, and
taking his hand, said with an affability that bespoke no lurking resentment in
her breast; "My child, since you have performed so generous an act toward my
Olivia, it would ill become me not to acquit myself of some part of the
obligation, which I can no otherwise do at present, than by passing an act of
oblivion in your favor." This diffused general cheerfulness, after which they
proceeded together in the same carriage, to the place of their destination:
when arrived, the young gentleman took the earliest opportunity to erase any
unfavorable impression that might dwell on the mind of his father-in-law, by
assuring him that his seeming dereliction of his daughter, was not the effect
of juvenile caprice, but was owing to his wish to receive the parting breath of
a valued friend at college, whose dissolution approaching fast, allowed him no
time then to substantiate his professions to the lady whom he was since happy
to make his own. Here ended all apologies and justifications; now the tongue of
slander, that did indeed but whisper before, became mute; and a happier couple
than appeared at church the following Sunday, in the persons of Olivia and her
husband, the seniors of the parish could not recollect.

FANNY: OR, THE HAPPY REPENTANCE.
[FROM THE FRENCH, OF M. D' ARNAUD.]
LORD WHATLEY had attained to those years, that may not improperly be called
the reign of the passions. His disposition was naturally good, he had great
sensibility, and an instinctive love of justice. But the thoughtless period of
two-and-twenty, wealth, birth, and bad company (by which it is needless to say
one means great company)* these, together with the facility of boundless
gratification, all equally destructive of reason and sentiment, had overborne
the voice of nature, that guardian voice, which, whenever we attend to it,
calls us to the paths of truth: Distinguished in the dissipated circle at
Newmarket, the perfect model of every fashionable folly, Whatley had all that
was politely careless or agreeably extravagant, and, what was the foundation of
the whole, a very fine estate in the county of Salop.

Sir Thomas Ward was his favorite. That gentleman had an engaging address, and
a seductive wit. He was a most eloquent professor of vice, a most powerful
advocate of pleasure; for he had the art of giving a prevailing charm to every
subject he undertook to defend. He, therefore found no great difficulty in
making a disciple of Whatley: -- A young mind is subservient to the senses, and
easily yields to every flattering overture.

This nobleman, after having been agreeably entertained at dinner with his
companions, his head full of voluptuous images, was walking alone in one of the
vistas of his park. It led him, insensibly, to the house of one of his tenants
whose name was Adams.

Lord Whatley was struck with the figure of a girl who seemed to be about
sixteen, and was one of the farmer's youngest daughters Ireland, so boasted for
beauties, never produced so fine a creature. Fanny was literally an angel from
heaven; the dignity of her mind was displayed in her countenance, and modesty
gave a deeper blush to the roses on her cheek. Her mouth, her glowing mouth was
the seat of ten thousand graces. Her skin was white as the glistening snow; her
hair the most beautiful brown, and her eyes had a charm, of which words can
give no idea. Suffice it to say, that it was impossible to look upon, her
without two sentiments that carried away the heart; that is, admiration, and
the whole energy of love. The latter soon made in inroads on the heart of this
young lord.

When Fanny spoke, every word went to the soul of Whatley, and completed her
conquest. He would have laid his commands on Adam^, but he was no longer the
lord the master of Fanny, his farmer's daughter. He let fall some broken
expressions; Fanny had confused him.

Adams had given his daughter an excellent education. She was cited as an
example of prudence and politeness, through the whole district of Salop. -- One
of her relations, minister of a neighboring parish, had taken a pleasure in
forming and embellishing her mind; and to whom she was indebted for seize
far above her years. The precepts of the minister had not, however, prevented
her from discovering that she had a heart: The sight of our young lord
convinced her of it at once. He frequently repeated his visit to the farmer, or
rather to his daughter; and she every time made a new impression on him He
became pensive, melancholy; the whole artillery of the baronets humor was
played upon him in vain. It could not banish that dear, that delightful
pensiveness which forever carried his heart toward the amiable daughter of
Adams.

Fanny, one day, presented him with a nosegay. My lord, said she, blashing, I
could wish these flowers were better: I gathered them on purpose for your
lordship. -- Flowers from your hand, most beautiful Fanny, must always be
acceptable. This compliment, or rather this real expression of what he felt,
soon found its way to the heart of Fanny. -- Her fine complexion assumed a
deeper blush. Her parents had not heard the answer his lordship had made her.
-- Upon his return home, he gave the flowers a thousand kisses. He addressed
himself to them as if he had been speaking to Fanny. The baronet did not fail
to treat him like a Celadon, or an Artemenes. My dear friend, said he, you must
certainly have read those piteous French romances. You must never show your
face in London; you will be pointed at as you pass along the street. I thought
you would have made an incomparable Lovelace, but you are Menalcas by a
fountain side.

Sir Thomas accompanied his friend to the farmer's. He saw Fanny. He was
disconcerted; he had need of the whole force of his wit and humor to defend
himself against the stroke that had wounded Whatley. He attempts to address
himself in the language of the town to the respectable villager. She speaks. He
is in confusion. Sir Thomas, at length, resumes his pleasantry. He retires to
have some private conversation with Adams* The worthy old man returns, lifting
up his eyes to heaven, distracted, pale, ready to sink into the ground, death
in his countenance. Go, my children. Ah, my lord! throwing himself with folded
hands, and streaming eyes, at the feet of Whatley, what have I done, that you
have sworn my ruin and disgrace? That gentleman, said he, my dear, addressing
himself to his wife, and pointing to the baronet, has offered me money to give
up Fanny to my lord. To think us capable of such baseness, of prostituting the
dear child we have brought up! -- Take our lives, my lord, but leave us our
honor; it is the only possession we have. Are we then no longer worthy to be
your servants? You, you then, had no such design. It is you, sir, who have
given his lordship such counsel as this. Alas! what would my lord his father
have said? He treated us like his children.

No, my dear Adams, interrupted Whatley, I never had any such horrid idea. This
is the insufferable pleasantry of my friend. Set your heart at ease. Certainly,
my lord, answered he, I never could apprehend that you should so far forget
your former goodness to the grateful creatures that are always blessing you. As
to you, sir, said he, turning to sir Thomas, I must tell you, that if these are
your pleasantries, they are very vile ones; we may be poor, but we have a sense
of honor as well as you. If one of my equals, added he, with a voice choked
up with grief, had made me such an infamous proposal, I should have gone to
these extremities which have now been prevented by respect. I tell you once
more, my dear Adams, my friend did not mean to insult you; he was only in jest;
I ask your pardon for him; and he goes.

Do you ask pardon for me, said Sir Thomas? Undoubtedly, and you ought to ask
it of the meanest person you have offended; then he is our superior, our
master. How cruel to be the occasion of my sufferings! you have offended the
father of Fanny.

I have described Whatley, as one of those young lords, that conceal all their
defects under the varnish of politeness. I am not now inconsistent; -- but love
works miracles. It had made of a frivolous and insolent lord, a timorous and
respectful lover; and had opened his mind to the influences of virtue. The
complaints of poor Adams had vexed him, and Sir Thomas must have been connected
with him in the closest intimacy, as the conduct of that worthless man of
fashion was not followed by an open rupture.

Whatley was distressed. He adored Fanny, yet he did not dare to see her. He
was equally afraid of seeing the father and daughter. His friends dragged him
to London, and plunged him once more in all those fashionable follies and
extravagancies, which the world calls pleasure.

Adams, from that moment, had lost that cheerfulness which is the happy portion
of the inhabitants of the country. He was not satisfied with lord Whatley's
promises. He looked upon his daughter's growing beauties with a sigh, and the
tear was sometimes ready to overflow the eyelid.

My dear father, said Fanny, may I ask you the reason why you appear so sad? I
have observed that for some time your looks have been fixed on me; and you shed
tears: Can I have given you, my tender parent, any reason to be dissatisfied?
will you no longer love your poor Fanny? -- Child, observe what I say, and
answer me ingeniously. Indeed, dear sir, I have always spoke the truth to you.

Tell me, then, what are your sentiments of my lord? what do you think of him?
speak the truth. I think, father, said she, with blushing cheeks and down-cast
eyes, -- I think him very amiable; do you not think the same? My dear child,
you must learn to know men. This lord, whom you think so amiable, would have
brought me and your poor mother with sorrow to the grave; would have deprived
me of all I hold most dear -- of my beloved Fanny! -- Sir! what is it you say?
He would, my dear child, (clasping her to his bosom, and bathing her with his
tears) he would have dishonored me; would have taken you for the indulgence of
a licentious passion -- for his mistress. (Upon this he sunk down into the arms
of his daughter) -- Heavens, what horrid wretches are men! who could have
thought this of my lord? Take care, my dear Fanny, resumed the father, take
care of the snare that may be laid for you. Receive no letters from my lord;
never be a moment alone; be always, if possible, in the bosom of your father
and mother. Remember that the greatest of all possessions is innocence. Embrace
me, my dear child, and be the glory and comfort of your parents.

Fanny wept. No, my worthy father, no, you never shall have reason to blush for
me. I did not apprehend any thing like this from my lord. What a barbarous man
to disturb our happiness! O that he may never come here! Gratitude and respect,
my child, are due to him; and it will be your duty to observe a profound
silence; only be directed by my advice.

Fanny, when alone, a thousand times repeated, how can so amiable a man have
such ungenerous sentiments? O that vile London: how has it depraved the heart
of my lord Whatley! had he always lived here, certainly he would never have
debased himself by such a conduct.

His idea, nevertheless, was still with Fanny; and, possibly, she partook of
the impression he had made. Her lover, in vain, had recourse to the dissipation
of his former amusements. He had received a wound which the art of London could
not cure. Every pleasure yielded to the remembrance of Fanny; she was in every
scene, in every object.

Without waiting for the spring, he returns into the country, accompanied by
his friends, who all united to rescue him from a passion so degrading, as they
called it, and contemptible. What! should a Peer of England sigh under the
influences of romantic love for a poor country girl! Incessantly stunned with
such reproaches as these, his vanity revolted against the attachment. Whatley,
in the hour of gaity and intoxication, sometimes promised to think no more of
Fanny; but the ensuing day renewed with a warmer interest, the idea of his
sovereign mistress, for so he called her. He rose more inflamed, and, if the
expression may be pardoned, more infatuated with love.

Our noble lord, as may very well be supposed, was no sooner arrived at his
estate, than he went to the house of his tenant. The timorous and respectful
behavior of love made him more amiable. He could not get over that
embarrassing confusion which the sight of Adams always occasioned. Fanny would
fain have persuaded herself to look upon him with aversion, but he had acquired
new charms.

As soon as he entered her father's house, she withdrew; but she stole a glance
that ruined her repose, and made her repeat incessantly, he is extremely
amiable. Whatley thought of a thousand pretenses for paying his devotions to
his hidden divinity,

One day he met Fanny at a little distance from the farm; she appeared more
beautiful, more engaging than ever he had seen her. A well-fancied hat on her
head, the neighboring flowers that fell negligently by her side, her hair in a
disorder preferable to all the elegance of art, her heaving bosom, the tears
that fell from her fine eyes upon, the roses of her cheeks; these were the
circumstances of that enchanting figure, in which he then saw the mistress of
his soul. She was seated at the foot of a tree, and it was easy to perceive
that her young heart labored under some oppressive sentiment. Whatley threw
himself at her feet in tears. My sweet angel! said he. At the same moment, she
rose, and cried, my lord! He would have taken her hand; she withdrew it
hastily, would have forced herself from him, and fled to the farm. No, my
divine creature, you will not leave me. What have I done, beautiful Fanny? What
crime have I committed? Ah, my lord, leave me, let me fly to my father; he has
forbidden me to speak to you, or to see you. It was very cruel, my lord, added
she, with tears, to think of taking advantage of our poverty; you have given
great disturbance to my father, and all my relations. I have not deserved such
treatment from your lordship.

In pronouncing the last words, she was advancing toward the farm-house, and
wept, letting fall her hand, which his lordship seized a second time. Ah!
divine Fanny! do not accuse me, my friend alone should bear the blame: Never
had I such an execrable thought; is it possible that I, who love you to
distraction, should treat you without respect? He perceived Adams coming
toward them, with a look of anger, intimating a design to reprove his
daughter. -- Yes, my dear Adams, I will repeat it before you, and in the face
of Heaven, that I adore your charming daughter. She is virtue itself, dressed
by the graces, and it is my pride to lay at her feet, myself, my fortune, my
honors, and my heart. (Fanny blushed; she turned her fine eyes, that were full
of tears, on her lover, thought him less criminal than her father had
represented him, and again cast those eyes on the ground.) Yes, Adams, I
declare it; Fanny has taught me that prejudice should yield to reason; and now
that I am in your house, before your wife and your children, I declare that I
will marry her; that my name, my title, my fortune, and my whole soul shall be
here is. Yes, my adorable Fanny, you see your lover and your husband at your feet.

What transport! what agitations in the heart of poor Fanny! What are you
about, my lord? said Adams, raising Whatley; it is our business to kneel before
you. I am thoroughly sensible of your goodness, but ignorant and artless as we
are, we know what is due to ourselves. My daughter was not born to the dignity
of lady Whatley; that title belongs to ladies of equal rank with yourself.
Fanny, my lord, is your humble servant; she has but one master that has a
superior claim, and that is honor. No, my lord, I will never agree that you
should marry beneath yourself; I should be very unworthy of your favors, and
those of my lord, your father, whose memory will be ever dear and sacred to me,
if I should indulge that passion which now blinds you; my wife, and Fanny
herself, will be of the same opinion, and I have the honor, in their stead, to
point out to you what is your duty on this occasion, and what is ours. Fanny,
once more looked on lord Whatley, and wept. Are not these, child, your
sentiments? Yes, father, said she. But that YES was pronounced with a trembling
accent, her heart would have snatched up what her tongue had let fall.

What a triumph for Fanny! she loved lord Whatley, and what secret transport
must she have felt to find his passion so great as to offer her marriage! Her
lover did not let the thing rest here. Every day he visited Adams. The same
perseverance of demanding Fanny in marriage on his part, the same fortitude of
refusal on the worthy father's. My lord at length determined to write to the
mistress of his fate. He leaves a letter at the foot of a tree. He knew that
Fanny must pass this way, and depended on her curiosity for taking up the
paper, on which he wrote no superscription. Fanny comes to the tree beholds the
billet, but in doubt whether she should touch it. She proceeds without taking
it up, looks back, returns to the place, yields to an involuntary impulse,
unfolds the paper, and trembling, reads the following address: --

You will easily discover who is the writer of this letter, and to whom it is
addressed: It proceeds from the most tender, the most passionate of men; it is
addressed to the most adorable, but the most cruel, the most barbarous of
women. Can the beautiful Fanny be ignorant, that the happiness of Whatley
depends solely on herself and her respectable father? I can only give her my
hand and my heart, the sacrifice is not sufficient to express my love. I know
it well, my charming Fanny, but it is all that is in my power. If you loved me,
if you had the least sense of pity for your unhappy Whatley, I should be in
heaven. The lover, the adorer of the divine Fanny would become her husband. But
ah, cruel! Have I a sigh that breathes not for you? And yet these sighs must
soon expire in death. Solicit your father to make me happy. Believe that you
will be the happiest, the most adored of women. Virtue and beauty level all
distinctions. You have read Pamela: a woman like her, in virtues and
accomplishments, should, like her, be distinguished and rewarded. But ah,
angelic creature! can it be an adequate recompense to you, to make you
sovereign mistress of a man who has not the most distinguished throne on earth
to offer you. -- Your answer will determine whether Whatley shall end the most
wretched of beings, or live the most happy of men.

Ah, my lord, cried Fanny, why was I not nobly born? If I were a queen, you
should have no wish ungratified. -- Oh! he suffers not what I endure. -- Would
we could change conditions! I would throw myself at the feet of my father and
mother, and should soon be his wife. Poor lord! How he loves me! No, no, he
never meant to dishonor me. I always thought it the contrivance of that wicked
baronet.

Fanny kept the letter in her hand, perused it an hundred times, and always
with the most ardent sensibility, with repeated exclamations of tender sorrow.
She considers whether she shall show it to her father. She is afraid, by
suppressing it, of breaking her promise. She sees him, runs toward him, and
with tears that interrupted her, she cried, Take it, father, see here a letter
from my lord which I slave found. Poor lord! -- he is very unhappy. If he
should die. --

Adams read the letter. Fanny you never concealed any thing from me. Do you
love my lord? -- she sobbed violently. My dear child, you have told me all; you
are not in the hands of a severe judge, invested with parental authority, but
of a tender friend. What do you expect from this unhappy passion? Your honor is
dear to you. Oh, sir! a thousand times more than my life. Well, and could you
ever flatter yourself with being lady Whatley? -- Would you have me take an
advantage of a moment of weakness or illusion, to infringe every duty I owe to
my masters and benefactors? Are you ashamed of your humble condition -- of your
father's poverty?

My father, said Fanny, with folded hands and floods of tears, Heaven is my
witness, how much I love and honor you. If you love me, then, child, you will
overcome that tenderness, which to you may be a source of misery, and perhaps
of endless shame. We will part for some time. You shall go to your aunt Harris,
who lives about ten miles from hence; there you will remain concealed until my
lord leaves this place, and returns to town, where he will forget you. Alas!
would my lord forget me? -- Go, my dear Fanny, you know not the great; you
imagine that they are like us country people. I lived for some time in town,
and I know that their friendships are short lived. Marry a man of your own rank
if you would be loved by your husband, and make your family happy. Tomorrow
you shall go: I will tell your mother that your aunt has sent for you, and I
shall pre-acquaint her with the affair. Go and prepare for your journey.

This was a thunderstroke to Fanny. Her father left her alone. It was then she
felt the whole force, the whole influence of love. She sat down, or rather fell
upon her chair, her head supported by her hands, and her heart heaving as if it
would burst. Shall I no more see my lord -- be driven from him -- scorn his
tenderness -- refuse to make him or myself happy -- break my heart? How, how
can I bear it! O my father! what is it you require of me! Can I have fortitude
enough to obey you, to draw myself into exile, into my grave? Yes, my aunt will
receive my last sighs. Ah, lord Whatley, lord Whatley!

Fanny passed a miserable night. Adams had sagacity to see into the heart of
his daughter, and to perceive the cause of her agitation. -- He loved her
tenderly, and thought he should give her a proof of his affection, by obviating
the effects of the young nobleman's passion. -- The moment is fixed for the
fatal departure. -- No body about the farm knew whither Fanny was going, except
only her mother, who partook of her daughters distress, when she beheld her
laboring under those afflictive sensations, which she, in vain, endeavored to
conceal.

Fanny, in preparing for her journey, often sighed. She met one of the young
men belonging to the farm, who had a great regard for her; and she was afraid
every moment of being surprised by her father. Tell him, said she, my dear
Williams, that I shall never forget him, and that I am very unhappy. Pray,
Miss, to whom shall I carry this message? Did I not tell you my friend? to my
lord, who loves me, and would be glad to marry me, but my father is against it
-- A moment after -- No, my friend, said she, tell him nothing; I should offend
my parents -- I should transgress my duty. Possibly, one day, he will hear that
I am dead, and then he will --

While this poor girl was torn by conflicting sentiments, Adams appeared. --
Come, child, take leave of your mother, your brother and sisters, and let us
go. I will attend you myself, and do you take care to keep every thing a secret.

What did not poor Fanny feel at this moment? She quitted the scenes where she
had spent her happy childhood -- the scenes where she had drawn her first
breath, and which received her last sighs. She cast her tearful eyes on the
seat of Whatley; she was a victim that was dragged to receive the mortal blow.
At this instant a servant arrives from lord Whatley. Mr. Adams, said he, my
lord desires to speak with you this moment: He is in bed, very ill. Ill! cried
Fanny -- and her heart was then in new agitations.

Adams hasted to the seat of his lord. He actually found him in bed, and in a
high fever. -- Whatley gave orders that he should be left alone with his
tenant. Set down, my dear Adams, said he, with a feeble voice; you see the
effects of your conduct. How, my lord? -- Yes, Adams, you obstinately refused
me your Fanny; you will soon be set free from future solicitation: I am
sensible that what I suffer from this disappointment will bring me to the
grave. Ah! my lord! replied the old man, you pierce me to the soul! Can I be
the occasion of your death, who would lay down my life for you a thousand
times? -- This passion will go off. Your present infatuation will vanish. No,
Adams, no; I shall never cease to adore your charming daughter; I shall
indemnify her for the injury fortune has done her, by raising her to the
dignity of my own; and my intentions are fixed unless you are inclined to
hasten my passage to the grave. Consider, my friend, whether you are really
determined to murder the tenderest of masters. And with these words he held out
his arms to embrace him.

The good old man, distracted with a thousand different sensations, cried out,
But, my lord, what will your family, the town, the whole world say? How is it
possible for me to consen^ to such an alliance as this, without infringin^
every duty? -- I am extremely unhappy -- O^ that you had never seen this girl!
-- My friend, I will marry Fanny privately, and declare my marriage after the
death of my uncle, who is o^ the brink of the grave. By this means you will
complete my happiness, that of your adorable daughter, and your family. You
will be my father, continued he, embracing Adams, who was quite overpowered.
Once more grant me my life, for it entirely depends on my union with Fanny.
Come, my dear Adams, be not apprehensive that my relations, or that the court
should be offended. Let them but see, but know Fanny, and all will applaud my
choice.

Honest Adams was confounded: He sighed: he cast his eyes on the ground.
Whatley called his servants. They rise and dress him. He gets into the coach
with Adams, and drives to the farm. He throws himself at the feet of Fanny, who
had run to the gate, followed by her mother. Yes, this, said he, is my adorable
con^ort, the wife of my heart, and I will never have any other.

To Fanny every thing appeared like the illusion of a dream; when lord Whatley
addressed her with pressing tenderness. Beautiful Fanny, it is your^ to confirm
that consent, which must be the joy of my life.

She suffered him to take her hand, which he devoured with kisses. Whatley, at
length, read his triumph in her ingenious aspect. Fanny was silent; but her
eyes spoke: Sometimes she tu^^ed them toward her father, as if she would
consult him what answer she was to make. The parents of the worthy girl once
more made the strongest remonstrances; their passionate lord still found means
to set them aside; until after many conflicts, denials, tears and entreaties,
it was at length determined that his lordship should marry Fanny. He flies to
his friends. Sir Thomas Ward had arrived some days before. My lord, after
supper, when the servants were gone, and the glass went round, informs the
company of his intention to marry Fanny. Sir Thomas received the intelligence
with indignation; and with a burst of sarcastic laughter, he drank to the
health of lord Whatley, the son of farmer Adams.

The poor lord underwent the severest raillery, the most humiliating sarcasms.
He defended his intentions; he insisted on the charms, the beauties, the
virtues of the farmer's daughter: But these remonstrances were followed by more
insulting sallies of ridicule; and the arguments still ended in the peer
dishonored, disgraced by such an alliance. It would be needless to observe,
that his lordship had great pride, and that this vice frequently triumphs over
love and nature.

Yet still he died, if he possessed not Fanny. That was the answer to all the
objections of his friends, and to possess her without marriage was impossible.
Should he employ any other means, he would break the hearts of a whole family
that was dear to him: Fanny herself would look upon him as a monster, and her
love, without her esteem, would not gratify his heart. In short he could have
no happiness distinct from here is. Yet how was he to render this passion
consistent with what he owed to the dignity of his birth, to the world and to
his friends?

Sir Thomas, after declaiming profusely on impracticable projects, cried, This
scheme, gentlemen, you will certainly approve. But do you really, my dear
Whatley, long to possess your little Fanny? -- I had rather have the pleasure
of looking upon her, than make a conquest of all the beauties in London. And I
tell you very seriously, that my life depends entirely upon her. Well, my
friend, then I expect your thanks for an expedient which will at once reconcile
your honor, your pleasure, and your rank; which will neither render you
obnoxious to your uncle, to your own reflections, nor to the reproaches of the
world. Depend upon me for the entire management of this affair. What is it you
propose? said Whatley: Let me know your scheme. -- Do not you mean to marry
Fanny? -- Most certainly. -- Well, hear then, and admire my ingenuity when I
would serve my friends. There is a clergyman in this neighborhood, who will
oblige me in any thing; we shall also be able to find managable witnesses. In
short, my friend, you shall be married, and yea shall not be married.

What! cried Whatley, be a traitor to Fanny! and he rose from his seat with
indignation. My dear lord, one moment's leave; pray be seated. By this supposed
marriage, you gratify your passion without exposing yourself to the just
resentment of your uncle. Your love will wear off with time, and when your
enthusiasm shall be over, you may indemnify Fanny for this little deception by
a proper settlement. This will be a sufficient price for the virtue of a
country girl. Detestable! Odious council! What! should I, under the sanction of
such an infamous artifice, tear a child from the bosom of her father! Betray my
Fanny! added he, unable to restrain the rising tears. How can you have the
cruelty to propose it? -- I will marry her in the face of heaven -- in the face
of the world. Let my marriage continue a secret until the proper time, but let
it be honestly executed, with the most sacred oaths.

Without enlarging on the defense of Whatley, the attacks of his friends, and,
above all, those of the depraved baronet, who employed all his wit to draw this
young lord into the most attrocious of crimes, be it sufficient to observe,
that their attempts were successful. -- The treacherous Ward was the principal
agent in this horrid plot, and every thing was prepared for the pretended
marriage. Whatley, stung by remorse, was frequently on the brink of defeating
this infernal scheme. But W^rd, inspired by his geni^s for villainy, as often
overbore his intentions. Behold our young lord, then, in the bosom of his
beautiful, his innocent angel! Behold him in the raptures of those pure, those
high-set pleasures which alone should be the fruits of unviolated virtue, yet
here they were the portion of guilt.

Whatley, in the midst of these charms, sunk under the influence of a
heartfelt poison. It is true, that he constantly confirmed himself in the
design of establishing those nuptials, which fraud and imposture had pretended.
Fanny had never left her father's house; her husband was the idol of her soul.
She was that tender Eve, whom Milton has described, so gently submissive to the
pleasure of Adam. Yet there were moments when her heart was a prey to sadness,
though the cause was unknown: Her parents too were pensive, and felt the same
unaccountable melancholy. But what were the pangs of Whatley, when his eyes
were fixed on that adorable creature, so touching, so ingenuous, so innocent in
the very lap of pleasure, and yet so wronged! When that angelic woman flew to
meet him, with all the prodigality of chaste embraces, conscious of her injury,
he would decline to meet her; would sometimes shed tears. His crime rose up
against him. Perfidious Ward! he cried, perfidious Ward!

This uncle sent for him to town. Fanny must now be left, though now more than
ever beloved and adored. The Baronet did not permit him to go out of his sight;
he was afraid that his dissimulation should abandon him, and accompained him
when he took his leave. Whatley vowed inviolable love to Fanny, and promised
soon to return to her bosom. The tender creature was with difficulty torn from
the arms of her husband. It was in those trying moments that Whatley felt all
the vengeance of injured truth and honor. He beheld Fanny bathing his feet with
her tears. No, cried he, interrupted by the agitations of his heart, no,
excellent creature, I am not worthy to possess you; such charms, such virtues
deserved a better fate.

Ward at length carries him off, and steals him from those reflections that
weighed down his heart, and were ready to escape from his lips. Fanny fainted
away in the bosom of her mother, when her eyes could no longer perceive her
lord. He was now in the chaise with the Baronet, who exerted all his wicked art
to stifle that remorse which persecuted and pursued him to London.

Philosophers and the learned deny the existence of pre-sentiments, and treat
them as chimeras and absurdities. I must take the liberty, however, to differ
from them, There is no man that honestly puts the question to himself, but must
own that there have been some critical circumstances in his life, wherein he
has been warned, as it were by an inward voice, that seemed to foretell some
approaching evil. This secret, and gloomy herald, came in all its horrors
before the mind of Fanny; nor was the hour of repose exempt from the same
inward alarm, The melancholy reflections of the day were followed by hideous
dreams in the night.

Whatley, arrived in town, is hurried by Sir Thomas round the circle of
pleasures. The base Baronet knew the human heart, and wanted not to be told
that foibles lead to crimes. He drew his friend into those companies, where the
delicacy of sentiment is destroyed, and every succeeding day he thought of
Fanny with less sensibility, and some feature of her image vanished from his
mind.

Sir Thomas had communicated in confidence to lord Darnton, this adventure of
his nephew; and it was in concert with this nobleman, that he endeavored to
draw Whatley into that round of dissipation, where the greater passions die
away -- for it is only with solitude and reflection that they can live.

Whatley found less frequent opportunities to write to Fanny. He received her
letters with less ardour. In one word, his love was abated. Not a day passed,
but the finest girls in town, like so many Circes, sought by their embraces to
rob him of his tenderness and his virtue.

Fanny's greatest misfortune was the youth of Whatley: Who at his years, has
the fortitude to call his heart to an account, or to rouse it from that
unsentimental state to which it has been reduced by dissipation? True pleasures
are never enjoyed but by maturer years. Upon our first entrance into life, we
are generally under such an intoxication, as is no less destructive to pleasure
than to reason.

Ward, among the rest of his seductive arts, did not fail to cherish and
encourage the vanity of his noble friend. By this he undoubtedly mediated a
more mortal blow to the interest of poor Fanny, than any she could suffer from
the influence of rival beauty. When he thought himself tolerably sure of the
success of his artifices, he acquainted lord Darnton with the disposition to
which he had brought his nephew.

Whatley had beheld, with some emotion, the growing beauties of Miss Barry, the
daughter of lord Ravenstone. This impression, so favorable to the designs of
lord Darnton, was immediately communicated to him. He concerted with the father
of that lady, the proper means of drawing Whatley into an attachment. The house
of lord Ravenstone was open to him; was the young lady, at every visit,
appeared more charming. Sir Thomas, like Milton's devil, employed every
artifice, and every temptation. He added new force to Miss Barry's attractions.
He spoke particularly of her high birth, and of the dignity it would confer on
the person who should have the good fortune to marry her. In short, lord
Darnton, acquainted with the progress of his scheme, proposes to his nephew to
marry lord Ravenstone^s daughter. Everything, added he, is already settled: You
are beloved by the lady, and nothing is wanting but your consent. I flatter
myself that you will not disavow my proceedings. She is one of the greatest and
most brilliant matches in England. Whatley changes countenance throws himself
at the feet of his uncle declares with tears his situation; his engagements to
Fanny, and the necessity he was under of confirming them by a lawful marriage.
Lord Darnton embraces and caresses his nephew, answers him with a dissembled
kindness, and employs every art to dazzel and overcome his integrity; but he
remains inflexible. Rage and menaces succeed -- he drives him from his
presence, and the poor lord flies for refuge, into the bosom of the serpent,
Ward: Who more insinuating, more dangerous, conducts him back to his uncle. In
short, after many tumults, many conflicts Fanny is sacrificed, and the weak,
the guilty Whatley marries Miss Barry. Were it allowable to paint the horrid
crime in less hideous colors, one might say that he was in some measure,
dragged to the alter; that, even in the arms of his new bride, he bewailed the
wife of his heart -- the wife whom heaven had destined and devoted to him; and
that the image of Fanny was ever in his mind. The cruel lord Darnton took upon
him to convey the fatal news to the daughter of Adams. He had promised his
nephew to settle such an income on her, as should be, to use his own
expression, a sufficient consolation for her disappointment. -- The crafty
uncle, however, was not satisfied with this triumph. He was still afraid, that
Fanny would recover her former influence; and therefore got Whatley nominated
to one of the remotest foreign courts. Our young lord set off with his
new-married lady, accompanied by Sir Thomas Ward, who never left him a moment
to his own reflections, and who was always flattering him on his dignities and
distinctions; the poor recompense of forfeited innocence and faithful love.

The anxieties, the painful pensiveness of Fanny increased. Already some weeks
were passed since she had heard from Whatley. She could no longer resist the
most cruel suspicions. In vain was she comforted by her father and the rest of
the family. How could she avoid being alarmed at the silence of the man she
adored? She counted the days, the hours, and the minutes she had to waste in
tears, until the time appointed for the lord's return should arrive. An express
arrives from lord Darnton, with a letter to Adams. The good old man received
the messenger with his usual politeness, desired him to set down, took the
fatal paper, and read as follows: --

I shall not, Mr. Adams, treat you with a tone of authority on this occasion. I
spare you those reproaches which your indiscretion might deserve and I am
willing to think that your paternal fondness, may have blinded you. You ought
to have understood that your daughter was a very unfit match for my nephew; you
must therefore, give up all pretensions on that head. Enclosed, you will find a
note for a thousand pounds. Let lord Whatley's folly be out of all future
question, if you would not offend

DARNTON.


The poor old man had no sooner read this letter, that he fell senseless to the
ground. He was alone; his wife and his daughter came in and raised him. By the
application of cordials he recovered his senses; he saw his daughter, and was
seized with a trembling. Ah, my dearest child! Come, my poor Fanny, come into
my arms. My dear father, what is the cause of this? Why this distress? These
tears? This agitation? My father! My child, we are undone, our fears were but
too just. lord Darnton -- Hah! What? -- Is determined to disannul your
marriage, and has had the inhumanity to insult you with the offer of money. My
lord will not own you as his wife. Not as his wife! What then should I be!
Fanny was just able to pronounce these words before she fainted away. She was
carried to her chamber, where she continued in a kind of stupefaction.

Take back, said the indigant old man to the messenger, take back his odious
favors. I am a poor man, it is true; but my lord shall not rob me of my honor.
It is my natural inheritance: I hold it from heaven, and no man on earth, shall
ever deprive me of it. My lord may act the ruffian to my children, and murder
their father, but he shall never oblige us, to give up our rights, nor will we
ever consent to the dissolution of the marriage. I will drag my wretched age to
the feet of lord Darnton. Let him throw me into prison. I will take my trial.
The rights of justice are above nobility; and an honest man, who has always
behaved as a faithful servant to his lord, will not be injured with impunity.
What is it you mean! interrupted the messenger, who could not forbear to weep
with these honest people: On what are your complaints founded? The marriage of
lord Whatley will not be annulled. What marriage do you speak of? Do you not
know that lord Darnton's nephew is married to lord Ravenstone's daughter?
Married! My lord Whatley! -- with any body but Fanny? Yes, and he is gone
abroad. O Heavens! cried Adams, in the utmost agonies, and has he then made a
jest of the most sacred ties? Can my lord have any other wife but Fanny? I will
go immediately to London, I will have justice, or death; lord Darnton cannot
refuse it.

He went into his daughter's chamber, who was just opening her eyes. Child, you
do not know all your wrongs, not all the treachery of lord -- He is married.
Married! Yes, married to another woman. But take courage, we have yet honor
and justice left us. I am going to London, and at my return, expect better
news. Can lord Darnton be such a savage that nothing can soften him? My dear
child (and he pressed her to his heart) you shall find a father in me.

The situation of Fanny admits of no description. The departure of lord Whatley
was more intolerable than all the rest. Adams, after taking a tender and
sorrowful leave of his wife and children, set off for London, accompanied by
the messenger of lord Darnton.

Lord Darnton's messenger entered his house, followed by the unfortunate old
man. No sooner did his lord see him, than he asked him concerning the event of
his message. He gave him, for answer, the thousand pound note. What! cried his
lordship, had he the impudence to refuse my favor? He is here, replied the
servant. Let him come in, said my lord, in wrath; I know how to treat people of
his stamp. Adams entered, and threw himself at his lordship's feet. Yes, my
lord, said the unhappy father, with floods of tears, I refused the price of my
disgrace, because my honor is not to be purchased. I am sensible that I am a
dependent of your family, and that respect and submission are my duty. I did
every thing in my power to prevent my lord, your nephew, from so
disproportionable a match; but he would not listen to me: He was determined to
possess my daughter, but he previously married her. Our fate is in your hands,
my lord, but the knot has been tied in the face of heaven, and it is heaven
alone that can dissolve it. Our only misfortune is my humble condition, and my
poverty: My family has over been irreproachable. -- Would you, my lord, deprive
a father, a mother, and a daughter of their lives -- poor unhappy people --
that esteem their honesty their greatest blessing? -- Let me embrace your
knees; and look upon a miserable father, that appeals to your humanity and your
justice. To do you justice, replied his lordship, I should drive you this
moment out of my house. How could you have the impudence to refuse my favor?
Though you had an hundred daughters, you insolent old man, a thousand pounds
would be too great a price for them. Hear me -- do not abuse my kindness --
take back the bill -- go; and do not think of seeing me any more.

No, said the courageous Adams, with that noble indignation which raises the
spirit above all rank, I will not go. I only ask for justice, my lord, and I
will have it. You shall either this moment run me through the body, or I will
have recourse to every court of justice in London. I will petition his majesty:
I will lay before him my grievances, my distresses, and my rights. I am,
proceeded, the honest man, with all the eloquence of anguish, I am a poor
farmer; but, my lord, I am a father, and an injured father. My complaints will
be heard -- they will be echoed from every heart -- and the world will
pronounce between us. I have reason and justice on my side. My grief distracts
me, my lord! -- No -- I never can think that lord Whatley has formed any other
connections -- This is only a pretense to try my integrity. Ah! my lord! once
more behold at your feet an unhappy father, who will never quit this posture
until he moves your compassion. You cannot be capable of an action so unworthy
of your rank. Come, said lord Darnton, I will give you two thousand pounds, and
let me hear no more of you or your daughter. My lord, you will not hear me:
Your second proposal, I presume to say, is a fresh attack on my life, and
honor. You shall take that life, my lord; you shall embrue your hands in my
blood; I will return no more to my daughter. Insolent man! Do you threaten me?
-- I will die, or obtain your consent to a marriage that will not discredit
you. -- Fanny was a girl of virtue. My lord, expect the utmost from my
distraction; it is very dreadful. Do you threaten me, you audacious earth-worm?
Know the insignificancy of your pretensions. I perceive on what your obstinacy
and your haughtiness are founded: You imagine that your daughter was legally
married to my foolish nephew. I would have owed to your compliance and your
duty, what I shall obtain by law. Know then, that your claims are a jest; that
your daughter has been the instrument of Whatley's pleasures; in short, that
the marriage you have the presumption to insist on, was nothing more than a
stratagem. What! My daughter not married to lord Whatley! -- She never was; she
has only been his mistress, my friend; and I think in that instance, his
lordship (my nephew) did you no little honor.

A thunderstroke could not have smitten poor Adams more violently. He fell
senseless to the ground. Lord Darnton went out of the room, and coldly ordered
his people to take the poor man to the air until he should come to himself, and
then to pay him two thousand pounds. There was a scene that might have moved
the heart of a savage. The poor old man lay extended on the floor, his gray
hairs soiled with dust and tears -- He hardly breathed, and the paleness of
death was on his countenance. A servant, who had more humanity than his master,
was moved with compassion for the unfortunate man; he took him by the arm, and
endeavored to recover him. Adams opened his eyes, and with a bitter
exclamation, threw himself again on the floor, crying, They have deceived my
daughter -- she is not married. O my God! my God! -- He rose hastily, and was
going to seek lord Darnton, but his strength failed him; he was obliged to set
down, and could do nothing but vent his anguish in a torrent of tears. The
compassionate domestic endeavored to comfort him; he exhorted him to be
reconciled to his misfortunes -- represented the quality and power of lord
Darnton, and concluded, with relating to him all the circumstances of Whatley's
pretended marriage with Fanny, Adams in distraction, tore his hair, and talked
of stabbing lord Darnton. The steward brought him two thousand pounds ready
told. Adams dashed them from him with all the rage of honest indignation. --
Wretch let your master keep his infamous wealth! Go, he has already insulted my
gray hairs -- I see that I have no other protection, nor other avenger than my
God -- I implore his assistance; and he will punish the villains that have
deceived my child, my poor Fanny. Ah! my friend, continued he, addresing
himself to the charitable domestic that took him by the hand, and would have
soothed him if you knew what a woman they have injured! -- Ah! my poor
children! How shall I bear to tell you this dreadful story! I find I shall die
in this place -- Here my body shall lie, and call down the divine vengeance.
The Supreme Justice can redress the meanest of his creatures, and He will not
refuse his succor.

The servant by degrees, brought him to a sense of his situation; told him that
every extremity, even death itself, would be vain; and represented to him the
authority of the great, who always trample on the rights of the poor with
impunity. At length he drew him to a little distance from lord Darnton's house,
and conveyed him to the lodgings of his wife. She received the unhappy Adams
with that humanity peculiar to those whom the insolence of grandeur and fortune
has denominated the meaner-sort of people; a humanity which is certainly
preferable to the superficial and heartless politeness of the splendid and the
gay.

The situation of Adams is not to be described: His general exclamations were,
My poor daughter! Child of my heart! How have they dishonored thee? -- Thee,
to whom honor was more precious than life! -- Ah! why did not the traitor
Whatley rather sacrifice you in the bosom of your father? Then the poor man
would weep, as if his soul would waste itself in tears.

The generous domestic, still more moved at his sufferings, pretends sickness,
that he might continue with Adams, who had the spirit to write a letter to lord
Darnton, filled (to use an expression of Satius) with all the majesty of grief.
It will be no way surprising to hear a farmer talk in this strain, when it is
remembered, that Adams had a liberal education. Besides, a virtuous mind calls
forth its powers, is elevated and exalted, acquires a kind of conscious dignity
and superiority in those circumstances which strongly affect its interests. It
is observable that men have acted prodigies of valor, firmness, and eloquence,
when they were excited by the great emotions of nature, the only source of
shining deeds, and distinguished talents, The old man's letter was conceived in
the following terms: --

Barbarous man! it is before the throne (...) everlasting justice that I summon
you, and you shall there take your trial. You have brought shame and disgrace
upon the last paths of my life. To recompense the labors of an old servant,
who has eat his morsel of bread with the honest sweat of his brow, you have
brought distraction into his heart, and betrayed the honor of his child, even
in his own bosom -- But know, unfeeling man, that heaven will call you to a
strict account for those tears, and that blood which now drops from me. Your
execrable nephew -- I have already summoned him to the tribunal of God; that
tribunal which is not to be corrupted -- He will give us vengeance. You will
one day suffer remorse for your abominable crime, but it will be too late; your
wretched victims will be in the grave, and from that grave their voices shall
pierce the sky. You have disgraced my old age -- You have sunk, under a load of
infamy, a man, a whole family, that served, loved you and grew under the shadow
of your protection -- You have trod upon weakness and innocence. I give up to
you, and your per^dious nephew, the farm and the property that was entrusted to
me. May hell open, and all its horrors, swallow you both! We will go to bathe
with our tears, some other place, to give up our torn hearts to misery and
anguish, and there lose our last sighs. May this letter urge to your heart,
every painful arrow you have sunk in mine! A man reduced to extremities, as I
am, is above all fear -- Dispatch us quickly, for that is the crime you will
add to those you have already committed. -- It will undoubtedly be less
horrible, and it is all that Adams is willing to owe you.

The afflicted father left London, loading it ^th imprecations. His
distructions increased, (...) broke out anew when he approached his own ^se. He
beheld it with groans of anguish, ^d cried -- There is the asylum of my poverty
-- There did I bring up my unfortunate daughter (...) innocence and virtue,
but, oh! to involve us (...) everlasting shame! Ah! how shall I see my ^mily!
How shall I go to plunge these daggers (...) their hearts? Could I have
believed that my ^st days would have been thus covered with dis^^^ce?

The domestic, his faithful attendant, support^d him, and he dragged himself
toward the ^rm. His wife and daughter came out to meet ^im: It was with
difficulty that Fanny could ^upport herself as she walked. She was ready to
expire -- She made an effort to throw herself into ^e arms of her father,
crying, O my father! -- Adams clasped her to his breast -- He would have spoke
-- Fanny saw his distress, and therein read her fate. I am not lord Whatley's
wife: I have nothing to do but to die. They sat down. -- Adams, as well as his
anguish would give him leave, related to them the barbarous manner in which he
had been received by lord Darnton. When he came to the horrid treachery of
Whatley; to the pretended marriage -- Hah! cried Fanny, am I then deceived? Am
I not his wife? -- Scarce had she pronounced these last words, when she fell to
the ground, as if she had been smitten with a thunder-stroke. Lord Darnton's
domestic was extremely affected at this shocking scene -- Fanny was conveyed to
her bed, which she had not left but to drag herself to meet her father. Adams
ceased not to embrace and weep over her -- At length she recovered her senses
-- But is it, said she, lord Whatley, who has deceived, betrayed, me? -- Ought
I to have expected such a blow? As soon as the unfortunate woman arose, so to
express it, out of the arms of death, she seemed to be animated with superior
strength; she seemed, by some miracle to have obtained another heart. She
raised herself upon her arm. Her features, that had been dejected by languor,
began to be animated. She seemed to command her tears to cease -- Come, my
father, said the majestic beauty, let us forget even the name of that villain
who meant to dishonor me. My honor is still the property of my heart -- It is
he -- it is the execrable traitor, who has forfeited his own. He has abused the
most sacred ties -- he has deceived me -- He has not robbed me of the innocence
of my soul. Can I be criminal in your eyes -- in the eyes of God? -- Since I
have nothing now to hope for in life, how easy were it for me to die? -- But I
will live for your consolation, your support. You and my mother shall be the
world to me. Let us fly from this detested farm; this scene of guilt and
horror! -- Let us go, where Lord Whatley, where even, his idea, shall not
follow me, (and at these words she wept.) Let not even his name be pronounced
among us! -- We will -- we will forget him -- I will tear him from my heart. My
tender father -- I am willing to submit to the most toilsome labors, the most
humble employments -- to any thing, provided you will be careful of your life
-- provided you will love your Fanny -- who is not a guilty creature. -- At
these words her fortitude gave way to a fresh flood of tears. At length the
unhappy family leaves the fatal place -- But Fanny forsakes it not without
sometimes turning her eyes toward it -- without some regretful looks -- She
seemed to leave in that place, the most sensible part of her faculties, the
most lively principle of her soul. Under the influence of that assumed
fortitude, love had not lost its force. That Fanny, so magnanimous, possibly
wept the more in secret. Virtuous minds are always most susceptible of great
passions. Those unfortunate people went to the house of the minister, their
relation, who had superintended the education of Fanny. The domestic who had
accompanied Adams from London, returned thither; but disdaining to serve a man
of lord Darnton's principles, he desired his dismission.

Lord Whatley, though married to a charming woman, in the bosom of pleasures
and honors, and surrounded with the pomp of dignity, was far from tasting any
true happiness. His lady had all the airs of a woman of quality; behaving with
a digusting coldness to her husband, and countenancing the attention of others,
in the genuine spirit of coquetry -- she was handsome, vain, and haughty: Yet
that haughtiness was not so severe, as to swerve her from many scandalous
adventures, the report of which came to the ears of her Lord. He would have
urged his affection, but was not heard: He threatened her with the authority of
an injured husband, but his threats were answered by the most glaring
indecorums. The daughter of Lord Ravenstone was supported by a great name, and
a powerful interest at court. Whatley was therefore obliged to put up with his
affronts -- The conduct of his lady, many times brought to his remembrance, his
poor Fanny, who loved, who adored him, and whom he had dishonored at the
expense of the purest and tenderest love. But this image that arose in his mind
was soon destroyed by the industry of the baronet. He hurried him round a
circle of continual dissipation -- He plunged him into every debauchery of
heart and mind, and while he was repelling the remembrance of Fanny, he was
extinguishing, by the same means, the natural sentiments of honor and virtue.

Some years passed, while Whatley continued in his death of reason, and honest
sensibility. He returned to London with his wife, who did not fail to torment
him with the most cruel chagrins. She dishonored him by her continual
intrigues, embroiled him with her relations, and rendered him contemptible in
the eyes of the court. Yet in these mortifying circumstances, he had one
consolation. His lady died, leaving him debts, enemies, insult and shame. It
was then that Whatley gave himself up to the most boundless dissipation: There
was not a noted tavern in London where he was not the distinguished hero of
libertinism, and Sir Thomas Ward partook of his reputation. They went, by
accident, with some other friends, to Brown's coffee-house -- The conversation
of the company turned on the subject of honor, a subject so trite, and yet so
new -- But why gentlemen, do you make this your subject, said a person who was
a stranger to them, but whose years, and simplicity of appearance rendered him
respectable; why do you not talk of matters with which you are better
acquainted? -- Of horse-races and fashions? -- What do you mean, interrupted
Whatley, briskly? -- That you are a very unfit person to discuss the subject of
honor -- How! know I not what honor is? -- You! -- there are a very few people
that know what it is -- Insolent! I am not insolent -- I only speak the truth
-- Immediately some person enquires for this singular man, and draws him out of
the coffee-house, the rest of the company remained in astonishment.

Gentlemen, cried Lord Whatley, you may be very sure I know what I ought to do
on this occasion, and I shall soon convince you whether I have a right to be
called a man of honor. He went out along with Ward, who heightened his
resentment. The next day, early in the morning. Wh^tley goes to the the house
where this man had an ordinary lodging. He knocks at the door. -- The stranger,
who had no servant, opened it, saying, my Lord, I did not expect you so soon.
By your leave, I will go to bed again -- Expect me! Then, did you expect me? --
Certainly -- I am glad to find you did me that justice; but, in the first
place, Sir, who are you? Who am I? a man -- What is your title? -- My heart,
and the love of truth. Do you know who I am? -- They call you a Lord, and I
suppose you are one, for you resemble the rest of that fraternity -- But
neither you, nor they, I repeat it, have any right to talk of honor -- You
insult me and I expect satisfaction; whoever you may be, you shall take your
chance with me -- You think, then, you have a right to take away my life, or to
sacrifice your own -- Imprudent young man! -- What familiar insolence! -- Do
you imagine that I owe you respect? -- I will convince you of it -- What, by
running me through the body? -- You suppose that fortune will favor you -- If,
in fact, it should, and if I should have time to express my sentiments, do not
look for respect, but rather contempt, perhaps pity -- Contempt! -- Your pity!
Get out of bed, friend, this moment; and let this dispute be quickly ended, on
the one side or the other. How audaciously this impudent fellow treats me! I am
not impudent, and I shall get up immediately. The stranger rises, and dresses
himself with great tranquillity, while Lord Whatley walked backwards and
forwards in the chamber, in the utmost agitation. Come, says he, let us go
behind Hyde-Park, and there I shall make you know what it is to offend a man of
my rank -- A man of your rank ought to support his superiority by probity and
virtue; without those distinctions, he is on a level with the lowest Plebian --
What do I say? -- He is not comparable to the latter, if he acts his humble
part honestly. Whatley stormed with anger. Scarce were they arrived on the
spot, when his Lordship drew, and called upon his antagonist to do the same.
One word by your leave. It is against my will that I fight. This acknowledgment
may appear singular; you may deem me a coward, a po^troon, but I am neither the
one nor the other When you shall know my ^ame, you will do me justice. Duelling
is an infamous thing; it is contrary to all laws, both divine and human, and is
nothing else but assination. But I shall comply with your desire, and, as you
are determined to have it so, shall do myself the honor to cut a throat with
you. I have only one thing to desire. What is that? I have offended you by
saying that you had no knowledge of honor: Before we fight, do me the favor
to tell me what you mean by the word honor, and try to do it calmly. I believe
this man is mad No I am not mad. What is that honor? Tell me what idea you
have formed of it?

Lord Whatley made use of all those definitions which are so well known, and so
ill-founded. Have you done, my Lord? -- Yes. You seem to be very little
acquainted with your subject, and perhaps you have forgot the principal parts
of it. Does honor consist in keeping one's word? -- Without dispute; and the
weaker, and more defenseless the person is to whom that word is given, the more
sacred a man of honor should hold his faith. Is it not, in short, the ^ankest,
the most degrading vileness to break it, I to betray in such an instance, and
to snatch by treachery the rewards of truth? Would you, my Lord, make a
purchase with false or forged bills? -- At these words Whatley stormed with
indignation. -- Forged bills! But you, my Lord, have been guilty of an action a
thousand times more base. -- Draw, Sir! Hear me, and as soon as I have
explained myself we will fight. -- Though I had a thousand lives, and should
lose them all by your hand, you would not be less culpable. Would you not forge
a bill? Barbarous man! What did you then, when you imposed on innocence, love,
and truth; When yielding to the dictates of your vile acaccomplices, under
pretext of the most sacred and solemn oaths, you dishonored an unhappy
creature, who received you into the arms of innocence, under the sanction of
the altar? -- What did you, when tearing in pieces the purest and tenderest
heart? Your conduct was followed by death and ruin: When you brought an aged
father to the grave with shame? Those unfortunate people, that were honored
with the name of your dependents; who considered the bosom of their Lord as
their asylum; whom you ought to have protected: And was it you that sacrificed
them? You understand me: True love and innocence betrayed; your heart, yes,
your heart itself, my Lord, if you dare look into it, all these will raise
against you. You seem disturbed. Ah! said Lord Whatley, and a tear rose in his
eye; too true! I have acted dishonorably; and this is what honor calls upon me
to do. Upon this he threw down his sword. Embrace me, generous stranger: You
open my eyes; you touch my heart; you bring me to myself: Then saying into his
arms -- Ah! tell me, tell me, said he, what is become of Fanny? Yes, I am
indeed a wretch; the vilest of criminals. This, my Lord, is honor; it returns
to your heart; and I acknowledge the man. Fanny and her family live in
bitterness and misery: They have taken refuge with a relation, who supports
them in their deplorable circumstances; and the unfortunate Fanny still loves
you. Loves me, interrupted Whatley, with tears; still loves me! -- Ah! Sir, let
me see her; let me throw myself at her feet: Will you have the goodness to
conduct me?

Ward, who had followed his friend at a distance, runs up to him, and finds him
in tears. Come on, Sir, said Whatley; behold the triumph of sentiment! -- Yes,
I acknowledge myself culpable; and this gentlemen had a right to tell me that I
could not with propriety talk of honor; he has opened my eyes, my friend, and I
fly to repair the injury I have done. Whatley explained the circumstances of
this adventure. Ward was outrageous, reproached him with meanness of spirit,
and draws upon the very person who had brought him back to virtue. The stranger
trie^, by the strongest remonstrances, to evade fighting with the enraged
Baronet; but at last, being constrained to it, cries, it was you, wretched
Ward, who corrupted the virtuous Whatley. You oblige me to the crime either of
sacrificing your life, or my own. Neither my words, nor my tears, (for I blush
not to weep) have any effect upon you. Take then the consequence, or may my
death soften your rigid heart, and bring you to repentence. Whatley would have
parted them, but Ward would not hear him.

They fight: The stranger disarms him, and gives him back his sword, saying,
Live, and enjoy the privilege of repentance. Whatley now made new efforts to
appease his friend: But he ^ell with greater fury on his generous adversary,
and at last received a mortal thrust that laid him on the ground. The stranger
immediately took him by the arm, assisted by Whatley, who bathed his friend
with tears. The conqueror gave himself up to the most piercing grief. O heaven!
said he, with groans, that I should be guilty of such a crime! That I should
shed human blood; the blood of a fellow creature! Ah! my Lord, continued he to
Whatley, I partake in your distress: Sir Thomas Ward has involved me in this
guilt; I ought rather to have let him run me through the heart: I never shall
survive this accident. Whatley's servants came and took away the body of Ward,
while his lordship and the stranger returned to town in the carriage, struck
with the deepest concern and melancholy. The people in the neighborhood, who
had been present at the combat, all deposed in favor of the conqueror. --
Whatley having recovered from his first emotions of grief, discovered at length
that the person who had killed the Baronet, was an officer of birth, and
distinguished for his merit and his bravery. He had retired from service, and
lived like a true philosopher; that is, like a man who had the support of honor
and virtue at heart. He employed the greatest part of his fortune in the relief
of indigence: He avoided splendour, and lived under the productive and pleasing
shade of his own integrity. His name was Windham. Whatley flew to his
apartment; whom he no sooner perceived, than he cried, Ah! my Lord, I shall
soon follow my unhappy victim to the grave. I cannot bear to think of this
event; to think that I have deprived a man of his life! I ought to have evaded
a circumstance so horrible. Fatal prejudice! How long shall it triumph over
reason! Is it thus a a man serves his country? -- How nearly doe^ such virtue
border on a crime!

This worthy man was pierced with grief and melancholy; nevertheless, he
recovers the health that he apprehended he should no longer enjoy. Whatley,
while he bewailed the fate of his friend, was obliged to own that he alone had
been to blame, and that he had obliged Windham to come to extremities. He was
no less ready to acknowledge that the Baronet had been the cause of all his
irregularities; that he had led him into that shameful treachery, the disgrace
of his life: In one word that he had been the occasion of all Fanny's
sufferings. These reflections rendered the memory of Sir Thomas less dear to his
friend.

Windham informed his lordship of the cruel behavior of Lord Darnton, with
regard to the unfortunate Adams. What a description for Whatley! His soul had
recovered all its honesty, all its sensibility. Windham was a kind of superior
being, who rescued him from that gulf of depravity into which Ward had plunged
him; and Whatley wished for nothing but the moment that should restore him to
his Fanny, the only wife of his heart.

Windham related such circumstances as still heightened his impatience to see
her. That worthy man, in traveling over the different counties of England, had
been led by accident to the house of that clergyman with whom Fanny and her
family had taken refuge. It was from them he learnt their misfortunes, and the
perfidious behavior of Lord Whatley. Windham, with pleasure indulged his
impatience; and they ^ook their way to the village where the clergyman lived.

Whatley already felt the happiness of repairing his injuries, and at length
they arrived: But what a thunder-stroke to the penitent Lord! They found the
clergyman dead; and the place where Adams and his family had retired was
unknown. It was only observed, that wherever their were, they must be very
miserable. -- This, cried Lord Whatley, is what I have done. I am the cause why
these unfortunate people, perhaps, are now no more. It is I who have murdered
the most adorable of woman. Let us go no farther, my generous friend! Here I
will die: Here, where my Fanny has wept and reproached me. No, angelic
creature! you never could love me after such enormities; my conduct is
detestable even in my own eyes. Let us go, my Lord, said Windham, let us not
idly give up our searches here. Why should we distrust the goodness of heaven?
It is that which has opened your eyes. Let us believe that we are under the
conduct of Providence, and that your Fanny will be restored to your arms, that
you you may make restitution for all the injuries you have done to her and her
relations. Virtue has its rewards sometimes even in this world. Thus he
encouraged the despairing Whatley: They pursued their journey, and made the
most dilligent enquiries.

Windham himself at length begun to despair of success, and the unhappy Lord
was in the greatest distress. They were on horseback, and unattended, when
they met a Baronet of Windham's acquaintance; he stopped a little to talk with
him, and Whatley rode forward.

A child was weeping very bitterly at a little distance from the road. The poor
innocent appeared to be about six or seven years of age. It had an air of
delicacy which was touching, under the disadvantages of a poor dress. Its
tears, its native comeliness, greatly moved his lordship. He looked upon the
child with pity, and could not draw his eyes from it. What makes you weep, my
little dear, said he? My poor mamma! she told me she should die soon, and she
wept when she kissed me. -- Mamma is very unhappy -- We have nothing to live
upon -- Mamma cries, and grand-papa is sick in bed. Thus the child, with
mingled tears and sighs, uttered its little complaints. Poor child! but your
father, my dear -- Oh! Sir, I never saw my papa: It is my papa that makes us
all unhappy: Mamma often talks of him: She says she loves him, and shall love
him as long as he lives: Though to be sure he has given us a great deal of
trouble. She makes me pray to God for him every day. Poor papa is in a very bad
way, added the child, weeping as if its little heart would break.

Lord Whatley was affected, and alighting from his horse, run toward the
child, who did not seek to shun him, but stretched out its arms to embrace him.
Embrace, my little angel! you are a sweet child -- And what are your parents?
They work the field -- Your mother too? -- She is always the first that goes to
work, Sir, though she has not much strength -- She takes care of my grand-papa
-- I wish I were rich that I could help my poor mamma, she is so very good --
And where do you live, my dear child? -- Below there, Sir! Showing him a
wretched cottage. Will you go with me to your dear mamma? Oh! she would chide
me, Sir! My mamma sees nobody. Fear not, said his lordship, still embracing the
child, I will make your excuse. The child hesitated, looked at him, and gave
him its hand -- He took it into one of his, and with the other held his horse's
bridle. Windham followed him at a distance. He went along with the child, who
conducted him to a poor hut covered with thatch, and surrounded by a miserable
hedge. A few paces from the cottage he saw a woman sitting upon the side of a
ditch, with a matlock in her hand, and seemingly oppressed with fatigue and
melancholy. The child goes up to her: Pray, mamma, do not chide me for bringing
this gentleman, who wanted to see you. She looked up. Whatley fell at her feet:
My dear Fanny. My Lord Whatley! She fainted away. Her child threw itself into
her arms. And at the same moment Windham came up. Whatley first recovered. My
dear Fanny! Is it you! O my friend! I have found the mistress of my heart. My
excellent, my only love, see me at your feet! Lift up your eyes! Behold your
lover! your husband -- who repents from his soul! My dear Fanny to what a
condition have I reduced you!

Whatley was prostrate at her feet, which he pressed to his lips and bathed
with his tears. Fanny recovers from her swoon, and falling into his bosom, is
it you, said she, my Lord Whatley? -- Yes, my adorable love, it is your
husband, who, repenting of all his follies and vices, returns to virtue and
your embraces, and to that tenderness which now possesses his soul, and makes
him die to repair your injuries! -- My Lord! have you embraced your child, said
Fanny, tenderly -- Go, my dear, and embraces your father -- My child! O God! My
child! -- This perfectly overcome him -- He carressed Fanny and her child by
turns, and pressed them to his bosom. Yes, my Lord, continued Fanny, it is your
child -- the fruit of our unhappy love -- I have brought him up to love you,
that when he survived me, he might tell you of his unfortunate mother; for had
you come a few days later, you would not have seen me here -- I should have
left a letter in his hands, and might have flattered myself -- Her swelling
bosom would not give her utterence, and Whatley took her again into his arms --
Ah! tell me not of my crimes! I am severely punished for them -- I feel it at
my soul -- But oh! could I then reduce to such a condition, the most valuable
of women? My dearest life -- May I, by every instance of love and tenderness,
prevail on you to forget my barbarity, my treachery -- My undeserved treachery?
-- Then he spoke, and wept upon her hand as he pressed it to his mouth.

I shall not pretend to excuse myself by telling you that Ward led me into this
scene of villainy. I would appear to you a criminal, as I really am, that I may
owe every thing to your generosity and your tenderness. Forgive me, forgive the
man who shall esteem it an honor to bear the name of your husband, and that of
a father to this amiable child (pressing it again to his heart) -- But where is
your father? -- My father? -- May I see him? -- He is in bed, answered Fanny,
expiring with sickness and sorrow; for sorrow has preyed upon him more than
want -- Want! said Whatley, O God -- My heart will break. Ah! worthy Windham!
What a wretch have I been -- Yes, my poor Fanny, it is I who have reduced you
to these extremities -- And -- What is that I see? -- The bread we live upon --
The bread that is earned by our toil, and steeped in our tears -- It was a
coarse brown loaf. Whatley could scarcely support himself at the sight -- He
raised his hands to heaven, and in broken accents cried, What, my dear, my
virtuous creature, was this your food -- While I -- O, my God! My God! -- I
shall die -- I cannot survive these horrid thoughts -- Ah, my Lord! What charms
in this repentance for your Fanny! Live that she may yet adore you -- she never
ceased to love you (embracing him) could she hate you? -- Yes, you shall be my
wife, my sovereign mistress. London has been witness to my irregularities -- It
shall behold my reformation; I can never make my acknowledgments to you
sufficiently distinguished -- Yes, you shall be the wife of my heart -- Come,
let me throw myself at the feet of my worthy father.

Fanny desired him to wait until she had acquainted him with his arrival. She
feared that the sudden sight of her Lord might be fatal to the languishing old
man. She did not know how to testify her gratitude to Windham. Lord Whatley had
told her, in a few words, all that the worthy man had done to bring him back to
a sense of truth and honor. Fanny flew to her father -- My dear father, said
she, take comfort -- I have good news to tell you -- My Lord Whatley is come --
He acknowledges his faults -- And will he own you for his wife? Shall I have
that consolation before I die? -- Yes, worthy Adams, cried his Lordship,
running to embrace the old man, you see your daughter's husband, your son who
comes to bewail his faults in your bosom, and would give his life to repair
them. Adams, overcome with surprise and joy, could only utter -- Ah, my Lord!
-- The tears flowed from his eyes; he would have got up, and attempted at some
expressions of respect -- Lie still my father, said Whatley, it is my duty to
do you honor and respect: -- I have injured you; I have betrayed my faith, and
virtue, and Fanny -- I am ready to make satisfaction for every thing -- I
humbly ask pardon of you, of your dear daughter, of humanity itself, which I
have wounded, through the heart of the worthy Adams. Yes, you shall be my
father, and your daughter shall be my wife, the only mistress of my soul. He
then enquired of Fanny concerning her mother -- Alas! replied the old man, she
is no more! -- She adored her daughter. Ah! I understand you -- This is my
doing -- Wretched and guilty Whatley, how shall thou expiate thy crimes? -- Ah,
my father! Ah, my Fanny!

Situations like these, admit of no adequate description; but the heart may
feel, and the mind may conceive what the pen can never paint.

Our poor cottagers went to dinner: How did their extreme indigence then pierce
the soul of Whatley! Scarce had they a sufficiency of that coarse bread, the
very sight of which, struck him with horror -- The dying Adams was another
object that might have smitten the heart of barbarity itself -- Every thing
that appeared in this mansion of misery was a dagger in the breast of this
penitent Lord. But when his looks were fixed on that woman whom he adored; when
he ^ead in her pale countenance the cruel impressions of pain and poverty, and
saw those arms that were locked in his with so much tenderness, faded and
emaciated, he was torn with that remorse, those torments of the soul, which are
ten thousand times more acute than any external torture. Every instant he
cried, with tears that bled from the heart -- My virtuous Fanny! To what misery
have I reduced you! -- And is it possible that you can still love me? -- Fanny,
embracing him, answered, Yes, my Lord! -- You were always dear to me; and you
should have pierced me to the heart, if you would have permitted me to kiss
your hand.

If there is a scene in this world that can attract the eye of the Supreme
Being, it is, undoubtedly, that of sincere repentance, of pure and honest love,
the triumph of sentiment and reason.

Lord Whatley learned that Fanny's two sisters had not long survived their
mother: That her brothers, obliged by their misfortunes to leave their fathers
house, were in the service of farmers; that she and her father, after the death
of the clergyman, their relation, being reduced to extreme indigence, tilled,
with their own hands a piece of ground, where they had built a kind of shed to
live in, and that this had been scarcely sufficient for the support of their
miserable lives. Fanny loved her Lord too much to afflict him with a detail of
such circumstances: He learnt them from Windham.

Whatley removed Adams to his own seat, where the old man soon recovered his
health. A very elegant apartment was prepared for Fanny, who, a few days after
their arrival, dressed in a magnificent suit, was married to her Lord. It is
needless to add, that Windham was one of the principal assistants on this
festive occasion. Lord Whatley agreeably surprised Adams, by presenting to him
his two sons, dressed in a manner becoming their change of fortune. I was
willing, my dear father, said he, to make all our family happy. The brothers of
Fanny ought to be mine, and it is my intention that they shall partake of my
happiness.

In the evening, when Whatley had dismissed his attendants, he threw himself at
the feet of lady W --, and, at last, said he, my excellent Fanny, you will
embrace an husband, whose only study will be to make you forget your
sufferings. Will you pardon me all the injuries, all the wrongs I have done
you! My dear, my adorable wife! your misfortunes have not robbed you of your
beauty; it will bloom afresh when cherished by my kisses, and watered by my
tears, I see the effect of my own conduct, and you are more dear to me: You
have been my victim, you shall be my sovereign, be all that is dear to me, with
the lovely child that pleads for its father's pardon. Let it not plead in vain,
my dear Fanny! She could only answer with tears of pleasure, the strong, though
inarticulate expressions of the soul, and overpowered by the intoxicating
tenderness, she sunk into his arms. O charm inexpressible of pure and tender
attachments! Pleasures of love! What are you without those of virtue.

Windham was about to take leave of Whatley. What! Sir, said his lordship, will
you refuse to reap the fruits of your labor? And what scenes can you find more
interesting than these? You have united two hearts, my dear friend, that know
how to be grateful for the favors you have done them. Enjoy the pleasure of
beholding the effects of your kindness. You have restored me to virtue, to
Fanny, and to happiness; but can that happiness be perfect, if you add not the
pleasures of friendship to those of love! Windham embraced his friend with
those tears that spring from the heart. Well, my dear children, I accept your
offer: It will be some consolation to my old age to find that there are yet on
earth, sensible and virtuous souls. They removed to London, where Fanny proved
herself the most charming and amiable of women. She was a model for those who
had long shone in the circle of distinguished life, and showed by her beauty
and her deportment, that the virtues and the graces are the natives of
villages, rather than of cities. She went yearly to visit that poor cottage
where Whatley and Windham had found her. There she seemed to find her virtues
strengthened, her principles improved. Scenes of poverty call us back to that
modesty, and that subdued frame of mind, which are the best support of virtue.

Whatley despised, doshonoured, chagrined by his marriage with Lord
Ravenstone's daughter, was indebted, in some measure, for a second existence to
the daughter of the farmer. Led by the tender influences of chaste love, he
returned to the duties of a man, a citizen, and a subject: He entered once more
into the service he had quitted, distinguished himself, and obtained the most
honorable appointments. Lord Darnton himself made a kind of public
satisfaction to Adams and Fanny; he declared Whatley his heir, and died in the
arms of his niece. Heaven, as a recompense to Adams, prolonged his life to an
advanced and happy old age; and Fanny had several children, the delight and
ornament of their family and their country.

FINIS.
Books and Stationary, Just received, and for sale, by JOHN HARRISSON, At his
Book Store and Printing Office, No. 3, Peck-slip.
QUARTO Bibles, with Plates, Apocrypha, and Psalms, Pocket do. fine paper,
elegantly bound, 2 vols. do. do. plainly do. 2. vols. do. do. in one neat
pocket vol. New Testament, large print, octavo, Davies Sermons, 3 vols. octavo,
Lime-street Sermons, Owen on Communion, Hervy's Aspasio Vindicated, Cloud of
Witnesses, Macl^uren's Sermons, Watts' Logic, Hervey's Letters, Thompson's
Seasons, Willi^on's Sacramenta' Catechism, do. Directory, Boston's Covenant of
Grace, do. Distinguishing characters, Newton on the Prophecies, Ainsworth's
Treatises Drellencourt on Death, Sherlock on do. Hervey's dialogues, Gospel
Sonnets. Young's Night Thoughts, Messiah, Mrs. Davies' Diary, Cowley's Poems,
Paradise lost, do, regained, elegant copy, New Geographical, Commercial, and
Historical Grammar, 2 vols. Boyer's French and English Dictionary, Johnson's,
Bailey's, and Eutick's Dictionaries, Young's Latin Do. Scott's pronouncing do.
Smart's Horace, Latin and English, Fisher's Companion, Thompson's Calculator,
Simson's Euclid, Goldsmith's Works, 4 vls. Telemachus, Byron's Narrative,
Goldsmith's History of Rome, do. of England, Rambler, 4 vols. Free Masons
Companion, History of 300 animals, Cook's Voyages, 4 vls. Sully's Memoirs, 5
vols. Addison's Works, 4 vls Sterne's Sentimental Journey, Lady's Library,
Sydney and Eugenia, Queen of France, Woodly Park, or the Victims of Revenge,
Letters from Henrietta to Morvina, History of Jane Gray, Queen of England,
Siege of Belgrade, an Historical Novel, Tristram Shandy, Simple Story, Evelina,
Herman of Unna, Inquisitor, Franklin's Life. Matilda Fitz Aubin, Juliana
Ormeston, Coglan's Memoirs, Vicar of Wakefield, Roderick Random, Sorrows of
Werter, Expedition of Little Pickle, or the Pretty Plotter, Fool of Quality,
Julia Mandeville, Man of Feeling, Man of the World, Julia de Roubigne, Fair
Circassian, Baron Trenck, Art of Speaking, Robert Boil, Childrens Friend,
Pleasing Instructor, The Life and Adventures of Anthony Ledger, Esquire or, the Man
of Shifts. In three vols. A great variety of the newest Song Books, A large
assortment of Plays and Pamphlets, Blank Books of all Kinds, Pocket,
Memorandum, and Receipt books, Copperplate Copy Books, Best gilt quarto Writing
Paper, common do. best foolscap do. common do. Wafers, Sealing Wax, Quills, and
Ink-Powders, Black Lead Pencils, Ink Stands, Slates, Playing Cards, Message do.
Penknives, India Ink, India Rubber, Patent Cake and Liquid Blacking for boots
and shoes, etc. etc. Also, just received, a large Assortment of CHILDRENS
BOOKS. Haerlem Oil, Turlington's Balsam, Prentiss's Balsam for Corns, Godfrey's
Cordial, and Anderson's Pills.

