THE IMPORTANCE OF THE RISING GENERATION. A SERMON, PREACHED At the Desire of
the SELECTMEN, and the COMMITTEE for inspecting the Town Schools: OCCASIONED BY
THE DEDICATION Of a new and very commodious GRAMMAR SCHOOL HOUSE, lately
erected in the First Parish of the Town of GLOUCESTER, ON THE 5th OF MARCH,
1795, BY ELI FORBES, A. M. AND PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST IN SAID
TOWN. And now made public at the Desire of the Hearers in general.

The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he who begets a wise
child shall have joy of him. Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she
who bears thee shall rejoice. My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes
observe my way. KING SOLOMON. Printed at Newburyport by BLUNT and MARCH, 1795.

To the Youth and Children of the town of Gloucester, of each sex and
denomination, the following Sermon is most affectionately INSCRIBED, BY THE
AUTHOR.

PSALM xlv. 16. INSTEAD OF THY FATHERS SHALL BE THY CHILDREN, WHOM THOU MAY
MAKE PRINCES IN ALL THE EARTH.
THIS psalm is an illustration of many other prophecies which relate to the
Messiah, the Prince, and points him out more expressly than any other chapter
or psalm in the Old Testament. It speaks of the royalty and excellency of his
person; the extensiveness of his victories; the righteousness of his
government, of which there would be no end: for his kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and his dominion rules over all.

And, that though in this world his subjects would be continually moving off
the stage, increasing the number of the dead; yet, that they would be succeeded
by rising generations, who should come in their room; who, by making greater
improvements in knowledge and virtue, under better advantages for light, truth
and grace, may rise to honor in the present, and arrive to the dignity of
kings, and the sanctity of priests, in the future world; so, in the sense of
our text, be made princes in all the earth. So, we may consider our text as a
prophecy, containing a promise which ascertains the increasing glory of the
kingdom of the Redeemer among men; for it implies, that, by improving clearer
light and richer privileges of grace, and the blessings of the gospel, the
succeeding generations of men may arive to greater purity of morals, and
dignity of character, and be made princes in all the earth.

Our text also implies, that there will be a succession of men, who shall
restore the wastes of mortality; that the earth shall not want inhabitants: but
the various departments, both in civil and social life, shall be filled with
honor and fidelity; and not only so, but that there shall be a succession of
good men; for both the prophecy and promise of our text respect the future
happy reign of the Messiah, when he shall have, as the reward of his
sufferings, a seed to serve him, who shall be accounted unto the Lord for a
generation of the righteous; and opens to the eye of faith, an extensive spread
of religion to unborn nations; when the sublime maxims of piety and morality
shall be generally received, and operate as universal principles of true
virtue, which shall raise the dignity of human nature; that, in however high or
low offices they may be called to act, they will fill their stations with
honor; that, in the language of our text, they may be princes in all the
earth; that it may be said of all the earth, as it was of Tire, "Her merchants
shall be princes and her traffickers or mechanics shall be the honorable of
the earth, Isaiah xxiii. 8.

When we reflect upon the time, the manner and the views, with which our pious
ancestors left the land of their nativity, and sought a retreat from the iron
hand of tyranny and oppression in these wilds of America, which, from time
immemorial, had been overspread with moral darkness, heathen barbarity, and
Indian idolatry; and as they brought the gospel and the means of knowledge with
them, and were influenced by its sacred maxims, the knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ was soon spread -- the worship of God established -- schools were
erected -- seminaries planted -- colleges founded by them; but as they were not
allowed to "continue by reason of death," in the room of these pious fathers
were their children, who piously maintained these institutions: being nursed in
those seminar^^^ they became "plants of renown," who being transplanted into
the church and state, where they shone with honor; some in the higher and more
public offices of life; and others, being instructed in the lower and more
common branches of literature, have been bred to agriculture navigation, and
the mechanical arts, and moving in a humbler yet not less useful sphere; but
whenever either the higher or the lower departments have been uniformly
influenced, directed and restrained by the nobler principles of true virtue,
they have appeared princely in all the earth: so that at the distance of more
than two thousand years from the publication of this prophecy and promise, we
have seen them fulfilling, down to the present day; so that we are living
witnesses of their truth and importance; for we are in the room of our fathers,
and here we see our children forming, and by the various grades of education
rising into respectability, and will soon take our places, and we must leave
them our room, and descend to the bed of dust -- "when our sons may rise to
honor, and we shall know it not; or they may be brought low, and we shall not
perceive it of them." But if we are not wanting to ourselves, to our children,
or to society, we may hope that this scripture will be more completely
fulfilled, and the kingdom of the Redeemer will soon have a more extensive
spread than it ever yet has had; and that in the room of the fathers there will
be children, who may successively arise and declare his righteousness unto
those who may be born of them.

But prophecies and promises do not prevent or supersede human endeavors; but
they are designed to encourage duty, to stimulate noble exertions, and support
and brighten future hopes. Therefore, animated by the prophecy and promise,
that God will have a seed to serve him, and that in the room of the fathers
shall be the children, who, by the improvement of clearer light and more
distinguished priveleges, may appear in their several stations to advantage,
princes in all the earth, let us do what we can to promote the education of our
children. Particular attention should be paid to youth, the rising generation,
that they be well instructed, religiously educated, and steadily and wisely
governed. The education of children was always the first thing our pious
forefathers attended to; after they had got a settlement in this land, they,
like Abram, first built an altar, fixed on a place for public worship, and then
erected schools for the education of their children.

So long ago as in 1633, the first settlers of this town consecrated a house
for public worship, and soon after made provision for a school, as being in
their view of importance to society, next to that of worshipping God in a
public and social manner, placing the duty we owe to our children next to that
we owe to our God: therefore, when new townships were laid out or incorporated,
care was taken that lands were sequestrated first for the encouragement and
benefit of the gospel ministry, and then school lots for the benefit and
support of free schools: -- so also particular care was taken that all
instructors of schools were men of capacity, piety, and good morals. Thus it is
evident that the idea that our forefathers had of a school education, was that
it should be religious.

And indeed without the heart is well established on the principles of
religion, the most enlightened head will be of little use to society, and of
less advantage to the persons themselves; they will not be princes in the
earth, will not fill the stations they are called to occupy with honor; -- men
of learning, without the balance of virtuous principles, will be likely to
prove pests to society, and accumulate to themselves infamy and ruin. Suffer me
then, on this occasion, to recommend it to all whose business it is, or may be,
to provide instructors and governors of schools, that they employ none but
those who are equal to the trust, and of sober lives and conversation; men of
principle, and who in the judgment of charity are good men. And I would
recommend to all masters and instructors of schools, that they pay particular
attention to the morals of the schools, over which they preside; that they
inform the understanding and impress the heart; for though without knowledge
the heart cannot be good, yet the most extensive knowledge, without the
regulating principles of religion, will not make the heart better, nor reform
the life. It is of the last importance then, that a religious cast should be
given to all school education; and this importance arises out of the nature and
reason of things, and it is suggested to us from the words of our text; for the
children are to come in the room of their fathers, and to act a noble part --
princes in all the earth; adopt a line of conduct in whatever department they
shall be called to act in, that may be an honor to themselves, support the
dignity of the human character, be, and appear to be, the sons of God, the
disciples of Jesus Christ, and friends to all mankind; and so, in the sense of
our text, be made princes in all the earth.

Give me leave to add -- it is of importance that youth be religiously
instructed; for it is through them that religion and good morals are to be
transmitted to posterity: they are our hopes, and we expect to live in them.
Now to support these pleasing hopes, it is necessary that they should come upon
the stage with their minds well informed in all the various branches of useful
knowledge, and their hearts well established by the operation of the principles
of true virtue.

We all love to have our children wise and good. Those who are vicious
themselves, love to have their children appear in the world under every
advantage, and to act an honorable part in the sphere where Providence shall
place them, and ever approve themselves wise, virtuous and good; good members
of the society to which they may belong.

And I do not think that any one of us can relish the thought with pleasure,
that religion, good order and liberty, both civil and religious, shall die in
the hands of our children; that the cause for which our ancestors left their
native country, and for which our late fathers and brethren have fought, bled
and died, should be lost in the hands of the next generation: and without they
are well instructed, well governed, their heads well furnished with useful
knowledge, and their hearts under the regulating principles of piety and
morality, we shall have no security of the cause in their hands. No one can
well conceive how much, under God, depends upon the character of our children,
both with respect to themselves and to society at large: and we can scarcely
realize the refined pleasure it must afford a tender and well disposed parent,
when they can look forward, and on good grounds hope, that their children will
rise up and take their places and fill them with honor, and, in the style of
our text, be made princes in all the earth. With such a prospect the parental
heart leaps for joy, for they have no "greater joy than that of seeing their
children walk in the truth." When they see them formed to this amiable temper,
to this honorable and useful character, they can leave the world in peace; or
like that pious father of old, who called his children round about his dying
pillow, and said, behold I die; but God shall be with you, and make you princes
in all the earth, ornaments to society, an honor to themselves, and the glory
of future generations.

I think we may, in the faithful discharge of the duties incumbent upon us to
the present generation, safely confide in the prophecy and promise of God, that
in our room shall be our children, who, by a better improvement of the
privileges and advantages they do, or they may enjoy, in this day of science
and land of liberty, may, under the transforming hand of knowledge and grace,
be made, in the sense of our text, princes in all the earth.

We shall close the present discourse with addresses adapted to the present
occasion.

1. We address the Selectmen, the School Committee of the Town, the Trustees of
the Proprietors' School, and Heads of Families. Selectmen -- John Low, Esquire.
Col. Daniel Warner, Capt. John Somes, Mr. James day, Mr. Caleb Pool, Mr.
Stephen Haskoll, Capt. Isaac Elwell.

Committee for inspecting the Town Schools -- Rev. Eli Forbes, Peter Coffin,
Esquire. Samuel Whittemore, Esquire. Mr. David Plummer, Mr. Nehemiah Parsons.

Trustees of the Proprietors' School -- Capt. Samuel Somes, Mr. James Hayes,
Mr. John Rogers, Mr. John Low, jun. Major Eliphalet. Davis.




Gentlemen,
You have done well in the attention you have paid to, and the provision you
have made for, the education of your children; and, agreeable to the votes of
the respective bodies you represent, have erected houses so respectable and
convenient, for that purpose: and I will assure you, that it gives me pleasure
to find that you have connected the idea of religion with the purposes for
which you built those houses, therefore invited me to assist you in dedicating
them to God. It was at the desire of the trustees of the Proprietors' School,
that we opened their house with a dedicatory prayer and a short address to the
school.

We have this day Fifth of March, 1795, and the order of procession was as
follows: -- The Schools begun the procession from the Meeting House -- first
the Proprietors' School walked in classical order two and two, and their
preceptor, Mr. Thomas Saunders, brought up their rear; next to him the Town
Grammar School, in the same order; these were followed by their preceptor, Mr.
Obadiah Parsons; who was followed by the gentlemen of the town -- then the
Trustees of the Proprietors' School -- the Committee of Inspection next --
after them the Selectmen; last of all the Clergy of the town. In this order the
whole body moved on to the newly erected School House, which was now finished,
ready to be improved. When the front of the Proprietors' School reached the
door, the whole stopped, and, opening to the right and left, the Clergy moved
on through the ranks, followed by the Selectmen, and so on, till the whole were
placed in the most decent order in the School House -- then a dedicatory prayer
was addressed to the Father of Lights -- then all returned in the same order to
the House of God, where each one occupied the seat assigned him by mutual and
previous agreement, exhibiting one of the most pleasing scenes the mind of man
can well imagine, and a very striking contrast with that dismal day, the 5th of
March, 1770, when Boston streets reeked with the blood and carnage of our
fellow citizens, when every heart was pained, and every face gathered blackness
-- now every heart was elate with joy, and every countenance teemed with hope.
met, and in solemn procession went to the Town Grammar School House, newly
erected for the beneficent design of the religious education of our children,
and in a solemn and religious manner consecrated it to God, imploring the
divine acceptance of it, inviting the divine presence into it, and humbly asked
the divine blessing upon it; that it may become a seminary of virtue as well as
of the most useful learning; that plants of renown may be transplanted from
hence, both into the Church and State, and be a seed who may serve the Lord,
and continue to bring forth fruit even to old age, and be accounted unto the
Lord for the generation of the righteous.



Having discharged our duty in the aforesaid Town School House, we return to
meet our fellow citizens in the House of our God. I have the honor to address
(from this desk) all who have or may have the direction, inspection and care of
schools or families in future.

Gentlemen and Christian Friends,
Let us go on, that we may be workers together with God in forming a people for
his praise. Let us all unite, and do what we can, to encourage, support and
inspect the education of the rising generation.

We see of what importance it is to them; how essential to the good of society:
on this, under God, rests the peace, the honor, and the prosperity, of these
United States of America; without it, in the very next generation, the cause of
truth, the rights of men, civil and religious liberty, can neither be defined
or defended, when anarchy with fell discord on one hand, despotism, with vice
and superstition on the other, will, like an overwhelming scourge deluge this
whole land. What, then, our hands find to do, let us do it with all diligence;
for our text suggests that we are moving off -- these our children are coming
in our room; in the room of the fathers shall be the children -- we must soon
give place to them -- And what part would we have them act in our places when
we are gone? -- When we look abroad, and see how many children are neglected by
their parents, and left the sport of native corruptions, exposed to every snare
the enemy of man and the contagion of evil examples are daily spreading before
them; when we consider how many, especially among the lower class, who are
growing up in ignorance, early learn to profane the name of God, to waste in
idleness and sloth the sacred day of rest, and to consume their learning age in
vain amusements and idle dissipation, our hearts may well tremble for the ark
of God, and we feel a solicitude for the cause that those who are coming into
our room must support. While we confide in the divine promise, let us extend
the arm of benevolence, and gather the lambs of the flock; and the fairer, the
weaker and more delicate, but not less amiable, part of the flock, must not be
forgot; I mean the female children, whose education has been too much
neglected: let us place them all under the nurturing hand of a religious
education, that they may be made princes and princesses in all the earth where
the future events of Providence shall place them, that we may leave them
friends to God, to themselves, and to mankind, ornaments to society, and
blessings in the world.



2dly, We address the Preceptors of each School.

Gentlemen,
You are engaged in an arduous and important work. It is not without its
honors and its pleasures; it is pleasing "to bend the twig, and to teach the
shoot how to grow;" it is the highest honor to be the most extensively useful.

This town, confiding in you, have committed to your charge and care their most
precious treasure; their future hopes, which respect the honor of their
families, the benefit of society, and the public interest; these dear children
are committed to your care, that you may make them princes in all the earth, i.
e, that you may form them to knowledge, virtue and usefulness; -- make them
good men and good members of society.

If you are faithful, how far the happy influence of your instructions may
extend, no one can tell. There is at least a high probability, that you will
succeed: for there is a divine proverb which implies a divine promise, "Train
up a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it."

It is evident that the propagation of religion, virtue and good order will
depend, under God, very much upon the influence which your instructions will
have upon the minds of youth, who are, or may be, under your care. It will in
general form their future conduct, and give a cast to their whole deportment
through life, wherever they may be spread through all the earth: -- not only
so, but they will carry your principles of conduct into social and domestic
life. When they form families of their own, they will, most likely, make it
their principal aim to form their families upon the same model; that a thousand
descendents, who never saw your faces, nor heard of your names, may owe their
honor, their religion, and their happiness, to the influence of your
instructions, your counsels, your government and prayers; -- God may succeed
your honest and faithful endeavors, and by you transmit useful knowledge, and
religion in its native purity, to the latest posterity. But if, on the other
hand, you should be unfaithful to your trust, and these dear children, or
others who may succeed them, should be neglected, and grow up in ignorance and
vice, not subject to government and order, destitute of the principles of
virtue; when they form social connections, and enter upon the stage of domestic
or civil life, they will be likely to form upon the same model, that, instead
of being princes in all the earth, they will be pests to society, and
disseminate the seeds of infidelity and irreligion as far as their influence
may extend: and the ill consequences, how far soever they may reach, may, in
part, at least, be charged to your account, for we are to be "rewarded
according to the fruit of our doings." That your reward may be great, and your
honest, prudent and faithful labors may be crowned with success, suffer me, in
the last place, to recommend it to you, that you pray with and for your
schools; not only because all success depends upon the blessing of God, which
is to be drawn down by serious, frequent and fervent prayer, especially where
we have to do with the heart, but also because prayer is one very important and
essential branch of religious education, and which, therefore, never should be
omitted, either in families, where there are children and servants, or in
schools, where there must be line upon line, and precept upon precept. When
your children see and hear you in a serious and solemn manner address their
great Creator, as the supreme and moral governor of the world, and the fountain
of goodness, they will learn to form right apprehensions of his moral and
rectoral character; their dependence upon him, and obligations to him; and will
be taught the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom: when they
hear you humbly confess sin, and implore pardon, they will feel themselves
sinners, discover something of the nature of sin, and the need they stand in of
the pardoning mercy of God, and be led to repentance: when they hear you
present your petitions, in the name and through the atonement and intercession
of Jesus Christ, they will insensibly be taught to form some correct
apprehensions of this mediatorial character, which lies in the foundation of
the christian faith: when they hear you offer up intercessions for others,
especially for the afflicted, their susceptible hearts will naturally glow with
benevolence to all mankind, and with compassion and sympathy for the
distressed, which is a leading trait of that wisdom which is from above; which
is first pure and then peaceable -- full of love and good fruits: so when they
hear themselves, particularly mentioned (as they always should be) they will
esteem and love you, and this will give weight to your instructions, render
your paternal government easy, and it will open the young mind to imbibe the
sentiments you inculcate, and follow the example you set them; and if these are
in conformity to him who is the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, they
will appear princely in all the earth.



We close with an affectionate address to the children of these schools, and
the youth and children in general.

My dear Children and young Friends,
Most of you have been publicly dedicated to God, and these hands of mine have
administered the sacred rite to you. I feel tenderly interested in your
happiness, as I have, I trust, sincerely consecrated you to God under the form
of his initiating ordinance, under which your parents also engaged to bring you
up for him. In the discharge of those engagements they have erected houses with
every accommodation, and have placed you under instructors who may form you to
knowledge and virtue, and make you princes in all the earth. You have now a
price put into your hands, to get wisdom; therefore get wisdom, and with all
thy getting get understanding. If you do not improve the advantage you now
enjoy, you will offend God, injure your parents, and wrong your own souls. You
have heard that you are our hopes -- that you are rising up in our stead; for
we are moving off the stage, and must soon make our bed in the dust; for behold
we die, but God will be with you if ye be with him; but if you forsake him, he
will forsake you. You must fear God, love and serve him, and cry unto God, and
say, "My Father thou art the guide of my youth." He has said, "I love those who
love me, and they who seek me early shall find me." Seek the Lord then while he
may be found, and call upon him while he is near. You must love too the Lord
Jesus Christ, who first loved us, and died for us, and rose again from the
dead, and is gone to heaven, and ever lives, praying for us. And will you not
love him in return for the great love wherewith he has loved us? And will you
not accept of him for your Savior, trust in him that you may be saved by him?
He was once here on the earth; and though he was the Son of God, the brightness
of his Father's glory, and had all power both in heaven and in earth, yet he
condescended to take particular notice of youth, of little children, and kindly
took them into his arms, and blessed them, and said, " Of such is the kingdom
of heaven." Come then to him, and lodge the salvation of your souls in his
hands. He has said, Whosoever will come unto me, I will in no wise cast him
out. The blessed Redeemer now stands with open arms to receive you, and to make
you the children of God, and the heirs of glory. You must ask of God, in the
name of Christ, to give you his holy spirit, to change your hearts, and
sanctify your natures, and to adorn your souls with the christian graces, that
you may shine as lights in this dark world, and be made meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light. And God is as ready to give his holy spirit
to them who ask him, as we your parents are ready to give you bread, or any
thing else that is good for you. But if you should forget your God, neglect
your Savior, and misimprove your time, and run heedless on, with the
thoughtless, vain and vicious youth, in the paths of dissipation and folly, you
will make bitter work for repentance, and wound the hearts of your parents and
bring down their gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

But if you should now improve your time, and the advantages you have in your
hand, you will rise into honor; and when you shall enter upon the stage of
life, you will appear to advantage, as princes in all the earth, the sons of
God, without rebuke. And having served God and your generation, according to
the will of God, you will meet the approbation of your Lord and Master, and
receive the rewards of his grace in the kingdom of glory.



AMEN.

