A DEFENSE OF METHODISM: DELIVERED EXTEMPORARY, IN A PUBLIC DEBATE, (But now
considerably enlarged) Held in LONDON, December 12, 19, and 26, 1785, ON THE
FOLLOWING QUESTION, "HAVE THE METHODISTS DONE MOST GOOD OR EVIL?"

WHAT HAS GOD WROUGHT!

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS. NO. 25, CHURCH-ALLEY, AND SOLD BY
JOHN DICKINS, NO. 50, NORTH SECOND STREET, NEAR ARCH STREET. 1795.

A DEFENSE, etc.
Mr. PRESIDENT,
THE Question before us is, Have the Methodists done most Good or Evil? Now
this supposes, first, That they have done both good and evil, otherwise it
would be absurd to inquire which they have done most of; and secondly, it
supposes, That they have done both in nearly the same degree; otherwise it
would not admit of any dispute, much less of one so large This Speech was
delivered on the third night.
as this we are now engaged in. This then being the true state of the Question,
I undertake to demonstrate that it is both absurd and blasphemous.

And, first, It is absurd. For it supposes that the same fountain sends forth
bitter water and sweet; that the same tree bears good and evil fruit; and they
both do this in nearly the same degree. Besides, it totally destroys that rule
of judging given by our Lord, By their fruit ye shall know them. For if the
same tree bears good and evil fruit, how shall we be able to judge by the fruit
whether the tree be good or evil. In like manner, if the Methodists bear these
opposite fruits, how can the world judge whether they are false prophets or
true? whether sent of God or of the Devil?

Again. Our Lord says, A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things, and (not the same, but) an evil man, out of the
evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things. Now the question, in
its present form, turns this into the greatest absurdity. For it supposes that
one of these may have both these treasures in his heart, bringing forth good
and evil things! That is, it supposes that he may be a good and an evil man at
the same time, and have a good and an evil treasure in his heart, bringing
forth these opposite things! which is a most palpable absurdity.

Secondly, It is blasphemous. In proof of this let it be observed, that,
according to the Scriptures, good and evil are brought into being by the
assistance of spiritual agencies: good, by the assistance of God, and evil, by
that of the devil. Hence, speaking of good, they say, All the good that is done
upon earth, the Lord does it, and that it is God who works in us both to
will and do of his good pleasure. On the other hand, all moral evil is
attributed to the agency of Satan. Therefore he is said to work, with energy,
in the children of disobedience; and in particular, to have beguiled Eve, and
to have put it into the heart of Ananias and Sapphira to lie unto the Holy
Ghost.

Now as the question before us supposes that good and evil are both done by the
Methodists, it must suppose that there is communion between light and darkness,
and concord between Christ and Belial: the one working in, and by the
Methodists all the good they do, and the other all the evil: and which works
hardest, Christ in helping them to do good, or Belial in helping them to do
evil, is the blasphemous point we are this night to determine!

Perhaps it is owing to this great impropriety of the question, that no one has
yet so much as attempted to speak directly to it: that is, that no one has once
offered to show, What good and evil the Methodists have done; and then which is
the greatest. Instead of this, the Opposers of Methodism have aimed at nothing
but Ridicule and Abuse: therefore their Advocates have hitherto thought it
quite enough to answer those false and ridiculous accusations.

Nor indeed is it possible to speak directly to the question, in its present
form, with any degree of propriety: therefore I shall take the liberty to amend
it, and only ask, Have the Methodists done Good or Evil?

In speaking to the question thus amended, I shall show, first, who the
Methodists are. Then, secondly, inquire, Whether they have done good or evil?

And, First, I am to show, who the Methodists are. And, first, it is certain
that those who were dead a hundred years before any Methodist was born, cannot
be taken into the account. Therefore to impute to them the absurdities of John
of Munster, or of Nailor of Bristol, or of any other who lived a hundred, or a
hundred and fifty years ago, is an insult both on Methodism and common sense.

Secondly, There are several denominations of Christians now living, who are
frequently called Methodists, who do not belong to them. For instance; the
Moravians, the Independents, the Baptists, the Antinomians; together with many
ministers and congregations, who, in every sense of the word, belong to the
church of England. Now though many of these preach the same doctrines, and
entertain a favorable opinion of the Methodists; and though, on the other
hand, the Methodists very highly esteem many of these; yet they cannot, with
any propriety, be called Methodists. For, first, their names were never entered
in any Register of the Methodist societies. Secondly, they were never subject
to those rules and regulations by which the Methodists are governed. Thirdly,
they do not so much as bear the Methodist-name, unless it be imposed on them,
and then they generally disown, and disclaim it. Nor, fourthly, were they ever
acknowledged by the Methodists, as any part of their community. As to some of
these, the Antinomians, they are professedly, as great enemies to the laws of
Methodism, as they are to the laws of God! To impute, therefore, the follies of
these, or of any other of the above denominations, to the Methodists, is absurd
and cruel.

Thirdly, Neither can the question intend any mere individual, as such; seeing
it speaks, in the plural, of "the Methodists." Now there are several sorts of
individuals, called Methodists, who must be excluded from the business in hand.
As first, such as are, or have been called Methodists, who never were in any
connection with them. Of this sort I knew an instance when I was a boy. A man
in a gown and cassoc preaching in the town where I was, passed for a Methodist:
but when the mob began to be unruly he cried out, "I am no Methodist." Now had
this man been guilty of any irregularity (which I know not that he was)
doubtless it would have been set down to the Methodist's account. Another sort
of individuals, almost always called Methodists, are those who have been
expelled for their evil practices. Persons of this sort have too frequently
been found in all denominations of Christians: even that small number which
followed our Lord while he was on earth, for some time had a Judas among them.
Now, whatever other communities do, when the Methodists discover an unholy
walker among them, they first endeavor to reclaim him; but if they cannot do
this, they then put him away from their societies. And though this is all they
can do, or ought to do, for the honor of God, and for their own credit, yet the
evil practices of such persons continue to be imputed to the Methodists; yea,
though they have been out of that connection for a great number of years.

A third sort of individuals unjustly called Methodists, are those who are
Apostates from Methodism; those who have made shipwreck of faith and of a good
conscience. Now apostates are well known to be often some of the bitterest
enemies the people have from whom they have apostatized. Witness Satan, the
original apostate; who ever since his apostasy has been doing all in his power,
against God and man: witness Alexander the copper smith, in the apostle's days,
whom St. Paul said had done him much wrong: witness Julian the Apostate, who,
after his apostasy, became one of the greatest persecutors the Christians ever
had. Add to these, the two principal Opposers of Methodism on this occasion.
These gentlemen, in the presence of this assembly, have avowed their apostasy
from Methodism, in the most explicit terms, and then have poured out such
torrents of low and scandalous abuse, on those who were once their brethren, as
is shocking to every Christian ear. Among many other instances one of them has
said, "The Methodists have thronged Bedlam with lunatics: made Tyburn groan
with criminals; and quite crowded the bottomless pit!" Now I ask every man of
sense, if these, and the like, are not fine gentry to be fathered on the
Methodists? Or rather if it is not great injustice to make them responsible for
the conduct of such virulent Apostates!

But if these are not, who then are the Methodists? I answer, Those who are
members of the several societies instituted by the original founders of
Methodism. Now these are the Rev. John Wesley, and the late Rev. George
Whitefield. All therefore who are members of the societies, instituted and
established by these, and who are governed by the rules and regulations they
have laid down, are properly, "The Methodists."

Having shown who the Methodists are, I proceed, Secondly, to inquire, whether
they have done Good or Evil?

But before I do this, it is necessary to make a few observations on the
different ways of doing good and evil. Now these may be done two ways:
directly, and indirectly; or rather properly and accidentally. Good and evil
are done directly, or properly, when the cause naturally produces the effect.
They are done improperly, or accidentally, when an effect follows which does
not naturally or properly belong to the cause. For instance; you see a person
in danger of dying for want of bread. From a principle of humanity you design
to save him. In order to this end, you give him a piece of bread, which is an
immediate and natural cause of producing the effect you intended. But this
cause cannot produce this effect, unless the person receives, and uses the
bread in a proper manner. But he does so receive and use it, and of consequence
his life is saved. Here then is good done immediately and directly, as the
effect has naturally followed the cause. But good may be done accidentally. One
man seeing another, whom he supposes to be his enemy, intends to kill him. In
order to this end, he thrusts a sword through his body. But the sword missing
the vitals, opens an imposthume, whereby his enemy's life is saved. Now here
was an evil intended, and evil means made use of to bring it to pass; but
notwithstanding both, good accidentally followed.

In like manner evil may be done directly and accidentally. And first,
directly. A man on seeing his enemy, intends to kill him. For this purpose he
runs a sword through his heart; the consequence is, his enemy drops down dead
at his feet: as must be the case, seeing the cause naturally produced the
effect. This evil then was not accidental, but natural, immediate, and direct.
On the other hand, evil may be done accidentally. For instance. You see a boy
in danger of dying for want. You design to save him. For that end you give him
a piece of bread. But by a careless use of it, a crumb sticks in his throat and
suffocates him, and in a short time he expires. Now if you had not intended to
have saved him, you would not have given him the bread; and if you had not done
this, it would not have occasioned his death. It is therefore certain that what
you did was the cause of his death: seeing he would not have died by means of
that bread, if you had not given it him. But as this evil did not happen as a
natural consequence of your generosity; but rather through the carelessness, or
wantonness of him you gave it to, the evil was entirely accidental with respect
to you.

Now as to this last sort of evil, there is nothing excellent or praiseworthy,
which is not liable to it. For instance; when God created angels and men, his
design was only good, viz. that they might glorify him, and be happy to all
eternity. And the means which he made use of in creating them, or rather the
manner in which he created them, was perfectly consonant with his design. For
he created them in his own image; endued with reason and understanding; with
liberty to choose the good and refuse the evil; that they might be capable of a
greater reward, by performing a free and voluntary obedience. But
notwithstanding the Creator only intended good, and created them in a manner
which was most likely to promote that end, yet much evil ensued, viz. all the
sin and misery which began presently after their creation, and which will last
to all eternity. Now if men and angels had not been created, this vvil could
not have happened; but as it was no part of their Creator's design, nor
naturally followed from the manner of their creation; but arose merely from the
abuse of their liberty, which God intended only for their good, the evil was
certainly accidental.

Again, when God entered into covenant with Abraham he intended great good both
to him and his family; and also that in him all the families of the earth
should be blessed. And there is no doubt but the terms of that covenant
corresponded with his design, otherwise a God of infinite wisdom and goodness
would not have given them. But notwithstanding this, the perverseness of men
occasioned much accidental evil to proceed therefrom: such as the tyranny of
the Egyptians, and the oppression of the Hebrews. This tyranny also occasioned
all the plagues which sell on that hardened people, in their own land, and at
last their overthrow in the Red Sea. And all the evils which befell the
Israelites and their enemies, both in the wilderness, and in the land of
Canaan, happened in the same way; so that these may properly be called
accidental evils.

Christianity likewise is subject to this sort of evil. Undoubtedly the design
of God in this was, the greatest good that a sinful world was capable of; being
nothing less than their present and eternal salvation. And what he did, in
order to this end, was the most perfect display of divine wisdom and goodness
ever made known to angels or men. Yet we all know that great evils were
occasioned thereby, which otherwise could never have happened: such as the
oppositions of the Jews and Gentiles on the one hand, and all the sufferings of
Christ and his followers on the other.

If we descend to particulars, we shall find that every part of Christianity is
liable to accidental evil. For instance, the birth of Christ was the accidental
cause of the slaughter of the infants, by the order of Herod: the fasting of
Christ in the wilderness was the accidental cause of Satan's horrid and
blasphemous temptations; the miracles of Christ accidentally occasioned the
blasphemies of the Scribes and Pharisees: the preaching of Christ thus
occasioned the opposition he met with on that account: the crucifixion of
Christ thus occasioned the insults he received in the judgment-hall and on
Calvary: and the resurrection of Christ was the accidental cause of the rulers
subborning the soldiers to say, His disciples came and stole him away while we
were asleep. Add to this, that the existence of the word of God is the
accidental cause of men wresting it to their own destruction: the preaching of
the Apostles was thus the cause of its becoming the savor of death unto many.
Again, Wherever the grace of God is turned into wantonness, we must say, that
it is remotely or accidentally the cause of that abuse; for if that grace had
never existed, it could not possibly have been thus abused.

Once more, The Reformation has been productive of much accidental evil.
Undoubtedly the design of our first Reformers was only the good of the church
of Christ. And the means they made use of, in exposing the superstitions and
idolatries of the church of Rome, were the most likely to accomplish their
design. Notwithstanding these, much evil followed, viz. all the persecutions
the Papists were guilty of, and all the martyrdoms, and other sufferings, the
Protestants endured. But as all these persecutions and sufferings were contrary
both to the design of the Reformers, and to the natural tendency of what they
did; they were accidental evils, and therefore not to be imputed to the
Reformers, as faults of theirs.

In like manner, Methodism has been attended with much accidental evil.
Undoubtedly the original founders of Methodism had a good design. Had they
aimed at ease, they would not have voluntarily undertaken the hardest labors;
much less have continued therein. Had they wished for the praise that comes of
men, they would not, knowingly and wilfully, have exposed themselves to almost
universal reproach. And had they aimed at riches, they would have gone to the
rich and great, and not to the most poor and indigent. Their design, therefore,
must be supposed to be, The glory of God, and the good of men. And the means
they made use of were the most likely to accomplish their design. For not being
satisfied with what they felt in themselves, and saw in those about them, who
were reputed good Christians, they determined, with much prayer and fasting, to
search the Original Scriptures, to see what real Christianity was: whether
there was any thing more contained therein, than doing no harm, and doing good,
and using the ordinances of God. They had not gone on long this way, before
they discovered, that Christianity required a right state of mind, consisting
of right tempers and desires, and that from hence right words and actions were
to proceed. No sooner were they thoroughly convinced of this, than they began
to be in earnest in seeking it for themselves: then in recommending it to those
who came in their way, who had any inclination to hear them. They then went to
the prisons, and recommended it to the most wretched criminals. At last they
boldly preached the religion of the heart to the whole University. From Oxford
they came to London, and insisted on the same doctrine there in many of the
churches. After a short stay in London, they went to America, to convert the
Indians to this religion. After attempting this they returned to London, where
their congregations were much greater than they had been before. After awhile,
the principal inhabitants of the several parishes where these gentlemen
preached, complained that they were greatly incommoded by the immense
multitudes which came to hear. The consequence was, that first one church, then
another, and at last, all the churches were shut against them. On this they
went into Moorfields, and diverse other places, preaching the kingdom of God to
thousands, and tens of thousands, of all sorts of people; but chiefly to such
as would not hear it in any other place. After doing this for awhile in and
about London, they went to Bristol, and did the same there. From hence they
went, with their lives in their hands, to the most ignorant and savage parts of
the nation, and preached Christ and his kingdom to the colliers in Kingswood,
Newcastle, and Staffordshire: then to the tinners in Cornwall: and at last, to
almost every city, town and village in the three kingdoms. And thus one of
them, the great and good Mr. Whitefield, went on to his dying day; and thus the
truly venerable Mr. Wesley goes on, with unabating ardour, to this day,
although he is now between eighty and ninety years of age.

And what has been said of these great and good men, to whose labors these
kingdoms owe so much, may in a good measure be said of those, who from time to
time, have labored with them. For the event has abundantly shown, that these
in general, set out with a single eye; and that the fame good intention has
influenced them in following the steps of their leaders.

Now, whoever considers the scriptural accounts of former ages, the histories
of later dates, and the state mankind is in at present; will soon be convinced,
that a great variety of accidental evils must follow such a work. Men of
influence, who have no religion, will cry out against those who endeavor to be
better than themselves: men of mere outside religion, like the Pharisees of
old, will exclaim against those who are seeking the kingdom of God within them:
hypocrites and deceivers are sure to have something to say against those who
profess to be true of heart: and all these will stir up the rabble to be guilty
of various and great outrages. So it was in the days of Christ and his
apostles; so it was in the following ages of the church; and so it has been
among the Methodists. Men of learning, fortune, power, and influence, invented
or propagated evil reports; hence arose a great variety of barefaced calumnies
and slanders. By these the rabble were encouraged to insult the persons, and
destroy the property of the Methodists. By these means, not only one neighbor
was often set against another, but there were frequent disturbances in
families. As our Lord said, there were five in a house, three against two, and
two against three: the father against his son, and the son against his father;
the mother against her daughter, and the daughter against her mother; the
mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; so that a man's foes were often those of his own household. Now
had these evils been a thousand times greater than they were, as they were not
the natural and direct consequence of Methodism, but rather accidental
consequences, which followed from the abuse thereof, the Methodists are no more
to be blamed on account thereof, than the Reformers are for the abuse of the
Reformation; or Christ, for the abuse of Christianity; or God, for the evils
which were occasioned by his entering into covenant with Abraham, or for the
abuse which men and angels made of the creation of the world.

We will therefore put accidental evil entirely out of the question; and ask,
Secondly, Have the Methodists done evil immediately and directly? If they have,
it has been either by their doctrine or their discipline. But have they done it
by their doctrine? That this may be fairly and fully understood, let us see
what their doctrine is. And, first, They teach that all men are sinners by
nature and practice. Secondly, That Christ died to save sinners. Thirdly, That
men must unfeignedly repent of all their sins. Fourthly, That they must believe
the Gospel. Fifthly, That all who thus repent and believe, are justified; that
is, pardoned and accepted of God. Sixthly, That all who are thus pardoned,
ought to love God with all their hearts, mind, soul, and strength. Seventhly,
That he that loves God, ought to love his brother also: yea, that he ought to
love his neighbor (every man, friend and enemy) as himself. Eighthly, That all
who thus believe and love, ought to be careful to maintain good works. Ninthly,
That every Christian ought to endeavor to be holy in all manner of
conversation, as he who has called him is holy. Tenthly, That while they are
in this world, they ought to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Eleventhly, That he that endures unto the end the
same shall be saved. Twelfthly, That they who have thus done good, shall go to
the Resurrection of Life; but they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of
Damnation.

Now I appeal to every one who is acquainted with the doctrine of the
Methodists, if this is not the sum thereof: if the particulars above mentioned,
are not the points chiefly insisted on both among Mr. Wesley's and Mr.
Whitefield's followers. If so, I shall be glad to know if there is any tendency
in these doctrines, whether taken separately, or in conjunction with each
other, to do evil. Has that which teaches the fall and actual wickedness of
man? Does it not rather tend to humble him? Has the doctrine of the atonement?
What! the doctrine which points out the love of God in giving his Son to save
us from our sins? Has the doctrine of repentance, which teaches us to be sorry
for our sins, and that we should immediately forsake them, such a tendency? Is
there any tendency to evil in the doctrine of faith: which insists on our
coming to Christ for the salvation he has purchased for us? Has the doctrine of
justification, of pardon and adoption for every penitent believer, any tendency
to do evil? Or these which teach that we ought to love God with all our heart,
and our neighbor as ourselves? Or those which inculcate the necessity of good
works, of growing in grace, of universal holiness, of perseverance in the ways
of God, or of eternal rewards and punishments? I say, is there any thing that
bears the smallest resemblance of a tendency to do evil in any of these?

But has not their discipline done evil? Let us examine this point with candor
and impartiality. The substance of their discipline is as follows: First, No
person is admitted into their societies who is known to live in open sin.
Secondly, When admitted, he is required to hear, read, and meditate on the word
of God as frequently as he can. Thirdly, Each member is expected to pray, in
public, in his family, and in private. Fourthly, He must assemble with his
brethren, for mutual edification, at every stated opportunity, if health and
business will admit. Fifthly, He is expected to receive the supper of the Lord
at every proper opportunity: Sixthly, It is also expected of him to use fasting
or abstinence, as often as health, business and opportunity serve. Seventhly,
It is moreover required of him to be merciful after his power to the bodies and
souls of men. Eighthly, In order to this end, It is expected that he be not
slothful in business; but rather work with his hands, the things that are
right, that he may owe no man any thing; that he may provide, for himself and
family, things lawful in the sight of all men; and have to give to him that
needs. Ninthly, It is required of him to show a good example to all men, that
the Gospel be not blamed. Now this is the substance of the Methodist
discipline, which certainly (to say no more at present) can have no tendency to
do evil.

But if they have not done evil, what have they done? I answer, They have done
much good. But what good have they done? Spiritual and temporal good. And,
first, they have done spiritual good. For first they have been instruments in
turning the most ignorant, vulgar, and ridiculous sinners from darkness to
light. Multitudes who, before they heard the Methodists, knew neither
themselves nor God, are now well acquainted with both. As to themselves, they
know that they were shapen in iniquity, and that in sin did their mother
conceive them. They know that on that account their heart is deceitful above
all things and desperately wicked. In other words, they know that they have in
them a carnal mind which is enmity against God, which is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be -- till it is renewed. They know also that this
evil nature is the source from whence all outward wickedness proceeds; that it
is this fountain which sends forth all the corrupt streams of outward sin.
Again, they know as all men are sinners by nature and practice, that they are
condemned already, that the wrath of God now abides on them. Again, they know
that this state of sin and condemnation is an infallible source of present
misery: that it is on this account the wicked are like the troubled sea which
cannot rest, whose waves cast up mire and dirt; that destruction -- eternal
destruction, and misery -- present misery are in their path, and that the way
of peace they have not known. Once more, They know that they cannot save
themselves, that they cannot bring a clean thing out of an unclean, that they
cannot make themselves new creatures, and that if it is not done in time, they
cannot be holy or happy here, much less saved to all eternity.

And as for God, They know that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of those that
diligently seek him. They know that in Him they live, and move, and have their
being. They know that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them. They know that God commands all men
every where to repent, and also to believe the Gospel. They know that all who
do this are justified and born of God. They know that all such have the kingdom
of God within them, even righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
They know that from this inward principle, all good works, yea, all holiness
and happiness proceed. And they know that this inward and outward religion is
the gift of God: that it comes from the Father, through the Son, by the Holy
Ghost; and that therefore all the praise belongs to Him in Time and Eternity.

If any one doubt, of their having this knowledge, he may soon satisfy himself:
only let him go into any city, town or village, where Methodism has prevailed,
and enquire first, what sort of people the Methodists formerly were, with
respect to knowledge; and then let him converse with them a single hour on any
of the above particulars, and he will doubt no longer.

Again, As the Methodists have turned many from darkness to light, so also,
have they from the power of Satan unto God. Surely, if ever any were taken
captive by the devil at his will, many of these were in a very high degree. It
is dreadful to conceive what slaves to sin, and what enemies to all that is
good, multitudes of them were: what pride, passion, and evil desires: and what
lust, cruelty, and injustice, filled, and governed their hearts. And from this
corrupt fountain issued forth abundance of polluted streams: on this evil tree
grew a large quantity of evil fruit, such as drunkenness, whoredom, cursing,
swearing, lying, fighting, thieving, sabbath-breaking, gaming, extortion,
oppression and the like. But by hearing the Methodists, the Lions became Lambs:
the proud became humble, the passionate became meek and gentle, the unclean
became chaste, the cruel became merciful, and the unjust became honest. And
being thus inwardly reformed, changed, and converted, they became new creatures
in their outward behavior. Drunkenness, uncleanness, and lying, gave place to
sobriety, chastity, and truth. The mouths that formerly were filled with oaths,
curses and blasphemies, were filled with prayer and praise. The sabbaths that
were formerly broken and profaned, were now employed in the service of God. The
time which was once spent in gaming, idleness, and vain amusements, was now
improved in reading, and holy meditation. And in the place of sighting,
cruelty, fraud and oppression, there was justice, mercy, and every good work.

Now that the Methodists have been instrumental in thus reforming multitudes,
is too notorious to be denied; yet if any doubt of it, let them go to
Kingswood, and Cornwall; let them go to Newcastle, Coleford, Wednesbury, and
Whitehaven; let them go to Leeds, Sheffield, Manchester, and Liverpool; let
them go to Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and Chester; let them go to Norwich, Bath
and Bristol: nay, let them only go to the most wretched parts of this
metropolis, and they will soon find abundant proof of all I have asserted; they
will soon be fully satisfied, that multitudes in these places, who were once
the reproach of Christianity, the pests of society, the plagues of their
neighbors, the curse of their families, and a scandal to human nature; are now
sober, holy, christian men.

Secondly, They have done Temporal good. Before the persons above referred to,
heard the Methodists, many of them were in a state of deplorable poverty and
wretchedness: having neither food to eat, nor raiment to put on; nor always so
much as a little clean straw to lie on. At the same time they were so deeply in
debt, and so far from any likelihood of paying it, that they had quite lost
their credit: and had it not been for the humanity of their neighbors, and the
scanty provision made for them by the laws of their country, they and their
families must have perished together. As this was owing, partly to idleness,
and partly to drunkenness, gaming, and other extravagancies; on hearing the
Methodists, and becoming earnest in the work of their salvation, there was an
end of all these evils. The consequence was, they soon got food for themselves
and families: next a little plain, decent apparel; then a little necessary
furniture. Having thus procured a few necessaries, they began to pay their
debts, and after awhile they owed no man any thing. Going on in the way of
virtue, they continued to use all diligence and frugality. By these means, they
were enabled to procure things a little more comfortable for themselves, and
now and then to spare a little to the most necessitous. By still continuing to
use all diligence and frugality, they were enabled to enlarge their bounty. At
length, having it in their power, they began to do good unto all men,
especially unto the household of faith. Nor did they overlook that word, Lend
to him that would borrow of thee; for when it was proper and convenient, they
were now as willing to lend, as they were formerly to borrow of others. Still
going on in the good way, they were soon able to lay by a little for future
contingencies. To this they added a little more: till at last many of them
became possessed of hundreds, and some of them of many thousands. Now as these
are facts which cannot be denied, I conclude that the Methodists have done both
Spiritual and Temporal good.

But, Secondly, what is the Extent of this good? What is the Number of those
who have been thus benefited by Methodism? To ascertain the exact number is
impossible to any child of man. None but God, who knows all things, can do
this. All that we can do is, by a general calculation, to come as near the
truth of the matter as possible. And in order to this end, I shall observe,
First, That there are above Ninety Since the time of this debate, many
thousands have been added to the Methodist Societies both in Europe and America.
Thousand members at this time in the different Societies under Mr. Wesley's
care and we cannot suppose there are less than Ten One reason of the great
disproportion between the above number is, Mr. Whitefield never thought it his
duty to establish societies wherever he preached, as Mr. Wesley did; nor, of
course, to encourage so many preachers.
Thousand in the Societies instituted by the late Mr. Whitefield: in all, about
a Hundred Thousand. Secondly, let us suppose that in the long space of fifty or
sixty years, there could not be less than a Hundred Thousand more, who from
time to time, have formerly been members of these Societies: multitudes of whom
have yearly been going to God; multitudes more who have continually been
joining other religious Societies; and vast numbers who after enduring for
awhile, went back into the world. Now very few, if any of these were suffered
to become Members of these Societies, without evident marks of having received
some benefit by first hearing the word: they were at least, a little
enlightened, and at the same time thoroughly reformed in their outward
behavior. Indeed, the far greater part of them experienced a much deeper work;
being more deeply awakened, and made much more in earnest for their salvation.
Here then are Two Hundred Thousand souls who have received good (some in one
degree, and others in another) by means of Methodism.

Again, Those who are constant and frequent hearers of the Methodists, in town
and country are (taking one place with another) about five times as many as
those who are members of the Societies. Now these, one with another, have heard
the Methodists about twice a week. And we cannot suppose that they have so
often heard that word which was made so great a blessing to others, without
receiving some blessing themselves. Indeed many of them have received very
material good, as their general behavior abundantly shows. And as to the rest,
if they were only enlightened and reformed a little, this, certainly is some
good. Now when these are added to the former number, they make in all about
Twelve Hundred Thousand souls.

Add to these such us have been occasional hearers; and those who have
frequently visited Methodist families, where religious worship, and Christian
conversation are kept up; and those who have labored or traveled with zealous
Methodists, or otherwise fallen into company with them, and have been
instructed, exhorted, warned and admonished by them, here must be an addition
of very many thousands more to whom they have been of use.

Again, Suppose there has been only a single Methodist in a family, and two or
three in a neighborhood, twenty or thirty in a country village, two or three
hundred in a large trading town, and three or four times that number in a city;
if each of these has been as a city upon a hill which cannot be hid, and as a
candle upon a candlestick which gives light to all in the house, Thousands,
Tens of Thousands, Hundreds of Thousands, who have seen their good works, must,
sooner or later, in some degree or other be benefited thereby.

Again, There have been (and still are) many holy, useful ministers, both in
the Church of England, and among the various sorts of Dissenters, whose
religion (and consequently their usefulness) originated with the Methodists.
Now as these have frequently been of use in enlightening, reclaiming, and
converting sinners, this must (under God) be attributed to the Methodists. For
in all likelihood, if these ministers had never heard the Methodists, they
would not have been converted; and if they had not been converted, they had
never been instrumental in doing the good they have; of consequence the main of
their usefulness, if not every tittle of it proceeded from the Methodists.

Again, In the course of fifty years many religious books have been published
by the Methodists, and others who sprung from them. Now as these in general are
not only argumentative, but likewise plain, practical, and persuasive; they
have been of unspeakable service to multitudes. And as it has often happened
that they have fallen into the hands of a great variety of persons, at home and
abroad, who never heard the Methodists, or conversed with them* we have reason
to believe, both from the nature of the books, and from the good effects we
have known them to have had upon others, that many of these have been much
benefited by reading them. Nor is this mere conjecture; for we have known many
instances even of persons of character who have been very materially benefited
by reading Mr. Wesley's Appeals, Sermons, and various other Tracts.

Again, We all know that in St. Paul's days there was those who preached Christ
out of contention, and that the apostle rejoiced therein; not doubting but good
was done thereby. In like manner, when the Methodists made a noise in the
world, many of the Clergy began to bestir themselves, and took much more pains
both in preaching and living. Nor is this mere imagination; for we have known
many instances of this kind in every part of the three kingdoms. Now as we must
believe that much good has been done, even by this means, and as we are certain
that Methodism gave occasion to it; we must view it as a farther display of the
good the Methodists have done.

Once more, He who says a firm foundation whereon to build a stately edifice,
or plants a large vineyard, which promises a fruitful vintage, or sows an
extensive field which almost assures us of a plentiful harvest; certainly does
good. Now all this the Methodists have done. They have laid such a firm
foundation; they have planted such a large vineyard; they have cultivated and
sown so wide a field; by enlightening, reforming, and converting so many
Thousands and tens of Thousands, that if they go on, as hitherto they have
done, ages unborn, and nations who never yet so much as heard of their name,
will bless God in Time and Eternity, that such a people ever existed.

Seeing then that the Methodists have been instrumental in doing Spiritual and
Temporal good, in a higher or lower degree, to Thousands of Thousands; and
seeing they have laid a broad and firm foundation for a much greater work in
futurity; I conclude that they have done Good, and not Evil; and that they have
done it in a most mavelous degree.

Perhaps it may be worth while to subjoin a few short answers to several
objections urged against the Methodists on this occasion.

First, It has been said, "They are Enthusiasts, in pretending to receive the
Spirit, and to be influenced thereby." I answer, They make no pretense but to
the ordinary operations of the Spirit: which is nothing more than what every
Christian Church under the heavens does, in its Liturgies, Articles, Creed,
Catechisms and Confessions: particularly, the Church of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; with every body of Dissenters in these lands. If then the Methodists
are Enthusiasts on this account, so also is the whole Christian World.

Secondly, It was said, "They are uncharitable, in confining Salvation to
themselves." To this I answer, They do no such thing. What they believe, and
say, is this: every one that repents of his sins, believes in Christ, and loves
God and his neighbor, will be saved, whatever Church he is of. And on the
other hand, he that does not thus repent, believe, and love, he, and he only,
they say will be damned. All the clamor, therefore, concerning the
uncharitableness of the Methodists, concerning their confining salvation to
themselves, and damning all besides, is mere Slander and Abuse, as every one
knows who has ever heard them.

Thirdly, It was said, "There are very wicked persons among them." I answer,
There never was a Christian church on earth, consisting of fifty members, who
sooner or later, had not those among them who did not adorn their profession.
In the Apostles' time they had Spots in their feasts of Charity; and even among
the Twelve, who were in the closest connection with our Lord, there was one who
had a devil. It would be strange, therefore if in a body consisting of a
Hundred Thousand members, there should be none who walked in a disorderly
manner. But suppose there were fifty that did so, this would not be enough to
criminate the whole body, seeing such are in no wise allowed among them. For
when a person of that sort is discovered, if they cannot reclaim him, they cut
him off as a withered branch, according to the word of Christ, and the example
of his Apostles. If he repent they receive him again; if not, he is no more
admitted into their Societies. Now here I ask, Does every Christian Church
under the heavens do this? Do those in Great Britain and Ireland? If not, with
what face can those who do it not, find fault with the Methodists in this
respect.

Fourthly, It has been said, "They make use of very uncouth and absurd
expressions." I answer, Perhaps they sometimes may. And is this to be wondered
at? Would it not rather be a wonder, if every member of such a community should
always express himself with the utmost accuracy? Was such a thing ever known
among any other people? "But the preachers themselves use uncouth expressions."
Perhaps they may, and perhaps they may not. It has sometimes happened that the
uncouthness was in the ears of those who heard them. For though St. Paul had
been speaking the words of Truth and Soberness, so uncouth were the ears of
Festus, that he cried out, Paul! thou art beside thyself; much learning has
made thee mad. And though the Son of God had been speaking as never man spoke,
yet some who heard him, and those too of the most reputable sort, said, He is
mad and has a devil; why hear ye him? "But there are absurd expressions in the
Methodist-writings." I answer, Was there ever a Book written wherein an evil
eye could not discover an absurdity? Is even the book of God free in this
respect? Rather have not the infidels of all ages beheld it as nothing but a
heap of Absurdities and Contradictions! What wonder then if the
Methodist-writings are viewed in the same unfavourable light?

Fifthly, It is objected; that, "They are divided among themselves, and often
condemn each other with great severity." I answer, Then this is one argument in
their favor. For it proves that they are so far honest men, as not to be in
league to deceive the world. But they are not divided in any thing essential.
They are perfectly agreed, That the whole world lies in wickedness: that God
commands all men every where to repent: that there is salvation in none but
Christ: that all who believe are justified, and have peace with God: that all
such ought to love God and their neighbor; and to rejoice evermore, pray
without ceasing, and in every thing give thanks; and to be holy in heart, and
in life. "But some of them are Arminians, and others Calvinists." This is very
true. The followers of Mr. Wesley are, in general, Arminians; and the followers
of the late Mr Whitefield are, in general, Calvinists. But what for that! Is
such a division any thing new or extraordinary? Was there not, at least since
the days of St. Austin, a mixture of those who are now called Calvinists and
Arminians, I will not say, in every Christian nation, or Christian city; but in
every Christian congregation of any note? Is it not so now all over England,
Scotland, Ireland, Holland, France, Spain, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Italy,
America, and in the East and West Indies? If so, where is the harm if such a
division is sound among the Methodists? "But they bitterly condemn each other."
I answer, Sometimes they do; but not in general. And if they did it oftener, it
would be no wonder, seeing so great a majority of mankind are incapable of
viewing any point with liberality and candor. This frailty of human nature,
has been matter of lamentation to candid men in every age and nation; but not
more so than to thousands of both parties which constitute "The Methodists."

Sixthly, It is said, "The teachers of Methodism are a company of illiterate
mechanics." I answer, They are not more illiterate than the Prophets and
Apostles* they are not more illiterate than the teachers of various other
denominations; such as the Quakers, Anabaptists, Moravians, and some
Independents: they are not more illiterate than some who have been ordained
ministers of the Church of England, who did not so much as know a Verb from a
Noun: particularly the Rev. Mr. T. who was originally a Merry-andrew, then a
Deacon, then a Priest, then a Justice of the Peace, if not of the Quorum!

Again, They are not more illiterate, or more ignorant of the laws of God, than
Thousands of Magistrates are of the laws of their country: particularly than
multitudes of Mayors and Aldermen, who have the care, not only of our corporate
towns, but even of our Cities! Now if an illiterate Magistrate, by looking into
the Statute-Laws, can tell what is legal and illegal; what pains and
punishments belong to evildoers, and what praise to them that do well; why may
not a Methodist teacher (suppose he is equally illiterate) by looking into the
Laws of God, tell what is required therein, on the one hand, and what forbidden
on the other; and also what Rewards and Punishments belong to obedience and
disobedience? And if he declares what these rewards and punishments are, and
adds warnings, instructions and exhortations, this is nothing more than what is
constantly done, by every illiterate Magistrate in the world.

Again, They are not more illiterate than myrrads of those who are heads of
families, who are supposed to be able to instruct all under their care, in the
duties they owe to God, their neighbors and one another; and to make use of
arguments, warnings, and exhortations, to engage their whole household to love
and fear God, and live in obedience to the king, and in love and charity with
their neighbors. Now if every master of a family is supposed (without the help
of a university education) to be capable of doing this; why may we not suppose
a Methodist teacher capable of doing the same, when Five, Ten, Twenty or Fifty
families are met together?

But after all this noise about their illiteracy, it is well known there have
been men of very considerable learning among them from the beginning: men who
have had a regular education, and who have acquired considerable renown, even
in our universities. There have also been others, who in the course of thirty
or forty years, have made themselves well acquainted with the learned
languages; with polemical and practical divinity, and with various other arts
and sciences. And as for the rest, seeing they have been wise to win souls,
they need not regard who clamours against them; as he is the best Physician who
performs the most cures.

But, "They are mechanics." So were Kings and Prophets, under the law; so was
Christ and his Apostles, under the Gospel; so were Bishops, Priests and Deacons
in former times; and so were many who now bear some of the highest offices,
both in Church and State. If then it is no objection to these that they were
once mechanics; where is the Candor? Where is the Justice of urging it against
the Methodists? Especially as it is no where said in the Bible, that every
preacher of the Gospel must be a fine Gentleman.

Seventhly, "But the teachers of Methodism are idle, mercenary men." I answer,
As they generally ride, through all weathers, three, four, and sometimes five
thousand miles a year; and, in that time preach, with all their might, five,
six, seven or eight hundred sermons; besides giving near as many public
exhortations, visiting the sick, and speaking to every member under their care,
four or five times a year; writing letters, and enforcing every other part of
the Methodist discipline; it is impossible they should be idle. On the other
hand, I know from long experience, that there are few ways of life attended
with more fatigue, and so likely to destroy a good constitution, as that of a
preacher among the Methodists. I myself have often been so wearied with the
labors of a single Sabbath, that I could scarce sleep at all the first night,
but imperfectly the second, and not soundly till the third. Now I ask every
impartial man, if this is a life of Idleness, whose is a life of Labor? whose
is a life of Toil?

But, "They are mercenary: their aim is only to enrich themselves." I answer,
if this was really their aim, never were men more disappointed. For I defy any
man living to show so much as a single preacher who has enriched himself, even
by preaching for the long space of forty or fifty years. It is true, a few of
them (perhaps one in ten) have got a little by marriage, though perhaps, not a
quarter, or a tenth part of what they would have done, had they staid at home.
And as to the rest, it is known to thousands, that they never aimed at more
than a scanty allowance to provide plain food and raiment for the present; and
if they got it (which was not always the case) they were therewith content.

And as a farther proof of their not being mercenary men, I add, had they been
such, would God have owned their labors as he has done? Was it ever known,
from the beginning of the world, that impostors and deceivers turned thousands
upon thousands from the evil of their way? Did any of this sort ever go, with
their lives in their hands, to the most ignorant, daring, and savage people;
and so preach Christ to them, as to constrain them to forsake all their sins,
to turn to God with full purpose of heart, and to walk in the narrow way, the
way of holiness, to their lives end? Yet all this have the Teachers of
Methodism been doing for forty or fifty years together, in the face of the sun;
and all this they still continue to do with unremitted zeal, notwithstanding
the many obstacles which are thrown in their way. We must therefore conclude
that they are not a set of deceivers, but holy and disinterested men, sent of
God to reform a guilty generation.

FINIS.
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS, ARE PUBLISHED BY John Dickins, No. 50, North
Second-street, near Arch-street, PHILADELPHIA; For the Use of the Methodist
Societies in the United States of America; AND THE PROFITS THEREOF APPLIED FOR
THE General Benefit of the said Societies. Sold by the Publisher, and the
Ministers and Preachers in the several Circuits.
THE Rev. Mr. John Wesley's Notes on the New Testament, in three volumes, well
bound, 17 s. -- The same lettered, 18 s. 6 d. The Arminian Magazine, vols. Is It
and IId, at 12 s. per volume. Thomas a Kempis, bound, 2 s. The Form of
discipline for the Methodist Church, as revised at the General Conference,
1792; with Treatises on Predestination, Perseverance, Christian Perfection,
Baptism, etc. all bound together, 4 s. 3 d. The Experience and Travels of Mr.
Freeborn Garrettson, well bound, 3 s. A Pocket Hymn-Book, containing three
hundred Hymns, well bound and lettered, 3 s. 9 d. An Extract on Infant Baptism,
stitched, 9 d. Children's Instructions, stitched, 6 d. An Abridgment of Mrs.
Rowe's Devout Exercises of the Heart, bound, 1 s. 10 d. The Saints Everlasting
Rest, well bound, 5 s. 7 d. The excellent Works of the Rev. Mr. John Fletcher,
published one volume at a time; the whole will consist of about six or seven
volumes; the Is It, IId, IIIrd, IVth, and Vth volumes now published, well bound
and lettered, at 5 s. 7 d. per volume. A Funeral Discourse on the Death of that
great Divine, the Rev. John Wesley, stitched, 11 d. The Is It volume of Mr. F.
Asbury's Journal, 5 s. 7 d. A Tract on Slavery, 6 d. The Rev John Wesley's
Journal, vol. Is It, 5 s. 7 d. The Rev. John Wesley's Life, handsomely bound and
lettered, 7 s. 6 d. -- N. B. Some of the British copies of this Life, in a
larger type, have been sold in America, bound, at 15 s. The Family Adviser and
Primitive Physic, 3 s. 9 d. Extract from Law's Serious Call to a devout and
holy Life, bound 3 s. 9 d. Spiritual Letters, etc. by the Rev. John Fletcher, 5
s. 7 d. Appeal to Matter of Fact and Common Sense, by the Rev. John Fletcher, 5
s. ^ d. Sermons by the Rev. John Wesley, published one volume at a time, the
Is It and IId volumes published. 5 s. 2 d. each. Doddridge's Sermons to Young
People, bound, 3 s. 6 d. A Scriptural Catechism, 7 d Minutes of the Methodist
Conferences, annually held in America, from the year 1773 to 1794 inclusive,
bound, 3 s. 9 d. The same, for several late years, separately, 5 d. each. The
Life of Monsieur De Renty, 1 s. 3 d. The Manners of the Ancient Christians, 8
d. A Defense of Methodism, 9 d.
As the Profits of these Books are for the general Benefit of the Methodist
Societies, it is humbly recommended to the Members of the said Societies, that
they will purchase no Books which we publish, of any other person than the
aforesaid JOHN DICKINS, or the Methodist Ministers and Preachers in the several
Circuits, or such Persons as sell them by their Consent.


