

THE SURPRISING LIFE AND DEATH OF DR. JOHN FAUSTUS, D.D. COMMONLY CALLED THE
HISTORY OF THE THE Devil AND DR. Faustus. TO WHICH IS NOW ADDED THE
NECROMANCER, OR, HARLAQUIN DOCTOR FAUSTUS; AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATERS.

Truly Translated from the Original Copies.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER. 1795.

THE SURPRISING LIEE AND DEATH OF Dr. John Faustus.
CHAP. I. Of his Parentage and Birth.
JOHN FAUSTUS was born in the town of Rhodes, in the province of Weimer, in
Germany, his father a poor husbandman, and not able well to bring him up; yet
having an uncle at Wittenburg, a rich man, and without issue, he took this
Faustus from his father and made him his heir, insomuch that his father was no
more troubled with him; for he remained with his uncle at Wittenburg, where he
was kept at the university in the same city, to study Divinity; but Faustus
being of a naughty mind, and otherwise addicted, plied not his studies, but
betook himself to other exercises, which his uncle hearing often, rebuked him
for it; as Eli oftentimes rebuked his children for sinning against the Lord,
even so this good old man labored to have Faustus apply his study to Divinity,
that he might come to the knowledge of God and his law. But it is manifest that
many virtuous parents have wicked children, as Cain, Reuben, Absalom, and such
like, have been to their parents. So Faustus having godly parents, who seeing
him to be of a forward wit, were desirous to bring him up in virtuous studies,
namely, of Divinity; but he gave himself secretly to Necromancy and
Conjuration, insomuch that few or none could perceive his profession.

But to the purpose, Faustus continued at study in the university, and was by
the Rectors, and sixteen masters afterward, examined how he had profited in
his studies; and being found by them, that none of his time were able to argue
with him in Di^^^nity, or for the excellency of his wisdom, to compare with
him, with one consent they made him Doctor of Divinity. But Dr. Faustus, within
a short time after he had obtained his degree, fell into such fantasies, and
deep cogitations, that he was mocked of many, and of most part of the students
was called the Speculator; and sometimes he would throw the scriptures from
him, as though he had no care of his former profession, so that he began a most
ungodly life, as hereafter more at large may appear; for as the old proverb
says, Who can hold what will away? So, who can hold Faustus from the devil,
that seeks after him with all his endeavors; for he accompanied himself with
diverse that were seen in those devilish arts, and that had the Chaldean,
Persian, Hebrew, Arabian and Greek tongues, using figures, characters,
conjurations, incantations, with many other ceremonies belonging to those
infernal arts, as Necromancy, Charms, Soothsaying, Witchcraft, Enchantment,
being delighted with their books, words and names so well, that he studied day
and night therein, insomuch that he could not abide to be called Doctor of
Divinity, but waxed a worldly man, and named himself an Astrologian, and a
Mathematician, and for a shadow sometimes a Physician, and did great cures;
namely, with herbs, roots, waters, drinks and clysters; and without doubt he
was passing wise and excellent in holy scriptures: But be that knows his
master's will, and does it not, is worthy to be beaten with many stripes. It is
written. No man can seve two masters, and thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. But Faustus threw all this in the wind, and made his soul of no
estimation, regarding more the worldly pleasures than the joys to come;
therefore at the day of judgment there is no hope of his redemption.

CHAP. II. How Dr. Faustus began to practice his Develish Art; and conjured the
Devil, making him to appear, and meet him on the morrow morning at his own
house.
YOU have heard before, that all Faustus's mind was to study the arts of
Necromancy and Conjuration; which exercise he followed day and night, and
taking to him the wings of an eagle, thought to fly over the whole world, and
to know the secrets of heaven and earth; for his speculation was so wonderful,
being expert in using his Vocabula, figures, character, conjuration and other
ceremonial actions, that in all haste he put practice to bring the Devil before
him, and taking his way to a thick wood near Wittenburg, called in the German
tongue Spisser holt, that is in English, the Spisser's Wood, as Faustus would
oftentimes boast of it among the crew, being in jollity, he came to the wood
one evening into the cross way, where he made with his wand a circle in the
dust, and within that many more circles and characters; and thus past away the
time till it was nine or ten of the clock at night; then began Dr. Faustus to
call on Mephostophiles the spirit, and to charge him in the name of Beelzebub,
to appear there presently without any longer stay; then presently the Devil
began so great a rumor in the in the wood, as if heaven and earth would have
come together, and the trees with wind bowed their tops to the ground; then
fell the Devil to roar, as if the whole wood had been full of Lions, and
suddenly about the circle run the Devil, as if a thousand wagons had be
running together on paved stones: After this, at the four corners of the wood
it thundered horribly, with such lightning, as if the whole world to his
seeming had been on fire. Faustus all this while, half amazed at the Devil's so
long tarrying, and doubting whether he were best to abide any more such
horrible conjurings, thought to leave his circle and depart; whereupon the
Devil made him such music of all sorts, as if the Nymphs themselves had been
in the place: Whereat Faustus revived, and stood stoutly in his circle,
expecting his purpose, and began again to conjure the spirit Mephostophiles, in
the name of the Prince of Devils, to appear in his likeness; whereat suddenly,
over his head hung hovering in the air, a mighty dragon; then calls Faustus
again after his devilish manner, at which there was a monstrous cry in the
wood, as if hell had been open, and all the tormented souls cursing their
condition. Presently not three fathom above his head, fell a flame in manner of
lightning, and changed itself into a globe; yet Faustus feared it not, but did
persuade himself that the Devil should give him his request before he would
leave. Oftentimes after to his companions he would boast that he had the
stoutest head under the cope of Heaven at command. Whereat they answered. They
knew none stouter than the Pope or Emperor. But Faustus said, The head that is
my servant, is above all upon earth; and repeated certain words out of St. Paul
to the Ephesians, to make his argument good, The Prince of the World is upon
Earth, and under Heaven. Well, let us come again to his conjuration, where we
left him at the fiery globe: Faustus vexed at his spirit's so long tarrying,
used his charms with full purpose not to depart before he had his intent, and
crying on Mephostophiles the spirit, suddenly the globe opened, and sprung up
in the height of a man, so burning a time, in the end it converted to the shape
of a fiery man. This pleasant beast ran about the circle a great while; and
lastly, appeared in the manner of a Gray Friar, asking Faustus what was his
request? Faustus commanded that the next morning at twelve of the clock, he
should appear to him at his house; but the Devil would in no wise grant it.
Faustus began to conjure him again, in the name of Beelzebub, that he should
fulfill his request; whereupon upon the spirit agreed, and so they departed each
on his way.

CHAP. III. The conference of Dr. Faustus with his Spirit Mephostophiles, the
morning following, at his own house.
DR. Faustus, having commanded the spirit to be with him, at the hour
appointed, he came and appeared in his chamber, demanding of Faustus what his
desire was: Then began Dr. Faustus anew with him, to conjure him, that he would
be obedient unto him, and to answer him certain articles, to fulfill them in
all points.

I. That the spirit should serve him, and be obedient unto him in all things
that he asked of him, from that hour, until the hour of his death.

II. Further, any thing that he desired of him, he should bring him.

III. Also, that in all Faustus's demands and interrogations, the spirit should
tell him nothing but what was true.

Hereupon the spirit answered, and laid his case forth, That he had no such
power of himself, until he had first given his prince (that was ruler over him)
to understand thereof, and to know if he could obtain so much of his Lord:
Therefore speak farther, that I may do thy whole desire to my Prince; for it is
not in my power to do it without his Leave.

Dr. Faustus upon this, arose where he sat, and said, I will have my request,
and yet I will not be damned. The spirit answered. Then shall thou want thy
desire, and yet art thou mine notwithstanding; if any man would detain thee, it
is but in vain, for thy infidelity has confounded thee. Hereupon spoke
Faustus, Get thee hence from me, and take St. Valentine's Farewell, and Crisman
with thee: yet I conjure thee, that thou be here at evening, and bethink
thyself of what I have asked thee, ask thy Prince's council therein.
Mephostophiles the spirit thus answered, vanished away, leaving Faustus in his
study, where he sat pondering how he might obtain his request of the Devil,
without the loss of his soul; yet he was fully resolved with himself, rather
than to want his pleasure, to do what the spirit and his Lord should condition
upon.

CHAP. IV. The second time of the spirit's appearing to Faustus at his house.
FAUSTUS continued in his devilish cogitations, never moving out of the place
where the spirit left him, such was his fervent love to the Devil. The night
approaching this swift flying Spirit appeared to Faustus, offering himself with
all submission to his service, with full authority from his Prince, to do
whatsoever he would request; if Faustus would promise to be his. This answer I
bring thee, an answer must thou make by me again; yet I will hear what is thy
desire, because thou have sworn to me to be here at this time. Dr. Faustus gave
him this answer, though faintly for his foul's sake. That his request was none
other, but to become a Devil, or at least, a limb of him, and that the spirit
should agree to these articles following:

1. That he might be a spirit in shape and quality.

2. That Mephostophiles should be his servant at his command.

3. That Mephostophiles should bring him any thing, and do for him whatsoever
he desired.

4. That at all times he should be in the house invisible to all men, except
only to himself, and at his command to show himself.

5. That Mephostophiles should at all times appear at his command, and in what
form or shape soever he would.

Upon these points the spirit answered Dr. Faustus, That all this should be
granted him, and fulfilled, and more, if he would agree unto him upon certain
articles, as follows:

1. That Dr. Faustus should give himself to his Lord Lucifer, body and soul.

2. For confirmation of the sames he should make him a writing in his own blood.

3. That he would be an enemy to all christian people.

4. That he would deny the christian belief.

5. That he let not any man change his opinion, if any man should go about to
dissaude or withdraw him from it.

Farther, the spirit promised Faustus to give him certain years to live in
health and pleasure, and when such years were expired, that then Faustus would
be fetched away; and if he would hold these articles and conditions, that then
he should have whatsoever his heart would wish or desire; and Faustus should
quickly perceive himself to be a spirit in all manner of actions whatsoever.
Hereupon Dr. Faustus's mind was so enflamed, that he forgot his soul, and
promised Nephostophiles to hold all things as he mentioned them; he thought the
Devil was not so black as they used to paint him; nor Hell so hot as the people
say.

CHAP. V. The third parley between Dr. Faustus and Mephohostophiles about a
Conclusien.
AFTER Dr. Faustus had made his promise to the Devil, in the morning betimes,
he called his spirit before him, and commanded him, that he should always come
to him like a Friar, after the Order of St. Francis, and with a bell in his
hand, like St. Anthony; and to ring it once or twice before he appeared, that
he might know of his certain coming: Then Faustus demanded of his spirit, What
is his name? The spirit answered, my name is as thou have said, Mephostophiles,
and I am a prince, but a servant to Lucifer.

After a while Faustus promised Mephostophiles to write and make his obligation
with all assurance of the articles in the chapter before rehearsed: A pitiful
case, Christian reader, for certainly this letter, or obligation was found in
his house after his most lame a table end, with all the rest of his damnable
practices used in his whole life.

Then he took a small penknife and pricked a vein in his left hand, and for
certain thereupon were seen on his hand these words written in his own blood, O
homo fuge? where at the spirit vanished away, but Faustus continued in his
damnable mind.

CHAP. VI. How Dr. Faustus set his Blood in a Sawcer, on warm Ashes, and writ
as follows:
I JOHN FAUSTUS, Doctor, do openly acknowledge with my own hand, to the great
force and strengthening of this letter that since I began to study and
speculate the course and nature of the elements, I have not found, through the
gifts that is given me from above, any such learning and wisdom that bring to
me my desire and for that I find that men are unable to instruct me any farther
in the Matter; now have I, Dr. Faustus, to the hellish Prince of Orient, and
his messenger Mephostophiles, given both soul and body, upon such conditions,
that they shall learn me and fulfill my desires in all things as they have
promised and vowed to me with due obedience unto me, according to the articles
mentioned between us.

Farther, I do covenant and agree with them, by these presents, that at the end
of 24 years next ensuing the date of this present letter, they being expired,
and I in the mean time, during the said years, being served of them at my will,
they accomplished my desire to the full in all points as we were agreed: That
then I gave them all power to do with me at their pleasure; to rule, to send,
fetch or carry me or mine, be it either body, soul, flesh, blood, or goods into
their habitation, he it wheresoever: And hereupon I defy God and his Christ,
all the host of Heaven, and all living creatures that bear the shape of God,
yea all that live: And again, I say it shall be so. And to the more
strengthening of this writing, I have written it with my own hand and blood,
being in perfect memory: And hereupon I subscribe to it my name, calling all
the infernal, middle, and supreme powers to witness of this my letter and
subscription.

JOHN FAUSTUS.

CHAP. VII. How Mephostophiles came for his writing, and in what manner he
appeared, and the sights he showed him; and how he caused him to keep a copy of
his own writing.
DR. Faustus sitting pensive having but only one boy with him, suddenly there
appeared his spirit Mephostophiles, in likeness of a very man, from whom issued
most dreadful fiery flames, insomuch that the boy was afraid; but being
hardened by his master, he bid him stand still, and he should have no haerm:
The spirit began to bleat, as in a singing manner. This pretty sport pleased
Dr. Faustus well, but he would not call his spirit into the counting house,
until he had seen more: Anon was heard a rushing of armed men, and trampling of
horses: This ceasing, came a kennel of hounds, and they chased a great heart in
the hall, and there the heart was slain. Faustus took heart, came forth and
looked upon the heart; but presently before him there was a lion and a dragon
together, fighting so fiercely, that Faustus thought they would have thrown
down the house; but the dragon overcame the lion, and so they vanished. After
this came a peacock and a peahen, the cock brustling of his tail, and turning
to the female, beat her, and so vanished. Afterward followed a furious bull,
that with a full fierceness ran upon Faustus, but coming near him vanished
away. Afterward followed a great old ape, this ape offered Faustus the hand,
but he refused; so the ape ran out of the hall again. Hereupon fell a mist in
the hall, that Faustus saw no light, but it lasted not; and so soon as it was
gone, there lay before Faustus two great sacks, one full of gold, another of
silver.

Lastly, was heard by Faustus all manner of instruments of music, as organs,
clarions, lutes, viols, citterns, waits, hornpipes, flutes, anomes, harps, and
all manner of other instruments, which so ravished his mind, that he thought he
had been in another world. Hereat came Mephostophiles into the hall to Faustus,
apparelled like a Friar, to whom Faustus spoke, thou have done me a wonderful
pleasure in showing me this pastime; if thou continuest as thou have began thou
shall win my heart and soul, yea, and have it. Mephostophiles answered, This is
nothing, I will please the better; give me thy hand writing. At which words the
wretch put forth his hand, saying, hold thee there have thou my promise.
Mephostophiles took the writing, and willed Faustus to take a copy of it; with
that the perverse Faustus being resolute in his Damnation, wrote a copy
thereof, and gave the devil the one, and kept in store the other. Thus the
spirit and Faustus were agreed, and dwelt together, no doubt there was a
virtuous house keeping.

CHAP. VIII. The manner how Faustus proceeded in his damnable life.
DR. Faustus having given his soul to the Devil, renouncing all the powers of
Heaven, confirming all his lamentable actions with his own blood, and having
already dilivered his writing now into the Devil's hand, the which so puffed up
his heart, that he forgot the mind of a man, and thought himself to be a
spirit. Thus Faustus dwelt at his uncle's house at Wittenburg, who died and
bequeathed it in his testament to his chosen Faustus. Faustus kept a boy with
him that was his scholar, an unlucky wag, called Christopher Wagner, to whom
this sport and Life that he saw his Master followed, seemed pleasant. Faustus
loved the boy well, hoping to make him as good or better seen in his hellish
exercises than himself, and he was fellow with Mephostophiles; otherwise
Faustus had no company in his house but himself, and boy, and spirit, that ever
was diligent at Faustus's command, going about the house like a friar, with a
little bell in his hand, seen of none but Faustus. For victuals and other
necessaries, Mephostophiles brought him at his pleasure from the Duke of
Saxony, the Duke of Bravaria, and the Bishop of Saltzburg: And they had many
times their best wine stole out of their cellers by Mephostophiles; likewise
their provisions for their own table: Such meat as Faustus wished for, his
spirit brought him in. Besides that Faustus himself was become so cunning, that
when he opened his window, what Fowl soever he wished for, it came presently
flying into the house, were it never so dainty. Moreover, Faustus and his boy
went in sumptuous apparel, the which Mephostophiles stole from the mercers at
Norenburg Aspurg, Frankfort and Lipzig, for it was hard for them to find a lock
to keep out such a thief; all their maintenance was but stolen and horrowed
ware: And thus they lived an odious Life in the sight of God.

CHAP. IX. How Dr. Faustus would have married.
DR. Faustus bethinks himself of a wife, and called Mephostophiles to council.
Quoth Mephostophiles, to this I answer the^ Thou can not marry; for wedlock
is a chief institution ordained of God and that thou have promised to defy, as
we do all.

Dr. Faustus fell into despair with himself fearing, if he should motion
matrimony any more then the Devil would tear him to pieces. For this time
(quoth he to Mephostophiles) I am not minded to marry: Then do thou well,
answered his Spirit. But within two hours after, Faustus called again to his
Spirit, who came again in his old manner, like a friar. Then Faustus said unto
him, I am not able to resist or bridle my fancy, I must and will have a wife, I
pray thee give thy consent to it. Suddenly upon these words came such a
whirlwind about the place, that Faustus though the whole house would have come
down; and all the doors of the house flew off the hooks: After all this, his
house was full of smoke, and the floor covered with ashes; which Dr. Faustus
perceiving, he would have gone up stairs, and flying up, he was taken and
thrown down into the ^^ll, that he was not able to stir hand nor foot; then
round about him ran a vast circle of fire, never standing still, that Faustus
cried as he lay, and thought there to have been burned. Then cried he out to
his spirit Mephostophiles for help, promising that he would live for all this,
as he had vowed by his hand writing, hereupon appeared unto him an ugly Devil,
so dreadful and monstrus to behold, that Faustus durst not look on him. The
Devil said, what would thou have Faustus? How likest thou thy wedding? What
mind art thou in now? Faustus answered, he had forgot his promise, but he would
talk no more of such things. Says the Devil, thou art best so to do; and so
vanished from him. After appeared unto him, his Friar Mephostophiles, with a
bell in his hand and spoke to Faustus. It is no jeasting with us, hold that
which thou have vowed, and we will perform that which we have promised, and
more than that, thou shall have thy hearts' desire of what Woman soever thou will, be she alive or dead, and so long as thou will, the shall keep her by
thee. These words pleased Faustus wonderfully well and he repented himself that
he was so foolish to wish himself married, that might have any woman in the
whole city brought him at his command.

CHAP. X. Question put forth by Dr. Faustus unto his spirit Mephostophiles.
DR. Faustus living in all manner of pleasure, that his heart could desire,
continuing of his amorous drifts, his delicate fare and costly apparel, calling
on a time his Mephostophiles to him, who being come, brought him a book in his
hand of all manner of Devilish and enchanting arts, the which he gave Faustus,
saying, "hold, my Faustus, work now thine heart's desire; the copy of this
enchanting book was afterward found by his servant, Christopher Wagger: "Well,
(quoth Faustus to his spirit) I have called thee to know what thou can do, if
I have need of thy help. "Then answered Mephostophiles, and said. "My lord
Faustus, I am a flying spirit, yea, so swift as thought can do whatever, and
will do all things for the at thy pleasure." I thank thee Mephostophiles, quoth
Faustus: Upon this left their communication.

CHAP. X. How Dr. Faustus dreamt that he had seen Hell.
THE night following after Faustus's communication with Mephostophiles, Dr.
Faustus dreamt that he had seen a part of Hell; but in what manner it was, or
in what place, he knew not, whereby he was much troubled in mind, and called
unto him Mephostophiles his spirit saying unto him, "I pray the resolve me this
doubt: What is Hell? What substance is it of? In what place stands it? And when
was it made?" Mephostophiles answered, Faustus, "thou shall know, that before
the fall of my lord Lucifer, there was no Hell, but even then was Hell
ordained; it is no substance, but a confused thing. In this confused Hell is
naught to find but a sulpherish fire, or stinking mist or fog; moreover, the
Devils know not how God has laid the foundation of our Hell, or where it is;
but to be short, Faustus, we know that Hell has neither bottom nor end.

CHAP. XI. How Dr. Faustus desired of his spirit, to know the secrets and pains
of hell.
DR. Faustus was pondering within himself how he might get loose from so
damnable an end as he had given himself unto, both soul and body; for his heart
was so possessed with the Devil, that he could think of nothing else but Hell,
and the pains thereof. Wherefore in all haste, he called unto him his spirit
Mephostophiles, desiring him some more of the secrets of Hell; what pain the
damned are in; and how they were tormented? to whom Mephostophiles answered,
Faustus, thou will have me tell the of the secrets of Hell, and of the pains
thereof: Know, Faustus, that Hell has many figures, semblances, and names, but
it cannot be named or signified in such sort to the living that are damned, as
it is to those that are dead, and do both see and feel the torment thereof. For
Hell is said to be deadly, out of which there never came any to life again but
one, but he is nothing for thee to reckon upon; Hell is blood-thirsty, and is
never satisfied: Hell is a valley into which the damned souls fall; for when the
soul is cut of man's body, it would gladly go to the place from whence it came,
and climbeth up above the highest hills, even to the Heavens, where being by
the Angels of the first model denied entertainment (in consideration of their
evil life spent on earth) they fall into the deepest pit or valley, that has
no bottom, into a perpetual fire which shall never be quenched. Therefore is
Hell called everlasting pain, in which is never hopes for mercy; so it is
called utter darkness, in which we see neither the light, the sun, moon, nor
stars; and were our darkness like the darkness of night, yet were there hopes
of mercy: But ours is perpetual darkness, elean exempt from the face of God.
Hell has also a place in it called Chasina, out of which issues all manner of
thunder and lightnings, with such shriekings and wailing, that often times the
very Devils themselves stand in fear thereof. For one while it sends forth
wind, with exceeding snow hail and rain, congealing the water into ice; with
the which the damned are frozen, gnash their teeth, howl and cry, and yet
cannot die.

Other whiles, it sends forth most horrible hot mists, or fogs with flashing
of flames of fire and brimstone; wherein the sorrowful souls of the damned lie
broiling in their reiterated torments; yea, Faustus Hell is called a prison,
wherein the damned lie continually bound; it is called Pernicious, and Exitium,
death destruction, hurtfulness mischief, a mischance, a pitiful and evil thing,
world without end, and mark. Hell is the nurse of death, the heat of of fire,
the shadow of Heaven and Earth, the obligation of all goodness; the pains
unspeakable, the griefs unremovable, the dwelling of the Devils, dragons,
serpents, adders, toads, crocadiles, and all manner of venomous things and
noisome creatures; the pubble of sin, the stinking far ascending from the
Stygian lake brimstone, pitch, and all manner of unclean metals; the perpetual
and unquenchable fire, the end of whose miseries was never purposed by God.
Yea, yea, Faustus, thou say I shall, I must: nay, I tell thee the secrets of
our kingdom, for thou buyest it dearly, and thou must and shall be partaker of
our torments; there shall thou abide horable torments, howling, crying,
burning, freezing, melting, swiming in a labarynth of miseries, scolding,
smoking in thine eyes, stinking in thy nose, hoarseness in thy speech,
deafness in thy ears, trembling in thy hands, biting thine own tongue with
pain, thy heart crushed as with a press, thy bones broken, the Devils tossing
firebrands unto thee; yea, thy whole carcass tossed on muck-forks from one
Devil to another; yea, Faustus, then will thou wish for death, and he will fly
from thee; thine unspeakable torments shall be every day augmented more and
more, for the greater the sin the greater is the punishment; how likest thou
this, my Faustus?

Lastly thou will have me tell thee that which only belongs to God, which is,
if it be possible for the damned to come again into the favor of God, or not:
Why Faustus thou kowest that this is against thy promise; for why should
thou desire to know that, having already given thy soul, to the devil, to have
the pleasure of the world, and to know the fecrets of Hell, therefore thou art
damned, and how can thou then come again to the favor of God? Wherefore I
discreetly answer, no; for whomsoever God has forsaken, and thrown into Hell,
must there abide his wrath and indignation, in that unquenchable fire, where is
no hope of mercy to be looked for, but abiding perpetual pains, world without
end: Therefore my Faustus, as thou come to Hell with these qualities, thou
may say with Cain, my sins are greater than can be forgiven, go hang thy
self like Judas: And lastly, be contented to suffer torments with Divas.
Therefore know, Faustus, that the damned have neither end nor time appointed,
in the which they may hope to be released.

CHAP. XIII. How Dr. Faustus turned Astronomer.
DR. Faustus turned almanac maker by the help of his spirit: And also, in a
short time to be a good astronomer. He had learnt so perfectly of his spirit,
the course of the sun moon and stars, that he had the most famous name of all
the mathematicians that lived in his time; as may well appear by his works
dedicated to sundry dukes and lords; for he did nothing without the advice of
his spirit, which learned him to presage of matters to come, which have come to
pass since his death. The like praise he won with his kalenders and almagnacks
making; for when he presaed of any thing, operations, and alterations of the
weather or elements; as wind, rain, thunder or lightnings, it fell so duly out,
as if an angel had forwarned it; he set in all his works the day and hour when,
where, and how it should happen. If any thing wonderful were at hand, as
mortality, famine, plague, wars, etc. He would set the time and place in true
and just order when it should come to pass.

CHAP. XIV. How Faustus asked his Spirit a Question in Astronomy.
NOW Faustus falling to practice and making his prognostications, he was
doubtful in many points; wherefore he called unto him his spirit, saying, I
find the ground of the science very difficult to attain unto; for when I confer
astronomia and astrologia, as the mathematicians and ancient writers have left
in memory. I find them very much to disagree; wherefore I require thee to teach
me the truth of the matter. Mephostophiles answered, I will teach thee the
course and recourse of the planets, the cause of winter, and summer, the
exaltation and declimation of the sun, and eclipse of the moon, the distance
and height of the poles, and every fixed star, the nature and opposition of the
elements, fire, air, water and earth, and all that is contained in them; yea,
there is nothing hidden from me; therefore learn now of me to make thunders,
lightning, hail, snow and rain; the clouds to rend the earth, and craggy rocks
to shake and split in sunder; the seas to swell and roar, and overrun their
marks; know thou not that the deeper the sun shines, the hotter it pierces;
as thy art is famous whilst thou art here, shall the greater thy name be when
thou art gone. Come on my Faustus, I will make thee as perfect in these ways as
myself; I will learn thee to go invisible, to find out the mines of gold and
silver, the fodines of precious stones; take thy heart's desire, thy time,
Faustus, wears away; then why will thou not take thy pleasure in the world?
Come up, we will go unto kings at their own courts, and at their sumptuous
banquets be their guests; if willingly they invite us not, then by force we
will serve our turn with their best and daintiest wine. Agreed, quoth Faustus.

CHAP. XV. How Faustus fell into Despair; for having put a Question unto his
spirit, they fell at Variance, whereupon the Rout of Devils appeared,
threatening him sharply.
DR. Faustus revolving with himself the speeches of the spirit: Mephostophiles,
said he, tell me how, and after what sort, God made the world, and all the
creatures in it? and why man was made after the image of God? the spirit
hearing this answered, Faustus, thou know that all this is in vain for thee
to ask; I know thou art sorry or what thou have done, but it avails thee not,
for I will tear thee in a thousand pieces if thou change not thy opinions; and
hereat he vanished away a Whereat Faustus fell to weeping and howling bitterly,
because the Devil, departed from him so suddenly in such a rage. And being in
this perplexity, he was suddenly taken with such extreme cold, as if he would
have frozen in the place where he sat; in which the greatest Devil in Hell
appeared unto him, with certain of his hedious and infernal company, in the
most ugly shapes, that it was possible to think upon; and traversing the
chamber round about where Faustus sat, Faustus thought to himself, now they are
come for me, though my time be not come, and that; because I have asked such
questions of my servant Mephostophiles: At which cogitations the chiefest
Devil, which was the lord unto whom he gave his soul, that was Lucifer, spoke
in this sort: Faustus, I have seen thy thoughts, which are not as thou have
vowed them unto me, by the virtues of this letter, and showing him the
obligation, which he had written with his own blood; wherefore I am come to
visit thee, and to show thee some of our hellish pastimes, in hopes that will
confirm thy mind a little more steadfast unto us. Content (quoth Faustus) go
to, let me see what pastime thou can make, At which words, the great Devil in
his likeness sat him down by Faustus, commanding the rest of his Devils to
appear in the form as they were in Hell. First entered Belial in form of a
bear, with curled black hair to the ground, his ears standing upright; within,
his ears were as red as blood, out of which issued flames of fire; his teeth
were at least a foot long, and as white as snow, with a tail three else long at
the least, having two wings, one behind eacharm; and thus one after another,
they appeared to Faustus in form as they were in Hell. Lucifer himself sat in
the manner of a man all hairy, but brown colored like a squirrel curled, and
his tail turning upwards on his back as the squirrels use; I think he could
crack nuts too like a squirrel. After him came Beelzebub in curled hair of a
horseflesh color; his head like the head of a bull, with a mighty pair of
horns, and two long ears down to the ground, and two wings on his back, with
two pricking things like horns; out of his wings issued flames of fire, his
tail was like a cow's. Then came Astoroth in form of a worm, going upright on
his tail, and had no feet, but a tail like a glowworm; under his chops grew
two short hands, and his back was coal-black, his belly thick in the middle,
yellow like gold, having many bristles on his back like a hedgehog. After him
came Cannagos^^, being white and gray mixed, exceeding curled and hairy; he had
a head like the head of an ass, and a tail like a cat, and claws like an ox,
lacking nothing of an ell broad. Then came Anobis; this Devil had a head like a
dog, white and black hair, in shape like a hog, saving that he had but two
feet, one under his throat, the other at his tail: he was four else long with
hanging ears like a blood-hound. After him came Dithican; he was a short thief,
in form of a large bird, with shining feathers, and four feet; his neck was
green, and his body red and his feet black. The last was called Brachus, with
very short feet like a hedgehog, yellow and green, the upper side of his body
was brown, and his belly like blue flames of fire, his tail was red, like the
tail of a monkey. The rest of the Devils were in form of unreasonable beasts;
as swine, hearts, bears, wolfs, apes, buffes, goats, antelopes, elephants,
dragons horses, asses, lions, cats, snakes, toads, and all manner of ugly
serpents and worms; yet came in such sort, that every one at his entry into the
hall, made their reverence to Lucifer, and so took their places, standing in
order as they came, until they had filled the whole hall, wherewith suddenly
fell a most horrible thunderclap that the house shook as if it would have
fallen unto the ground; upon which every monster had a muck-fork in his hand,
holding them toward Faustus, as though they would run a tilt at him: Which
when Faustus perceived he thought upon the words of Mephostophiles, when he
told him how the souls in Hell were tormented, being cast from Devil to Devil
upon muck-forks, he thought verily to have been tormented there by them in this
fort: But Lucifer, perceiving his thought, spoke to him, My Faustus, how likest
thou this crew of mine? Quoth Faustus why came thou not in another manner of
shape? Lucifer replied, we cannot change our hellish form, we have showed
ourselves as we are there; yet can we blind men's eyes in such sort, that when
we will, we appear unto them as if we were men or Aagels of light, although our
dwellings be in darkness. Then said Faustus I like not so many of you together.
Whereupon Lucifer commanded them to depart, except seven of the principle; and
forthwith they presently vanished; which Faustus perceiving, he was somewhat
better satisfied, and spoke to Lucifer, where is my old servant.
Mephostophiles? Let me see if he can do the like. Whereupon came a fierce
dragon flying, and spitting fire round about the house, and coming toward
Lucifer, made reverence, then changing himself to the form of a Friar, saying
Faustus, what will thou? Faustus said, I will that thou teach me to transform
myself, in like sort, as thou and the rest have done. Then Lucifer put forth
his paw, and gave Faustus a book, saying, hold do what thou will, which he
looked upon changed himself into a hog, then into a worm, then into a dragon;
and finding this for his purpose, he liked it well.

CHAP. XVI. How Dr. Faustus was carried round the world in eight days. After
which he wrote a letter to his friend at Leipzig of the same.
THIS letter was found written with his own hand, and sent to his friend as
Lipzig, a physician named Love Victori, the contents were as follows: "I give
you here to understand, that being once lying in my bed, and could not sleep
for thinking on my calendar and practice, I marvelled with myself how it was
possible that the firmament should be known, and so largely written of by men,
or whether they writ true or false, by their own opinions and suppositions, or
by due observation and true course of the Heavens. Behold I thought my house
would have been blown down, so that all my doors and chests flew open, whereat
I was not a little astonished, for withal, I heard a groaning which said, get
up, the desire of thy heart thou shall see, at which I answered, what my heart
desires, that would I fain see, I will away with thee: Why then quoth he, look
out at the window, there comes a messenger for thee. That I did, and behold
there stood a wagon with two dragons before it, to draw it, and all the wagon
was of light burning fire, and for that the moon shone, I was the willinger at
that time to depart but the voice spoke again, saying, sit up, and let us away,
I will, said I, go with thee, but upon consideration that I may ask after all
things that I see, hear, or think on. The voice answered, I am content for this
time. Hereupon I got into the wagon, so that the dragons carried me upright in
to the air.

The wagon had four wheels, which rattled so, and made such a noise, as if it
had been all this while running on the stones, and round about us flew flames
of fire; and the higher I came, the more the earth seemed to be darkened, so
that I thought I came out of a dungeon; and looking down from Heaven behold
Mephostophiles, my spirit and servant was behind me, to whom I said, I pray
thee, Mephostophiles whither shall I go now? Let not that trouble thy mind,
said he, and yet they carried us higher up. And now I tell thee, (good friend
and school fellow) that on Tuesday I went out, and on Tuesday sevennight
following, I came home again, that is eight days, in which I slept not, no, nor
had a wink come within my eyes: And we "went invisible of any man; and as the
day began to appear after the first night's journey, I said to my spirit,
Mephostophiles, I pray thee how far have we now ridden? I am sure thou know,
for methinks we have ridden very far, the world seems so little. Mephostophiles
answered me, my Faustus, believe me that from the place from whence thou
come, unto this place where we now are, is already 47 leagues right in
height. And as the day increased, I looked down into the world: Asia, Europe,
and Africa, I had a sight of. Then I looked on the ocean, and beheld a great
many ships and galleys ready to battle one against another: And thus I spent my
journey, being gone a year and a half, and then returned home to Wittenburg.

CHAP. XVII. How Faustus had a Sight of Paradise.
AFTER this Dr. Faustus set forth again to visit the Countries of Spain,
Portugal, France, England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Muscovy, India,
Africa, Persia, and lastly, into Barbaria, amongst the Blackamoors; and in all
his wandering, he was desirous to visit the ancient monuments, and mighty
hills; amongst the rest, beholding the high hill, called Teneriffe, he was
desirous to rest upon it. From thence he went into the isle of Britain, wherein
he was greatly delighted to see the fair water and warm baths, the diverse
sorts of metal, with many precious stones, and diverse other commodities, which
Faustus brought thence with him. He was also at the Orcades behind Scotland,
where he saw the tree that brings forth fruit, that when it is ripe, opens,
and falls into water, wherein ingendereth a certain kind of sowl or bird:
These islands are in number twenty three, but ten of them are not inhabited.
From thence he went to the hill Caucasus, which is the highest in all the
tropic; it lies near the borders of Scythia; hereupon Faustus stood, and
beheld many lands and kingdoms: Faustus being on such a hill, thought to look
over all the world, and beyond; for he went to Paradise, but he durst not
commune with his spirit thereof; and being on the hill Caucasus, he saw the
whole land of India and Scythia, and as he looked toward the East he saw a
mighty clear streak of fire coming from heaven upon earth, even as if it had
been one of the beams of the sun. He saw in the water four mighty waters
springing, one had its course toward India, the second toward Egypt, the
third and fourth toward Armenia: When he saw these, he would needs know of his
spirit, what waters they were, and from whence they came? his spirit gave him
gently an answer, saying, It is Paradise that lies so far in the East, the
garden that God himself has planted with all manner of pleasure; and the fiery
streams which thou see, is the wall or fence of the garden: But the clear
light which thou see afar off, that is the Angel that has the custody
thereof, with a fiery sword; and although thou think thyself to be hard by,
thou have yet farther thither from hence, than thou have ever been. The water
that thou see divided into four parts, is the water that issues out of the
well in the middle of Paradise. The first is called Ganges or Pison, the second
Gihon the third Tygris, and the fourth Euphrates; also thou see that he
stands under Libra and Aries, right toward the Zenith; and upon this fiery
wall stands the Angel Michael, with his flaming sword, to keep the tree of
life, which he has in in charge. But the spirit said to Faustus, neither thou,
nor I, nor any afler us, yea, all men whatsoever, are denied to visit and come
any nearer than we be.

CHAP. XVIII. Another question put forth by Dr. Faustus concerning the stars.
THERE was a learned man of the town of Halberstat, named N. W. who invited Dr.
Faustus unto his table, but falling into communication before supper was ready,
they looked out of the window, and seeing many stars in the firmament; this man
being a doctor of physic, and a good astrologician, said to Dr. Faustus, I have
invited you as my guest, hoping you will take in good part with me, and withal,
I request you to impart some of your experience in the stars and planets; and
seeing a star fall he said, Faustus, what is the condition, quality or
greatness of the stars in the firmament? Faustus answered him, my friend and
brother, you see that the stars that fall from heaven, when they come to the
earth, they be very small to our thinking, as candles, but being fixed in the
firmament, there are many as great as the city, some as great as a province or
dukedom, others as great as the whole earth, other some far greater than the
earth twelve times, and from the height of the heavens there is scarce any
earth to be seen, yea, the planets in the heavens are some so great as this
land, some so great as the whole empire of Rome, some as Turkey, yea, some as
great as the whole world.

CHAP. XIX. How Faustus was asked a Question concerning spirits.
BUT I pray you in what kind or manner do spirits use to vex men so little by
day, and so greatly by night? Dr. Faustus answered, because the spirits are of
God forbidden the light, their dwelling is in darkness, and the clearer the sun
shines, the farther the spirits have their abiding from it; but in the night
when it is dark, they have their familiarity and abiding near unto us men. For
in the night we see not the sun, yet the brightness thereof so lights the
first moving of the firmament, as it does here on earth in the day, by which
reason we are able to see the stars and planets in the night; even so the rays
of the sun piercing up in the firmament, the spirits abandon the place, and so
come near us on Earth, the darkness filling our heads with heavy dreams and
strong fancies, with shrieking and crying in many deformed shapes. And
sometimes when men go forth without light, there falls to them a fear, that
their hair stands up an end; so many start in their sleep, thinking there is
a spirit by them, groping or feeling for him, going round about the house in
their sleep, and many such like fancies; and all this is, because in the night
the spirits are more familiarly by us, then we are desirous of their company,
and so they carry us, blinding us, and plaguing us more than we are able to
perceive.

CHAP. XX. How Faustus was asked a Question concerning thunder.
IN the month of August, there was over Wittingburg a mighty great lightning
and thunder; and as Dr. Faustus was jesting merrily in the marketplace with
certain of his friends and companions, being physicians, desired him to tell
them the cause of that weather: Faustus answered, it has been commonly seen
heretofore that before a thunderclap fell a shower of rain, or a gale of wind,
commonly after a wind falls rain, and after rain a thunderclap; such
thickness comes to pass when the four winds meet together in the Heavens, the
airy clouds are by force beaten against the fixed crystal firmament, they are
congealed, and so strike, and rush against the firmament, as great pieces of
ice, when they meet on the water: Then each other sounds in our ears, and
that we call thunder, which indeed was none other than you have heard.

CHAP. XXI. Dr. Faustus 's merry conceits, showing after what sort he practiced
Necromancy.
THE Emperor Charles, the fifth of the name was personally, with the rest of
his nobles and gentlemen, at the town of Zutzbruck, where he kept his court,
unto the which also Dr. Faustus resorted and being there well known of diverse
nobles and gentlemen, he was invited into the court to meet even in the
presence of the emperor, whom when the emperor saw, he looked earnestly upon
him, thinking by his look^ he was some wonderful fellow* Wherefore he asked one
of his nobles whom he should be? He answered that he was called Dr. Faustus:
Then said the emperor, Faustus, my hearty desire is, that thou would
vouchsafe to let me see that Alexander and his paramour, the which was praised
to be so fair; and I pray thee show me them in such sort as that I may see
their personage, shape, gesture and apparel, and that here before my face, to
that end that I may say, I have had my long desire fulfilled, and to praise
thee to be a famous man in the art and experience. Dr. Faustus answered, my
most excellent lord, I am ready to accomplish your request in all things, so
far forth as I and my spirit are able to perform; yet your majesty shall know,
that their dead bodies are not able fubstantially to be brought before you; but
such spirits as have seen Alexander and his paramour alive, shall appear unto
you in manner and form as they both lived in their most flourishing time; and
herewith I hope to please your imperial majesty. Then Faustus went a little
aside and spoke unto his spirit, but he returned again presently, saying, now
if it please your majesty you shall see them; yet upon this condition, that you
demand no question of them, nor speak unto them, which the emperor agreed unto.
Whereupon Dr. Faustus opened the privy-chamber door, where presently entered
the great and mighty emperor Alexander Magnus, in all things to look upon as if
he had been alive; in proportion, a strong set thick man, of a middle stature,
black hair, and that both thick and curled, head and beard, red cheeks, and a
broad face, with eyes like a Basilisk; he had a complete harness, furbished and
engraven, exceedingly rich to look upon, and so passing toward the emperor,
Carolus would have stood up to receive and greet him with the like reverence:
But Faustus took hold on him, and would not permit him to do it. Shortly after
Alexander made humble reverence, and went out again, and coming to the door,
his paramour met him: She coming in, made the emperor likewise reverence; she
was clothed in blue velvet, wrought and embroidered with pearl and gold; she
was also excellent fair, like blood and milk mixed, tall and slender, with a
face as round as an apple, and thus they passed certain times up and down the
house, which the emperor marking, said to himself, now have I seen two persons
which my heart has long wished to behold; and sure it cannot otherwise be
(said he to himself) but that the spirits have changed themselves into these
forms, and have but deceived me, calling to mind the woman, that raised the
prophet Samuel: And for that the emperor should be more satisfied in the matter
he said I have often heard that behind in her heck, she had a great wart or
wen, wherefore he took Faustus by the hand without any words, and went to see
if it were to be seen on her or not: But she perceiving that he came to her,
bowed down her neck, where he saw a great wart, and hereupon she vanished,
leaving the emperor and the rest well contented.

CHAP. XXII. How Dr. Faustus in the Sight of the emperor conjured a pair of
hart's Horns on a Knight's Head.
WHEN Dr. Faustus had accomplished the emperor's desire in all things, as he
was requested, he went forth into the gallery, and leaning over a rail, to look
into the privy-garden, he saw many of the emperor's courtiers walking and
talking to gether, and casting his eyes now this way, now that way, he espied a
Knight leaning out of a window of the great hall, who was fast asleep, (for in
those days it was very hot.) Dr. Faustus, through the help of his spirit
Mephostophiles, fixed on his head, as he slept, a huge pair of hart's horns;
and as the Knight awaked, thinking to pull in his head, he hit his horns
against the glass, that the panes thereof flew about his ears. Think here how
this good gentleman was vexed, for he could neither get backward nor forward:
Which when the emperor heard, all the courtiers laughed, and came to see what
had happened: The Emperor also, when he beheld the Knight with so fair a head,
laughed heartily thereat, and was therewith well pleased. At last Faustus made
him quit of his horns again, but the Knight perceived not how they came.

CHAP. XXIII. How Dr. Faustus borrowed Money of a Jew.
IT is a common proverb in Germany, that although a conjurer have all things at
command, the day will come that he shall not be worth a penny; so it is like to
fall out with Dr. Faustus, in promising the Devil so largely; but as the Devil
is the author of all lies, even so he led Faustus's mind in practicing things
to deceive the people, and binding them, wherein he took his whole delight,
thereby to bring himself to riches; notwithstanding in the end, he was never
the richer; and although during 24 years of his time that the Devil set him he
wanted nothing; yet he was best pleased when he might deceive any body. For out
of the mightiest potentates' courts in those countries, he would send his
spirit to fetch away their best cheer. And on a time being in his merriment,
and banqueting with other students in an inn thereunto resorted many Jews;
which when Dr. Faustus perceived, he was minded to play a merry jest to deceive
a Jew, desiring one of them to lend him some money for a time; the Jew was
content, and lent Faustus threescore dollars for a month, which time being
expired, the Jew came for his money and interest; but Faustus was never minded
to pay the Jew again; at length the Jew coming home to his house, and asking
for his money, Dr. Faustus made him this answer; Jew, I have no money, nor know
I how to pay thee; but to the end thou may be contented, I will cut off a
limb of my body, be it arm or leg, and the same thou shall have in pawn for thy
money; yet with this condition, that when I pay thee thy money then thou shall
give me my limb. The Jew that never was a friend to a Christian, thought with
himself, this fellow is right for my purpose, that will lay his limbs in pawn
for money, and was therewith very well content: Wherefore Dr. Faustus took a
saw, and therewith seemed to cut of his leg, but not withstanding he did not
so. Well, he gave it to the Jew. The Jew took his leg, and departed; and having
far home, he was some what weary, and by the way he thus bethought himself;
what avails me a knave's leg? If I should carry it home, it would stink, and
infect my house; besides, it is a hard piece of work to set it on again;
wherefore what an ass was Faustus to lay so great a pawn for so small a sum of
money? And for my part, (quoth the Jew to himself) this will never profit me
any thing; and with these words, he threw the leg into a ditch. All this
Faustus knew right well, therefore within three days after, he sent for the Jew
to make him payment of his sixty dollars: The Jew came and Faustus demanded his
pawn, there was his money ready for him. The Jew answered, the pawn was not
profitable nor necessary for any thing, so I threw it away: But Faustus
threatening, replied, I will have my leg again, or one of thine for it. The Jew
promised to give him what money he would ask, if he would not deal strictly
with him; wherefore the Jew was forced to give him sixty dollars more to be rid
of him, and yet Faustus had his leg on, for he had but blinded the Jew.

CHAP. XXIV. How Dr. Faustus deceived a Horse Courser.
AFTER this manner he deceived a horse-courser, at a fair called Pheifering;
for Faustus through his conjuring had gotten an excellent fairhorse; whereupon
he rid to the fair, where he had many chapmen that offered his money: At last
he sold him for forty dollars, and willing him that bought him, that he he
should not, by any means, ride him over the water; but the horse courser
marvelled with himself, that Faustus did not ride over no water: But, quoth he,
I will try, and forthwith he rode him into the river; and presently the horse
vanished from under him, and he was left on a bottle of straw, insomuch that he
was almost drowned: The horse-courser knew well where he lay that had sold him
his horse whereupon he went to his inn, where he found Dr. Faustus asleep, and
snoring on his bed; but he pulled him so that he pulled his leg from his body
insomuch that the horse-courser fell backwards in the place; then began Faustus
to cry out with open throat he has murdered me! hereat the horse-courser was
afraid, and ran away, thinking that he had pulled his leg off. By this means
Dr. Faustus kept his money.

CHAP. XXV. How Dr. Faustus eat a Load of Hay.
DR. Faustus being at a town in Germany, called Zwickow, where he was
accompanied with many doctors and masters, and walking cut after supper, they
met a man driving a load of hay: Good fellow, said Faustus, what shall I give
thee to let me eat my belly full of hay? The man thought with himself that he
was a madman, to talk of eating of hay, and that he could not eat much: They
agreed for three farthings he should eat as much as he would; now Dr. Faustus
began to eat, and so ravenously, that all the rest of the company fell a
laughing: blinding so the poor man, that he was sorry at his heart, for he
seemed to have eaten more than half of the hay; wherefore the man began to
speak him fair, for fear he should have eaten the other half also: Faustus made
as though he had pity on the man, and went away; when the man came in the place
where he would be, he had his hay again, as he had before, a full load.

CHAP. XXVII. How Dr. Faustus sold five Swine for fix dollars a piece.
DR. Faustus began another jest; he made ready five fat swine, the which he
sold to one for six dollars a piece; upon this consideration, that the swine
driver should not drive them into the water. Dr. Faustus went home again, and
as the swine had fouled themselves in the mud, the swine driver drove them into
the water, where presently they changed into so many bundles of straw. The
buyer looked sorrowfully at them, but knew not where to find Faustus; so he was
content to let all go, and loose both money and hogs.

CHAP. XXIII. How Dr. Faustus played a merry Jest with the Duke of Anhalt, in
his court.
DR. Faustus on a time went to the duke of Anhalt, who welcomed him very
courteously, it being in the month of January; where siting at the table he
perceived the Duchess to be with child; and forbearing till the meat was taken
from the table, and the banqueting dishes were brought in; Faustus said to the
Duchess, gracious lady I have always heard that great bellied women long for
dainties; I beseech therefore your grace, hide not your mind from me, but tell
me what you desire to eat: She answered him Dr. Faustus, now truly I will not
hide from you what my heart does desire, namely, that if it were now harvest
time, I would eat my belly full of grapes, and other dainty fruit: Dr. Faustus
answered, gracious lady, this is a small thing for me to do, for I can do more
than this; wherefore he took a plate, and set it upon one of the casements of
the window, holding it forth, where incontinent he had his dish full of all
manner of fruit, as red and white grapes, pears and apples, which came out of
strange Countries: All of these he presented to the Duchess, saying, madam, I
pray you vouchsafe to taste of this dainty fruit, which came from a far
country, for there the summer is not yet ended. The Duchess thanked Faustus
highly, and fell to her fruit, with full appetite. The Duke of Anhalt
notwithstanding, could not forbear asking Faustus the reason that there were
such young fruits to be had at that time of the year? Faustus told him, may it
please your grace to understand, that the year is divided into two circles of
the whole world, that when with us it is winter, in the contrary circle it is
notwithstanding summer; for in India and Saba, there falls or sets a sun,
so that it is so warm, that they have twice a year fruit; and gracious lord, I
have a swift spirit, which can in a twinkling of an eye fulfill my desire in
any thing; wherefore I sent him into those countries, who has brought this
fruit that you see; whereat the Duke greatly admired.

CHAP. XXIX. How Dr. Faustus with his company visited the Bishop Saltsburg 's
Wine Cellar.
DR. Faustus having taken leave of the Duke, he went to Wittenburg, about
shrove-tide, and being in company with certain students, Faustus was himself
the god Bacchus, who having well feasted the students before with dainty fair,
after the manner of Germany, where it is counted no feast unless all the bidden
guests be drunk, which Faustus intending, said, gentlemen, and my guests, will
it please you to take a cup of wine with me, in a place or cellar whereunto I
will bring you? They all said willingly, we will, which when Dr. Faustus heard,
he took them forth, set each of them upon a holly wand, and so was conjured
into the Bishop of Saltsburg's cellar, for thereabouts grew excellent pleasant
wine; there fell Faustus and his company to drinking and swilling of the best.
And as they were merry in the cellar, came to draw drink the Bishop's butler;
who when be perceived so many people there, he cried with a loud voice,
thieves! thieves! this spighted Faustus wonderfully, wherefore he made every
one of his company to sit on their holly wand, and so vanished away; and in
parting. Faustus took the butler by the hair of his head, and carried him away
with them, until they came to a very high lopped tree; and on the top of that
huge tree he set the butler, where he remained in a most fearful perplexity.
Dr. Faustus departed to his house, where they took their vale^, one after
another, drinking the wine that they had stolen in their bottles out of the
Bishop's cellar. The butler that had held himself by the hands upon the tree
all the night, was almost frozen with cold, espying the day, and seeing the
tree of great height, thought with himself it is impossible to come off this
tree without peril of death; at length espying certain clowns passing by, he
cried, for the love of God help me down! The clowns seeing him so high,
wondered what madman would climb up so huge a tree; wherefore as a thing most
miraculous, they carried the tidings to the Eishop of Saltsburg: then was there
great running on every side to see him on the tree; and many devices they
practiced to get him down with ropes; and being demanded of the Bishop how he
came there? He said that he was brought thither by the hair of his head, by
certain thieves that were robbing the wine-cellar; but what they were he knew
not; for, said he, they had faces like men, but they acted like Devils.

CHAP. XXX. How Faustus feasted his Guests on Ash Wednesday.
UPON Ash Wednesday came unto Dr. Faustus his bidden guests, the students, whom
he feasted very royally; insomuch that they were all full and lusty; and when
the high glasses and goblets were caroused one to another, Faustus began to
play them some merry feats; insomuch that round about the hall was heard a most
pleasant music, and that in sundry places; in this corner a lute, in another a
cornet, cittern, etc. In fine, all manner of music was heard there in that
instant, whereat all the glasses and goblets, cups and pots that stood upon the
board, began to dance; then Dr. Faustus took ten stone pots, and set them down
on the floor, where presently they began to dance, and to mite one against
another, that the shivers flew round about the house, at which the whole
company fell a laughing: Then began the other jest; he set an instument upon
the table, and caused a mighty great ape to come against them, which ape began
to dance and skip, showing them merry conceits. In this and such pastime, they
passed away the whole day; when night being come, Dr. Faustus bid them all to
supper, which they agreed to; for students in these cases are easily entreated;
where he promised to treat them with a banquet of fowl, and afterward they
would go all about with a mask. Then Dr. Faustus put forth a long pole out of
the window, whereupon presently came innumerable birds and wild fowl, and so
many as came, had not power to fly away again; but he took them, and flung them
to the students, who lightly pulled of the necks of them, and being roasted,
then made their supper; which being ended, they made themselves ready for the
mask. Dr. Faustus commanded every one to put on a clean shirt over their
clothes; which being done they looked upon one another; it seemed to each one
of them, that they had no heads; and so they went forth unto certain of their
neighbors, at which sight the people were most wonderfully frighted; and as
the custom of Germany is, that wheresoever a mask enters, the good man of the
house must feast them: So as these masks were set to their banquet, they seemed
again in their former shape, with their heads, insomuch, that they were all
known who they were; and having sat, and well eat and drank, Dr. Faustus made
that every one had an ass's head on, with great and long ears, so they fell to
dancing, and to drive away the time, until it was midnight, and then every one
departed home; and as soon as they were out of the house, each one was in his
natural shape, and so they ended, and went to sleep.

CHAP. XXXI. How Dr. Faustus conjured the four Wheels from a Countryman's
Wagon.
DR. Faustus was sent for to come to the marshal of Brunswick, who was
marvellously troubled with the falling sickness, now Faustus had his quality;
he seldom rid, but walked on foot, to ease himself when he list, and as he went
unto to the town of Brunswick there overtook him a countryman with four horses
and a wagon; to whom Dr. Faustus (jesting to try him) said, I pray thee, good
fellow, let me ride a little to ease my weary legs; which the buzzardly ass
denied, saying, that his horses were weary, and he would not let him get up:
Dr. Faustus did this to prove this countryman, if there were any courtesy to be
found in him, if need were; but such churlishness is usually found among
clowns; but he was requited by Faustus, even with the like payment; for he said
to him, thou doatish clown, void of all humanity, seeing thou art of so
churlish a disposition, I will pay thee as thou have deserved, for the four
wheels of thy wagon thou shall have taken from thee; let me see then how thou
can shift? whereupon his wheels were gone, his horses fell also down to the
ground as though they had been dead: Whereat the countryman was sore
affrighted, and measured it as a just scourge of God for his sins and
churlishness; wherefore with a trembling, and wailing he humbly besought Dr.
Faustus to be good unto him, confessing he was not worthy of it;
notwithstanding if it pleased him to forgive him, he would hereafter do better;
which submission made Faustus's heart to relent, answering him on this manner:
Well, do so no more, but when a poor man desires thee, see that thou let him
ride; but yet thou shall not go altogether free, for although thou have again
thy four wheels, yet thou shall fetch them at the four gates of the city; s^^e
threw dust on the horses, and revived them again; and the countryman for his
churlishness, was fain to fetch his wheels, spending his time with weariness,
whereas if before he had showed a little kindness, he might quietly have gone
about his business.

CHAP. XXXII. How four Jugglers cut one another's Heads off, and set them on
again, and Faustus deceived them.
DR. Faustus came in lent unto Frankland Fair, where his spirit Mephostophiles
gave him to understand that in an inn were four Jugglers that cut one another's
heads off, and after their cutting off, sent them to the barber to be trimmed,
which many people saw. This angered Faustus, for he meant himself to be the
only cook in the Devil's banquet, and went to the place where they were, to
beguile them; and as the Jugglers were together, ready one to cut off another's
head, there stood also the barber ready to trim them, and by them upon the
table stood likewise a glass full of stilled waters, and he that was the
chiefest among them, stood by it. Thus they began; they smote off the head of
the first and presently there was a lilly in the glass of distilled waters,
where Faustus perceived this lilly as it was springing; and the chief Juggler
named it the Tree of Life: Thus dealt he with the first, making the barber wash
and comb his head, and then he set it on again; presently the lilly vanished
away out of the water; hereat the man had his head whole and sound again; the
like he did with the other two; and as the turn and lot came to the chief
Juggler, that he should also be beheaded, and that his lilly was most pleasant,
and flourishing green, they smote his head off, and when it came to be
barbered, it troubled Faustus's conscience, insomuch that he could not abide to
see another do any thing, for he thought himself to be the chiefest conjurer in
the world: Wherefore Dr. Faustus went to the table, whereat the other Juggler
kept the lilly, and so he took a small knife, and cut off the head of the
lilly, saying to himself, None of them shall deceive Faustus. Yet no man saw
Faustus to cut the lilly; but when the rest of Jugglers thought to have set on
their master's head, they could not; wherefore they looked on the lilly, and
found it bleeding; by this means the Juggler was beguiled, and so died in his
wickedness. Yet no one thought that Dr. Faustus had done it.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Dr. Faustus wrote the second time with his own blood, and
gave it to the Devil.
I Dr. John Faustus, do acknowledge by this my deed and hand writing, which is
seven years past, I have right willingly held, and have been an utter enemy to
God and all men; the which I once again confirm, and give fully and wholly
myself unto the Devil, both body and soul, even unto great Lucifer; and that at
the end of seven years ensuing after the date thereof, he shall have to do with
me according as it pleases him either to lengthen or shorten my life, as
pleases him; and herein I renounce all persuaders that seek to withdraw me
from my purpose by the word of God, either ghostly or bodily: And farther, I
will never give ear to any man, be he spiritual or temporal, that moves any
matter for the salvation of my soul. Of this writing, and that therein
contained, be witness my blood, which with my own hands I have begun and ended.
Dated at Wittenburg the 25th of July.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Dr. Faustus made a Marriage between two Lovers.
IN the city of Wittenburg was a student, a gallant gentleman named N. N. This
gentleman was far in love with a gentlewoman, sair and proper in personage;
this gentlewoman had a Knight that was a suitor unto her, and many other
gentlemen, which desired her in marriage, but none could obtain her. So it was
that he fell in despair with himself, and pined away to skin and bone: But when
he opened the matter to Dr. Faustus, he asked counsel of his Mephostophiles,
the which told him what to do. Hereupon Dr. Faustus went home to the gentleman,
and bid him be of good cheer, for he should have his desire, for he would help
him to that he wished for, and that this gentlewoman should love none other but
him only. Wherefore Dr. Faustus so changed the mind of the damsel by the
practice he wrought, that she could do no other thing but think on him, whom
before she had hated, neither cared she for any man but him alone. The device
was thus; Faustus commanded the gentleman that he should clothe himself in all
the best apparel that he had, and that he should go unto the gentlewoman, and
show himself, giving him a ring, commanding him in any wise that he should
dance with her before he departed; who following his counsel, went to her, and
when they began to dance, they that were suitors, began to take every one his
lady by the hand; this gentleman took her who before had so disdained him, and
in the dance he put the ring into her hand, that Faustus had given him, which
she no sooner touched, but she fell presently in love with him, smiling at him
in the dance, and many times winking at him, rolling her eyes, and in the end
she asked him if he could love her, and make her his wife. He gladly answered
that he was content; whereupon they concluded, and were married by the means
and help of Faustus, for which the gentleman well rewarded him.

CHAP. XXXV. How Dr. Faustus led his Friends into his Garden at Christmas, and
showed them many strange sights, in the Nineteenth Year.
IN December about Christmas, in the city of Wittenburg were many gentlemen,
which were come out of the country to be merry with their friends, among whom
there were certain well acquainted with Dr. Faustus, who often invited them
home unto his house; they being there on a certain time, after dinner he had
them into his garden, where they beheld all manner of flowers and fresh herbs,
and trees bearing fruit, and blossoms of all sorts; who wondered to see that
this garden should flourish at that time, as in the midst of the summer, when
abroad the streets, and all the country lay full of snow and ice; wherefore
this was noted by them as a thing miraculous, every one gathering and carrying
away all such things as they liked, and so departed, delighted with their sweet
smelling flowers, making good the words of the poet: He wrought such Wonders by
his Magic Skill,
That all the World might talk of Faustus still.


CHAP. XXXVI. How Dr. Faustus gathered together a great Army of Men in his
Extremity, against a Knight that would have conjured him on his Journey.
DR. Faustus traveled toward Evzeleben, and when he was nigh half the way, he
espied seven horsemen, and the chief of them he knew to be the Knight with whom
he had jested in the Emperor's court, for he had set a great pair of hart's
horns upon his head; and when the Knight now saw fit opportunity to be revenged
of Faustus, he and those that were with him, ran upon him to mischief him,
intending privily to slay him; which when Faustus espied, he vanished away into
a wood that was hard by them; but when the Knight perceived that he was
vanished away, he caused his men to stand still; but where they remained, they
heard all manner of warlike instruments of music, as drums, flutes, trumpets,
and such like; and a certain troop of horsemen rushing toward them; then they
turned another way, and were also met on that side; then another way, and yet
were freshly assaulted; so that which way soever they turned themselves, they
were encountered, insomuch that when the Knight perceived that he could escape
no way, but that his enemies lay on him which way soever he offered to fly, he
took good heart and ran amongst the thickest and thought with himself it was
better to die than to live with so great infamy: Therefore being at handy blows
with them, he demanded the cause, why they should so use them? But none of them
would give him answer, until Dr. Faustus showed himself unto the knight;
whereupon they enclosed him round, and Dr. Faustus said unto him, Sir, yield
your weapon and yourself, otherwise it will go hard with you. The knight
knowing no other, but that he was conjured with a host of men, whereas indeed
they were none other but devils, yielded: Then Faustus took away his sword, his
piece and horse, with all the rest of his company. And farther, he said unto
him, Sir, the chiefest general of our army has commanded me to deal with you
according to the law of arms, you shall depart in peace; and then he gave the
Knight a horse after the manner, and set him thereon; so he rode, the rest went
on foot, until they came unto their inn, where he being alighted, his page rode
on the horse to the water, and presently the horse vanished away, the page
being almost sunk and drowned; but he escaped, and coming home, the Knight
perceived the page to be bemired and on foot, asked where his horse was? Who
answered, that he was vanished away; which when the Knight heard, he said, of a
truth this is Faustus's doing, for he served me now, as he did before at the
court, only to make me a scorn and laughing stock.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Dr. Faustus used Mephostophiles, to bring him seven of the
fairest Women he could find in all the Counries he had traveled in the Twenty
Years.
WHEN Dr. Faustus called to mind that his time from day to day drew nigh, he
began to live a swinish and epicurish life: Wherefore he commanded his spirit
Mephostophiles to bring him seven of the fairest women that he had seen in all
the time of his travel; which being brought, first to one, then another, he lay
with them all, insomuch that he liked them so well, that he continued with them
in all manner of love, and made them to travel with him all his journies; these
women were two Netherland, one Hungarion, one Scottish, two Walloon, and one
Franklander. And with those sweet personages he continued long, yea, even to
his last end.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Dr. Faustus served the drunken Clowns.
DR. Faustus went into an inn, wherein were many tables full of clowns, the
which were tippling can after can of excellent wine; and to be short, they were
all drunken, and as they sat, they so sang and hallooed, that one could not
hear a man speak for them; this angered Dr. Faustus, wherefore he said to them
that called him in, mark, my masters, I will show you a merry jest: The clowns
continued still hallooing and singing; he conjured them that their mouths stood
as wide open as it was possible for them to hold them, and never a one of them,
was able to close his mouth again; by and by the noise was gone: the clowns
notwithstanding looked earnestly upon one another, and knew not what was
happened; one by one they went out, and so soon as they came without, they were
all as well as ever they were; but none of them desired to go in any more.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Dr. Faustus found a mass of Money, when he had consumed
Twenty two of his Years.
TO the end that the Devil would make Faustus his only heir, he showed unto him
where he should go and find a mighty huge mass of money, and that he should
find it in an old chapel that was fallen down, half a mile distant from
Wittenburg: There he bid him to dig, and he should find it, which he did: And
having dug reasonably deep, he saw a mighty huge serpent, which lay on the
treasure itself. The treasure itself lay like a huge light burning, but Dr.
Faustus charmed the serpent, that he crept into an hole, and when he dug
deeper to get up the treasure, he found nothing but coals of fire: There he
also saw and heard many that were tormented; yet notwithstanding he brought
away the coals, and when he was come home, it was turned into silver and gold,
and after his death it was found by his servant; which was almost by
estimation, one thousand guilders.

CHAP. XL. How Dr. Faustus made the spirit of fair Helena of Greece his own
Paramour and Bed fellow in his Twenty third Year.
TO the end that this miserable Faustus might fill the lust of his flesh, and
live in all manner of voluptuous pleasure, it came in his mind, after he had
slept his first sleep, and in the twenty third year past of his time, that he
had a great desire to lie with fair Helena of Greece, especially her whom he
had seen, and showed unto the students at Wittenburg: Wherefore he called his
spirit Mephostophiles, commanding him to bring unto him the fair Helena; which
he also did: whereupon he fell in love with her, and made her his concubine and
bedfellow; for she was so beautiful a piece, that he could not be an hour from
her, if he should therefore have suffered death; she had stolen away his heart,
and to his seeming in time she was with child, whom Faustus named Justus
Faustus. The child told Dr. Faustus many things which were done in foreign
countries; but in the end, when Faustus lost his life, the mother and the child
vanished away both together.

CHAP. XLI. How Dr. Faustus made his Will, in which he made his Servant Wagger
to be his Heir.
DR. Faustus was now in his twenty fourth and last year, and he had a pretty
stripling to his servant, which had studied also to the university of
Wittenburg: This youth was very well acquainted with his knaveries and
sorceries, so that he was hated as well for his own knavery, as also for his
master's; for no man would give him entertainment into his service, because of
his unhappiness, but Faustus. This Wagger was so well beloved by Faustus, that
he used him as his son, for do what he would, his master was always contented.
And then when the time drew nigh, that Faustus should end, he called unto him a
notary, and certain masters, the which were his friends, and often conversant
with him, in whose presence he gave Wagger his house and garden. Item, he gave
him in ready money sixteen thousand guilders. Item, one farm. Item, a gold
chain, much plate and other household stuff, that gave he to his servant; and
the rest of his time he meant to spend in inns and student's company, drinking
and eating, with other jollity: And thus he finished his will at that time.

CHAP. XLII. How Dr. Faustus fell in talking with his Servant, touching his
Testament, and the Covenant thereof.
NOW when this will was made, Dr. Faustus called unto his servant, saying, I
have thought of thee in my testament, for that thou have been a trusty servant
unto me, and faithful, and have not opened my secrets: And yet farther (said
he) ask of me before I die, what thou will, and I will give it thee. His
servant rashly answered, I pray you let me have your cunning; to which Dr.
Faustus answered I have given thee all my books, upon this condition, that thou
would not let them be common, but use them for thy own pleasure, and study
carefully in them; and do thou also desire my cunning? That thou may
peradventure have, if thou love and peruse my books well. Farther, said Dr.
Faustus, seeing that thou desire of me this request, I will resolve thee; my
spirit Mephostophiles his time it out with me, and I have naught to command
him, as touching thee: Yet I will help thee to another, if thou like well
thereof. And within three days after, he called his servant unto him, saying,
art thou resolved, would thou verily have a spirit? Then tell me in what
manner and form thou would have him? To whom his servant answered, that he
would have him in the form of an ape: Whereupon appeared presently a spirit
unto him, in manner and form of an ape, the which leaped about the house. Then
said Faustus, see, there thou have thy request; but yet he will not obey thee
until I be dead; for when my spirit Mephostopholes shall fetch me away, then
shall thy spirit be bound unto thee, if thou agree; and thy spirit shall thou
name Aberacock, for so he is called: But all this upon a condition that thou
publish my cunning, and my merry conceits, with all that I have done (when I am
dead) in an history, and if thou can not remember all, the spirit Aberacock
will help thee; so shall the acts that I have done be made manifest unto the
world.

CHAP. XLIII. How Dr. Faustus having but one Month of his appointed time to
come, fell to Mourning and Sorrowing with himself for his Devilish exercise.
TIME ran away with Faustus as the hour glass; for he had but one month to come
of his twenty four years, at the end whereof he had given himself to the Devil,
body and soul, as is before specified. Here was the first token, for he was
like a taken murderer or a thief, the which finding himself gailty in
conscience before the judge have given sentence, fears every hour to die; for
he was grieved, and in wailing spent the time, went talking to himself,
wringing of his hands, sobbing and sighing, his flesh fell away, and he was
very lean, and kept himself close, neither could he abide to see or hear of
Mephostophiles any more.

CHAP. XLIV. How Dr. Faustus complained that he should in his lusty Time and
youthful Years die so miserable.
THE sorrowful time drawing near, so troubled Dr. Faustus, that he began to
write his mind, to the end that he might peruse it often, and not forget it,
which was in manner as follows, ah! Faustus, thou sorrowful and woeful man,
now must thou go to the damnable company in unquenchable fire, whereas thou
might have had the joyful immortality of thy soul, the which now thou have
lost! Ah! gross understanding, and wilful will! what seizes upon thy limbs,
other than robbing of my life? Bewail with me my senses for you have had your
part and pleasure as well as I. Oh! envy and disdain! How have you crept both
at once upon me: And now for your sake I must suffer all these torments. Ah!
whither is pity and compassion fled? upon what occasion has heaven repayed me
with this reward, by sufferance, to suffer me to perish? wherefore was I
created a man? The punishment I see prepared for me of myself, now must I
suffer. Ah miserable wretch! There is nothing in this world to show me comfort!
Then woe is me! What helps my wailing?

CHAP. XLV. How Dr. Faustus bewailed to think on Hell, and the miserable Pains
therein provided for him.
NOW thou Faustus, damned wretch! how happy were thou if, as unreasonable
beast, thou might die without a soul? So should thou not feel any more
doubts; but now the Devil will take thee away both body and soul, and set in an
unspeakable place of darkness; for although other souls have rest and peace,
yet I, poor damned wretch, must suffer all manner of filthy stench, pains,
cold, hunger, thirst, heat, freezing, burning, hissing, gnashing, and all the
wrath and curse, of God; yea, all the creatures that God has created are
enemies to me. And too late I remember that my spirit Mephostophiles did tell
me there was a great difference amongst the damned, for the greater the sin the
greater the torment; as the twigs of a tree make greater flames than the trunk
thereof, and yet the trunk continues longer in burning; even so the more that
a man is rooted in sin, the greater is his punishment. Ah! thou perpetual
damned wretch: How art thou thrown into the everlasting fiery lake, that shall
never be quenched; there must I dwell in all manner of wailing, forrow, misery,
pain, torment, grief, howling, sobbing, rubbing at the eyes, stinking at the
nose, gnashing, of teeth, smart to the ears, horror to the conscience, and
shaking both of head and feet? Ah! that I could carry the Heavens upon my
shoulders, so that there were time at last to quit me of this everlasting
damnation. Oh; what can deliver me out of the fearful tormenting flame, the
which I see prepared for me! Oh! There is no help, nor can any man deliver me;
nor my wailing of sins can help me; neither is there rest for me to be found
day or night. Ah! Woe is me! for there is no help for me, no shield, no
defense, no comforter; where is my help! knowledge dare I not trust; and for a
soul to Godwards, that have I not; for I am ashamed to speak unto him; if I do,
no answer shall be made me; but he will hide his face from me, to the end, that
I should not behold the joys of the chosen. What mean I then to complain where
no help is? No, I know no hope rests in my groanings; I have desired it would
be so, and God has said amen to my misdoings; for now I must have shame to
comfort me in my calamities.

CHAP. XLV Here followed the miserable and lamentable end of Dr. Faustus, by
which all christians may take an example and warning.
THE full time of Dr. Faustus his four and twenty years being come, his spirit
appeared unto him, giving him his writing again, and commanding him to make
preparation, for that the Devil would fetch him against a certain time
appointed. Dr. Faustus mourned and sighed wonderfully, and never went to bed,
nor slept a wink for sorrow, wherefore his spirit appeared again, comforting
him, and saying, My Faustus, be not thou so cowardly minded; for although thou
love thy body, it is long unto the day of judgment, and thou must die at
last, although thou live many thousand years: The Turks, the Jews, and many an
unchristian emperor are in the same condition; therefore, my Faustus, be of
good courage, and be not discomfited, for the Devil has promised that thou
shall not be in pains as the rest of the damned are. This and such like comfort
he gave him, for he told him false,, against the saying of the holy scriptures.
Yet Dr. Faustus, that had no other expectation but to pay his debt with his own
skin, went (on the same day that his spirit said the Devil would fetch him)
unto his trusty and dearest beloved companions, as masters and batchelors of
art, and other students more, the which did often visit him at his house in
merriment; these he entreated, that they would walk into the village called
Rimlich, half a mile from Wittneburg, and that they would take with him for
their repast, a small banquet, the which they agreed unto: So they went
together, and there held their dinner in a most sumptuous manner. Dr. Faustus
with them, dissemblingly was merry, but not from the heart; wherefore he
requested them that they would also take part of his rude supper, the which
they agreed unto, For (quoth he) I must tell what is the victualler's due: And
when they slept (for drink was in their heads) then Dr. Faustus paid the shot,
and bound the students and masters to go with him into another room, for he had
many wonderful matters to tell them; and when they were entered the room, as he
requested, Dr. Faustus said unto them as follows.

CHAP. XLVII. An Oration of Dr. Faustus to the Students.
MY trusty and well beloved friends, the cause why I have invited you into this
place, is this: For as much as you have known me these many years, what manner
of life I have lived: practicing all manner of conjurations and wicked
exercises, the which I obtained through the help of the Devil, into whose
devilish fellowship they have brought me; the which use, the art and practice,
urged by the detestable provocation of my flesh, and my stiffneeked and
rebellious, will, with my filthy infernal thoughts, the which were ever before
me, pricking me forward so earnestly, that I must perforce have the consent of
the Devil to aid me in my devices. And to the end I might the better bring my
purpose to pass, to have the Devil's aid and furtherance, which I never have
wanted in my actions, I have promised him at the end and accomplishment of
twenty four years, both body and soul, to do therewith at his pleasure; this
dismal day, these twentyfour years are fully expired; for night beginning, my
hourglass is at an end, and the direful finishing whereof I carefully expect;
for out of all doubt he will fetch me to whom I have given myself in recompense
of his service, body and soul; and twice confirmed writings with my proper
blood: Now have I called you, my well beloved lords, friends and brethren,
before that fatal hour, to take my friendly farewell, to the end that my
departure may not hereafter be hidden from you, beseeching you herewith
(courteous loving lords and brethren) not to take in evil part any thing done
by me; but with friendly commendation to salute all my friends and companions
wheresoever, desiring both you and them, if ever I have trespassed against your
minds in any thing, that you would heartily forgive me; and as for those lewd
practices, these full twenty four years I have followed, you shall afterward
find them in writing; and I beseech you let this my lamentable end, to the
residue of your lives, be a sufficient warning, that you have God always before
your eyes, praying unto him, that he will defend you from the temptations of
the Devil, and all his false deceits, not falling altogether from God, as I
wretched and ungodly damned creature have done, having denied and defied
baptism, the sacrament of Christ's body, God himself, and heavenly powers and
earthly men; yea, I have denied such a God, that desires not to have one lost.
Neither let the evil fellowship of wicked companions mislead you, as it has
done me; visit earnestly and often the church; war and strive continually
against the Devil, with a good and steadfast belief in God and Jesus Christ, and
use your vocation and holiness. Lastly, to close my troubled oration, this is
my friendly request, that you would go to rest, and let nothing trouble you;
also if you chance to hear any noise or tumbling about the house, be not
therewith afraid, for there shall no evil happen unto you; also I pray you rise
not out of your beds; but above all things, I entreat you, if hereafter you
find my dead carcass, convey it into the earth, for I die both a good and bad
Christian; though I know the Devil will have thy body, and that would I
willingly give him, so that he would leave my soul to quiet; wherefore I pray
you, that you would depart to bed, and so I with you a quiet night, which unto
me, notwithstanding, shall be horrible and fearful.

This oration was made by Faustus, and that with a hearty and resolute mind, to
the end he might not discomfort them; but the students wondered greatly
thereat, that he was so blinded, for knavery, conjuration, and such foolish
things, to give his body and soul to the Devil; for they loved him entirely,
and never suspected any such thing, before he had opened his mind to them:
wherefore one of them said unto him, ah! Friend Faustus, what have you done to
conceal this matter so long from us? We would by the help of good divines, and
the grace of God, have brought you out of the net, and have torn you out of the
bondage and chains of satan, whereas we fear now it is too late to the utter
ruin both of body and soul. Dr. Faustus answered, I durst never do it although
often minded to settle myself to godly people to desire counsel and help, and
once my old neighbor counfeled me, that I should follow his learning, and
leave all my conjurations: Yet when I was minded to amend, and to follow that
good counsel, then came the Devil and would have had me a way, as this night he
is like to do; and said, so soon as I turned again to God, he would dispatch me
altogether. Thus even thus, (good gentlemen and dear friends) was I inthralled
in that fatal bond, all good desires drowned, all piety vanished, all purpose
of amendment utterly exiled, by the tyrannous oppression of my deadly enemy.
But when the students heard his words they gave him counsel to do nothing else
but call upon God, desiring him, for the love of his sweet son Jesus Christ's
sake to have mercy upon him: Teaching him this form of prayer: O God! Be
merciful unto me, poor and miserable sinner; and enter not into judgment with
me, for no flesh is able to stand before thee! although, O Lord! I must leave
my sinful body with the Devil, being by him deluded; yet thou in mercy may
preserve my soul.

This they repeated to him, yet he could take no hold: But even as Cain, he
also said, That his sins were greater than God was able to forgive. For all his
thoughts was on the Writing, he meant he had made it too pithy in writing it
with his own Blood. The Students and the others that were there, when they had
prayed for him, they wept, and so went forth; but Faustus tarried in the hall,
and when the gentlemen were laid in bed, none of them could sleep, for that
they attended to hear if they might be privy to his End. It happened that
between twelve and one o'clock at midnight, there blew a mighty storm of wind
against the House, as though it would have blown the foundation thereof out of
its Place. Hereupon the Students began to fear, and go out of their beds, but
they would not stir out of the chamber, and the host of the house ran out of
doors, thinking the house would fall. The Students lay near unto the hall,
wherein Dr. Faustus lay, and they heard a mighty noise and hissing, as if the
hall had been full of snakes and adders, with that the hall doors flew open,
wherein Dr. Faustus was, then he began to cry for help, saying, murder! much
there! but it was with half a voice, and very hollow, shortly after they heard
him no more: But when it was day, the Students that had taken no rest that
night, arose and went into the hall, in which they left Dr. Faustus, where
notwithstanding they found not Faustus, but all the hall sprinkled with blood,
the brains cleaving to the wall, for the devil had beaten him from one wall
against another: in one corner lay his eyes, in another his teeth; a fearful
and pitiful Sight to behold. Thon began the Students to wail and weep for him,
and sought for his body in many places; lastly, they came into the yard, where
they saw his body lying on the horse-dung, most monstrously torn, and fearful
to behold; for his head and all his joints were dashed to pieces. The forenamed
Students and Masters that were at his death, have obtained so much, that they
buried him in the village where he was so grievously tormented. After which
they returned to Wittenburg, and coming into the house of Faustus, they found
the servant of Faustus very sad, unto whom they opened all the matter, who took
it exceeding heavily. There they found this history of Dr. Faustus noted, and
of him written, as is before declared; all save only his end, the which was
after, by the Students, thereunto annexed. Farther what his servant noted
thereof, was made in another book. And you have heard held by him in his life
the spirit of fair Helena, who had by him one son, the which was named Justus
Faustus, even the same day of his death they vanished away, both mother and
son. The house before was so dark, that scarce any body could abide therein.
The same night Dr. Faustus appeared to his servant lively, and showed unto him
many secret things which he had done, and hidden in his lifetime. Likewise
there were certain which saw Dr. Faustus look out of the window by night, as
they passed by the house.

And thus ended the whole history of Dr. Faustus's conjuration, and other acts
that he did in his life; out of which example every christian may learn; but
chiefly the stiffnecked, and highminded, may thereby learn to fear God, and to
be careful of their vocation, and to be at defiance with all devilish works,
that God has most precifely forbidden; to the end we should not invite the
Devil as a guest, nor give him place as that wicked Faustus has done: For here
we have a wicked example of his writing, promise, and end, that we may remember
him, that we go not astray, but take God always before our eyes, to call alone
upon him, and to honor him all the days of our life, with heart, and hearty
prayer, and with all our strength and soul, to glorify his holy name, defying
the devil and all his works; to the end we may remain with Christ in all
endless joy, Amen, Amen. That wish I to every christian heart, and God's name
be glorified.

THE NECROMANCER: OR, HARLEQUIN DR. FAUSTUS.
SCENE, a Study. The Doctor discovered reading at a Table. A Good and Bad
Spirit appear. Good Spirit. O Faustus! thy good genius warns, break off in
time; pursue no more
An art that will thy soul ensnare.

Bad Spirit. Faustus, go on: That fear is vain:
Let thy great heart aspire to trace
Dark nature to her secret springs,
'Till knowledge make thee deemed a God.

(Good and Bad Spirit disappear: The Doctor uses Magical Motions, and an
Infernal Spirit rises. Infernal Spirit. Behold! thy powerful charms prevail
And draw me from the deeps below,
To listen to thy great command.
On easy terms the king of night
Is pleased thy mighty wand to obey,
And offers to divide his power,
Sign thy consent his sway to own.
Ten thousand demons stand propar'd
shows a paper Through seas, through air, through raging fire,
To start, and execute thy will.

Good Spirit. O Faustus! fear the dread event.
within.
Infernal Spirit. Think what renown, what pleasures wait thee;
Each glittering vein, that earth infolds
Shall spread its ripened ores for thee.

Good Spirit. Think vengeance is offended Heaven's!
within.
Infernal Spirit. Heaven envies not poor mortal's bliss,
Thy spirit is dull: -- our art shall cheer thee,
And chase this unavailing gloom.
INCANTATION.
Arise! ye subtle forms, that sport
Around the throne of sable night;
Whose pleasures in her silent court,
Are unprophan'd with baleful light.
Arise! the screech-owl's voice proclaims,
Darkness is in her aweful noon:
The stars keep back their glimmering flames,
And veils of clouds shut in the moon. Arise! ye subtle, etc.

Here Furies rise, and dance, and then vanish. Infernal Spirit. Still art thou
sad? awake to joy.
Strikes the table, and it appears covered with gold, crowns, sceptres, etc.
See! -- wealth unbounded courts thy hand.
Is it despised? -- Then other charms,
With full delight, shall feast thy sense.
waves his wand. Helen, appear; in bloom and grace
Lovely, as when thy beauties shone;
And fired the amorous prince of Troy.
The Spirit of Helen rises.
Helen. Why am I drawn from blisful shades,
Where happy pairs the circling hours
In never fading transports wear,
And find delights with time renew?
Say, what deserving youth to bless,
Is Helen called to earth again?
Show me the dear enchanting form,
Where truth and constancy reside,
And I embrace the noble flame.
Cupid! God of pleasing anguish,
Teach the enamored swain to languish,
Teach him fierce desires to know.
Heroes would be lost in story,
Did not love inspire their glory.
Love does all that is great below.
The Doctor preparing to address Helen with fondness, the Infernal spirit
interposes.
Infernal Spirit. Hold; -- and the terms of pleasure know;
This contract sign, thy faith to bind,
Offers the paper. Then revel in delight at large,
And give a loose to joy.
The Doctor gazing at Helen, signs the paper, and gives it to the Infernal
spirit: After which, attempting to approach Helen, the phantom of envy
interferes, the Doctor starts and turns in surprise to the Infernal Spirit, who
sinks laughing at having deceived him. The Doctor retires discontented, and the
scene closes.
SCENE, THE DOCTOR's SCHOOL OF MAGIC. Several Scholars seated on each side of
the stage, to see the power of his art. The Doctor waves his wand, and the
Spirits of Hero and Leander rise. Leander. ENOUGH have our disastrous loves
Felt the severities of fate:
Drenched in the salt and swelling surge,
We found the common grave. -- And now,
If what the poets sing be true,
In flowery fields, the seats assigned
For happy souls, shall we enjoy
A long eternity of bliss.

Hero. Grant me ye powr's, wheree'er my Lot is placed,
To have my loved Leander there,
And I no other bliss require.

Leander. O charming Hero! Times to come
Shall celebrate thy name:
And lovers dwell upon the praise
Of thy unequaled constancy.
While on ten thousand charms I gaze,
With love's fires my bosom burns
But ah! so bright thy virtues blaze,
Love to adoration turns.
While on ten thousand charms I gaze,
With love's fires my bosom burns.

Hero. O my soul's joy! To hold thee thus,
Repays for all my sorrows past:
Crowned with this pleasure, I forgive
The raging wind and dashing stream,
And welcome death, that brings me back to thee.
Blessed in thy arms, the gloomy vales,
Where shudd'ring ghosts with horror glide;
Gay as Elysium seem to smile,
And all is paradise around.
Cease, injurious maids, to blame
A fondness which you never have known:
Feel but once the lover's flame,
The fault will soon become your own.
Cease, injurious maids, to blame
A fondness which you never have known.

Charon rises to them.

Charon. What mean this whining, pining pair,
Must I for you detain my fair?
Or do your wisdoms think my wherry,
Should wait your time to cross the ferry.

Leander. Charon, thy rigorous humor rule.

Charon. And stand to hear a lovesick fool,
Talk over the cant of flames, and darts,
And streaming eyes, and bleeding hearts?
Give over this stuff. -- Why what the Devil!
Will Not drowning cure this amorous evil?
I thought when once men's heads were laid,
Their passions with there lives had fled:
But find, though flesh and blood no more,
The whims in the brain maintain their power.

Hero. Oh! could thy savage nature measure
The joys of love, the enchanting pleasure.

Charon. No doubt, you women may discover
Pleasures in a substantial lover;
But what great transports can you boast,
To find from one, that is, at most,
But a thin, unperforming ghost?
Away, for on the distant shore,
Pluto expects my cargo over:
The crowded boat but waits for you;
Come, join with its fantastic crew.
Ghosts of every occupation,
Every rank, and every nation,
Some with crimes all foul and spotted,
Some to happy fates allotted,
Press the Stygian lake to pass.
Here a soldier roars like thunder,
Prates of wenches, wine and plunder:
Statesmen here the times accusing;
Poets sense for rhymes abusing;
Lawyers chatt'ring,
Courtiers flattering,
Bullies ranting,
Zealots canting,
Knaves and fools of every class!

[ At the end of the air Hero, Leander and Charon vanished. Doctor waves his
wand, and the scene is converted to a wood; a monstrous dragon appears, and
from each claw drops a demon, representing diverse Grotesque figures; several
female spirit, rise in character to each figure, and join in antic dance. As
they are performing, a clock strikes, the Doctor is seized, hurried away by
spirits, and devoured by the monster, which immediately takes flight; and while
it is disappearing, spirits vanish, and other demons rejoice in the following
words: Now triumph hell, and fiends be gay,
The sorc'rer is become our prey.
[ At the end of the Chorus the Curtain falls. FINIS.
WITTY-STORIES.
A Conjuring Tale.
AT such time when Perukes were as scarce as money is now amongst most men a
gentleman who had lost his hair by a fit of sickness, was forced with the first
to make use of one of them. It happened that he and his boy that attended on
him, riding down into the country, there fell such a shower of rain, which
continued so long as obliged them to take up their lodging at a paltry alehouse
in a country village, where seeing the weather prove so bad, he was resolved to
lie there for that night: After some short canmons, which went by the name of a
supper, the gentleman was conducted to his lodging chamber, which was hung with
cobwebs instead of cloth of Arras; his boy also was shown to another chamber,
something inferior you may be sure to that of his master's; which was also
richly hung with spiders tapestry, whilst the gentleman was making himself
ready, the maid peeped in at a hole under the door (which was made for the cat
to go out and in) that when he was abed she might fetch away the candle. Having
undressed himself, he pulls off his Peruke, and sets it upon a stool by him,
which the maid perceiving, verily imagined that he had pulled off his head; and
so conceited she was of it, that she ran down to her dame, telling him, that
the gentleman who lodged there, was no other than an arrant conjurer, for she
saw him with her own eyes pull off his head, and set it on a stool by him; and
if she doubted any thing of the truth thereof, if she would go up, she might
see it standing there at that present. Her dame, though something hard of
belief of what she heard, yet to satisfy her maid's curiosity, went up; where
peeping likewise in at the hole, and seeing it upon the stool, she was then of
the same opinion with her maid; and so fearful they were both thereof, that
neither of them durst fetch the candle, and the gentleman was forced to put it
out himself. That night was spent in a great deal of fear, they judging that
bad weather to proceed from the conjurer, and expecting yet worse; but when in
the morning they saw all fair, and a serene sky, they changed their opinion,
and that though he was a conjurer, yet that now he would do no more harm. Whilst
they were now entered into this good opinion of him, one of her neighbors came
in who had lost a horse, whom he judged to be stole, for which he made a great
complaint. Hold your peace, said she, I can tell you a way which I warrant you
will fetch your horse again: we have a conjurer that is now lodged in our
house, who for half a dozen of beer, I question not but will do your business:
and therewithal she went up to the gentleman, acquainting him with her
neighbor's loss, and desiring his assistance for gaining him again; for, said
she, I know you have skill in the black art, my maid and I seeing your head
last night upon the stool, when as the rest of your body was gone to bed. The
gentleman perceiving her folly in her grand mistake, and willing to have some
mirth after his wet journey, told her, that for her sake he would do his best
endeavor for her neighbor; and that when he was ready, he would raise a
spirit which would quickly tell him where the horse was. The woman overjoyed at
these words ran down and told her neighbor that he would have his horse again
within an hour, and that if he would stay so long, he should see him come
galloping to him again in a full career; this news pleased him so well, that he
resolved to stay. In the mean time the gentleman was consulting with himself
how to bring his purpose the best way to effect: In order thereto, he told his
boy that he must act the part of a devil; and to personate him the better,
whilst I am gone down to speak with them about the business do you turn your
coat the wrong side outward, and creep under the bed where you must lie till I
speak these words, Elhavareuna, Phonsonthonchya, Heydonicus Towronus Dungeonis
Keptoribus; then do you come forth from under the bed, and make as hideous a
noise with your mouth as you can possible. The boy promised to do as he bid
him; and when his master was gone down, he went about his business; but
remembering with himself, that in the chamber where he lodged, there lay a raw
bulls hide, left there by some butcher he thought that would personate the
Devil far better than his coat; and thereupon he sudenly fetched it, and
wrapped himself therein, with the horns apearing just over his head; which
having done, he crept under the bed, expecting the event: Soon after he was
fixed, came up his master, the dame, the maid, and the fellow that had lost his
horse; when the gentleman having a chalkstone in his hand, marked them every
one out a circle; then placing them therein, he bid them not to stir out of
them, whatever they saw: So pulling a book out of his pocket, he began to read
some hard uncouth names, and at last came to those words, Elhavareuna, etc.
when the boy made his appearance from under the bed, with a great pair of horns
and a bellowing noise: His master, who knew not of his boy's new invention for
acting the devil, seeing such a hideous thing to appear, thought it had been
the devil indeed who had come to have punished him for undertaking to conjure,
and thereupon he ran as fast as he could drive, making but one step from the
top of the stairs to the bottom: The woman and the man seeing the gentleman
run, thought likewise the devil was come to fetch them for being spectators,
and thereupon ran as fast as he, tumbling down the stairs on the neck of one
another. The boy seeing them all run in such disorder, thought also that the
devil was indeed come for him for acting his part, and therefore he began to
throw off his covering; but he had before so fastened it upon him, that seeing
he could not pull it off, he ran with it on; when coming to the top of the
stairs, the hide so wrapped about his legs that it threw him from the top to
the bottom amongst them; when they hearing the horns to make a clattering, so
shrieked and bellowed as if the devil had been amongst them indeed. Sad was the
effects of this their conjuring: One had his nose broke, another his shins,
some hurt their elbows, some their thighs, and others their backs, the
gentleman lost his Peruke, the women fell with their heels upwards; and to
conclude, not any one of them sped so well, but he had more occasion for a
surgeon than a conjurer.

This was a merry Devil played this prank,
Although his master gave him little thank:
Well may we judge the times must needs be evil,
When as that boys begin to play the Devil.
The Jesuit and Friar.
A Jesuit preaching at the great church in Padua, toward the end of his
sermon, fell into a large commendation of the order of the Jesuits, extolling
it above all, the religous orders that then were, or ever had been in the
world, giving God thanks, that he had the happiness to be of that order, and in
the close of his discourse, he told his auditory that he would acquaint them
with a vision which he had lately seen. The other night, said he, I dreamed
that I was in hell, where methought I saw Popes, Emperors, Kings, Queens,
Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Friars, and some of all sorts of men, both
ecclesiastical and secular, but not one Jesuit amongst them all; which made me
to bless God that ever I was born to be of so blessed a society, which though
it had sent so many thousands of that holy order to the grave, yet never any of
them went to hell; and so he concluded his sermon with a fresh encomium on the
society of Jesuits. The next funday after, a dommican friar preached in the
same church, and he also, toward the end of his sermon, fell upon the high
praises of the order of the Jesuits; repeating much of the Jesuit's sermon the
day before, and bewailing himself that it was not his fortune to be of that
holy order, whereof none ever went to Hell, as the reverend father had told
them the day before; at last he told the people, that he had also seen a
vision, and dreamed likewise one night that he was in Hell, where he saw popes,
emperors, kings, cardinals, and all sorts of orders, as the Jesuit had notably
showed them the day before; but not a Jesuit (said thefryar) could be seen
among them all. Then thought I to myself, O what a blessed order is this, that
there should not be a Jesuit there! and still I cast my eyes all over hell,
wishing myself had been a Jesuit and not a dominican, to see not one piece of
that order there. At last methought I beckoned a little Devil to me, and asked
him softly in his ear, whether there were any Jesuits in that place or not? He
answered, that there were none there, but that they were kept in a Hell by
themselves, which is a great room under this, where (said the Devil,) there be
abundance of them; and they come hither so fast, that my master Lucifer scarce
knows where to bestow them; and besides they are so unruly that if they were
not kept by themselves, every body would be soon weary of this place: Adding
withal, that his master durst not let them have any gunpowder, for fear they
should blow up Hell itself.

No Wit like a Woman's
ACARPENTER had married a very handsome woman to his wife, but that she wearing
corkshoes, it made her light heel'd. This carpenter used to work about a mile
from home: but for the love he bore to his wife, he would every night come back
to bed with her, although it seemed, she had rather have had his Room than his
Company; for no sooner was he gone, but his Place was supplied by another, whom
she loved more dearly; his next Neighbor, who by Trade was a Grocer. It
happened one Morning, that the carpenter went for that he was accustomed; but
before his Place was cold, another was gotten therein. He had not gone a
Quarter of a Mile, but there fell such a Shower of Rain, with Likelihood of
Continuance, that he returned back again, and drawing the Latch, went into the
house; which the Grocer hearing, crept out of Bed and got underneath it as fast
as he could. It being not yet Day, the Carpenter pulled off his clothes and
went to bed; where he had not lain above a quarter of an hour, but it ceased
raining, gave great hopes of a fair day; which the good wife perceiving seared
her lover would catch cold by being without his clothes underneath the bed, she
jogged her husband, telling him now the sky was very clear, and therefore
desired him to rise and go to work. The Carpenter, who was very observant to
his wife, did accordingly; but it became so dark that he could not see, he
mistook, and put on the Grocer's breeches instead of his own; and so going his
journey, when putting his hands in his pocket to pull out his compasses, he
found there a handful of money, at which he much marvelled, knowing not how it
should come there; only he thought it was no bad luck to have his pockets so
lined; yet was he in a quandary whether he was a wake or in a dream, he being
seldom master of such a purchase. Putting his hand in his other pocket, he
found there a bunch of keys, a note book, and some other papers; which
increased his wonder more then before: But looking down toward his legs, he
saw the breeches were all full of ribbands, whereas his own never had one on
them. Not knowing what to think thereof, he resolved to go home and confer with
his wife. In the mean time the Grocer missed his breeches, and telling the good
wife thereof, they knew not what to do, only she thought it was his best way
not to stay, judging her husband had gotten them on, which might occasion his
sudden return. And indeed her suspicion proved true; but the husband returned
home, where he found his wife weeping and waliing, and taking on most bitterly:
He asked her the reason thereof; O! said she, the Grocer at the next door fast
night brought a pair of breeches heither for me to mend for him, and I being
willing to earn a penny, and not always to rely upon your gettings took the
business upon me; since which time, I know not how, some body has come in and
stolen them away? but if I knew the cuckoldly rogue that had them, I would have
him hanged if it were possible. Then casting her eyes fully upon him, O lack!
Husband, said she, I see you have gotten them on: only I was afraid they had
been lost; but herein I will have more care of such things as long as I live.
The husband hereupon pulled them off, and gave them to his wife; but withal
told her, that he had rather allow her twopence out of his day's wages, then
that she should earn a penny in such sort.

The proverb says (and proverbs often hit)
There Is nothing like unto a woman's wit;
They can lead men by the nose even where they will,
Be arrant whores, and yet seem honest still.
FINIS.

