DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT THE DEDICATION OF THE NEW CONGREGATIONAL MEETINGHOUSE
IN PROVIDENCE; AND ALSO, AT THE WESTPARISH IN BROOKFIELD, NOVEMBER 10, 1795, ON
A LIKE OCCASION. BY ENOS HITCHCOCK, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN PROVIDENCE,
Rhodeisland. PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

FROM THE PRESS OF Rice and Waldo, Brookfield, Massachusetts. 1795.

On the joys of God's House and Worship.
PSALM CXXII. 1, 2. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house
of the Lord.

Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.


JERUSALEM was not only the seat of government for the Commonwealth of Israel,
but also of the church of GOD. On this favored spot stood the National Temple,
whither the tribes of the LORD went up to pray and praise. The happiness of the
nation was so connected with the prosperity of the church, that whatever
touched the one, would affect the other. It was presumed, therefore, that He
who had an intelligent regard for the prosperity and happiness of civil
society, would discover it by a suitable affection for the house and worship of
GOD.

THIS psalm seems to have been composed to be sung at the general national
festival, when the assembled tribes had opportunity to meet each other with
mutual congratulations, and unite together in devoutly worshipping their common
Creator: And by an easy transfer of the sentiments it contains to the occasion
of our present meeting, it may afford instruction both useful and entertaining.
For the church of CHRIST is called, The Jerusalem that is above.

WE (...) ^^^embled, my respected auditory, for the purpose of solemnly
separating and setting apart a house erected for religious worship; and of
dedicating of it unto GOD. May it never be profaned by impiety, nor dishonored
by improper uses! May it be forever sacred to GOD and his service! Here, may
thy worship arise as incense, and the offerings of thy people be an acceptable
memorial before thee!

THE duties of piety and devotion are the most important part of the service
which is due from man to his Maker. In vain do we offer GOD the outward form
without the homage of the heart! And in vain do we profess to have devotion,
unless we have clean hands and a pure heart, moral virtue and christian
charity! These are sentiments which should always accompany us to the house of
GOD.

MAY they impress our minds while we proceed to consider this congratulatory
hymn, and apply it to the present occasion.

" I WAS glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the LORD. Our
feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem is builded as a city
that is compact together: Whither the tribes of the LORD go up, the tribes of
the LORD unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the
LORD. For there are set thrones of judgment; the thrones of the house of David."

WITH inimitable melody he represents them as expressing, in semichoir, the
pleasure they received by the invitations to go up to the temple, echoed by the
full choir " Our feet shall stand --;" because the worship and order of it was
fair as the moon, clear as the sun; and the workmanship of it was as beautiful
as Tirzah, and comely as Jerusalem.

MANY of them came from a distance. They did not decline the fatigues that must
attend going there. But urged on by the love they felt for the house and
worship of GOD, they rejoiced in the opportunity of attending there. They
celebrate the uniformity and elegance of the city, which added beauty to the
temple, while that in turn contributed much to ornament the city.

IT was on this account that they were encouraged to go from strength to
strength. Here they beheld every thing decent and in order. Here they consult
together the oracles of GOD. They worship Him together. And as the order and
arrangement of the building, formed a faint emblem of the glory and
magnificence of the great Builder of the temple above, so it had a good effect
on the mind.

IT was matter of joy too that this seat of worship was also the seat of
justice and of judgment, where their civil rights and ecclesiastical concerns
were patronized and secured. Though religion needs not the aid of civil
government to defend, much less to prove its truth, yet government needs the
aid of religion to support it.

FEEBLE indeed were the efforts of law in the hand of civil officers to control
the unruly passions of men, were they not restrained by the more awful
sanctions of religion. Happy the state where the current of justice runs pure
by the temple of GOD! Where religion renders all in authority a terrror to evil
doers!

THE favorable aspect of morality and religion on the prosperity and happiness
of society cannot be doubted. Indeed, it is a well known fact, that those
places are more opulent and happy where public worship is made respectable, by
suitable houses dedicated to GOD, and His worship steadily supported, than
where they are neglected. The expense notwithstanding.

RELIGIOUS establishments are the just abhorrence of freemen, both as a
violation of the rights of conscience, and as the bane of pure religion, by
introducing an abhorrent system of corruption, priestcraft and state policy:
But the experience of mankind envinces the importance of upholding religious
institutions.

THE air of respectability which elegant churches give a town, tends to its
prosperity and happiness, by inviting settlers, by giving a spring to industry,
and by promoting order. The respect which religion acquires by an open, fair
and liberal support, has a great influence on the welfare of society, by
refining the sentiments and polishing the manners of men. The effect on the
education of youth, and in forming the character of the rising generation, is
unspeakably great. And while these pleasing effects are produced on the face of
the world, the way is prepared for the growth of real virtue and piety in the
heart, which are the final objects of all religious institutions.

THESE things are, in their operation, promotive of the best interests of
mankind on earth. They are at the same time, by their instructive and moral
tendency, training up men for higher scenes of nobler joys. -- Thus the
institutions of religion, by qualifying men to be citizens on earth and
ornaments in the church, are preparing them to receive, as the gift of GOD'S
grace, the rank of citizenship in heaven, and to shine as stars in the
firmament above.

" PRAY for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee." Since
so many blessings attend the ordinances of religion, how natural to call on the
church to pray for the city which contained them, especially when both their
outward prosperity, and inward and spiritual comfort depend on the blessing of
GOD.

THE welfare of men on earth depends so much on the preservation of order, that
to pray and exert ourselves for the prosperity of Zion, is an evidence of our
regard for the good of the world, and is a mean of increasing our attachment to
it. With this public and generous spirit, christianity inspires its true
subjects, and is itself the highest possible example of it, in the astonishing
act of its Author and Founder, who died a martyr to the truth and importance of
our subject.

SO true is the saying, that "godliness is profitable to the life that now is,"
that he who exerts himself for the honor and interest of religious
institutions, is consulting his own good and prosperity. By a wise constitution
of things, it is so ordered, that he who casts his bread on the waters shall
receive again after many days.

HE will find his account in all his deeds of charity or of public utility, in
one way or another. Whatever service he renders the church of GOD, he thereby
lays up in store a good foundation for himself or his children. Though he
should experience no particular marks of prosperity himself, he has the
consolation of reflecting that he has laid the foundation for it in posterity,
by the order he has contributed to establish.

THE Psalmist thought it a sufficient reason to wish peace and prosperity to
Jerusalem, because that city contained the temple of GOD. " Peace be within thy
walls." -- It is not uncommon for man to envy the prosperity of the opulent and
the condition of public characters. But a better spirit is inculcated in the
house of GOD; even to pray for them. Of how much consequence, then, to their
comfort and tranquillity, that they should give public countenance and
sanction to the institution of worship?

" FOR my brethren and companions' sake, I will now say, peace be within thee."
The interests our friends have in the prosperity of the church should engage
our attention to it. Their happiness, as ours, depends on the preservation and
growth of religion. But how is this to be effected but by keeping up religious
institutions.

WERE religion left to a solitary retreat without houses or forms of worship,
how would the spirit of it die away for want of public countenance; and with
the failure of this, how would iniquity and every evil work abound? But there
are many who wish well, but can do but little toward the support of religion.
Those may be among the salt of the earth, by whose moral influence the system
is preserved. " For their sakes" should we cultivate a public spirit, and seek
the good of the church.

" BECAUSE of the house of the LORD our GOD, I will seek thy good." To prayers
in the church, every good man will add his endeavors to promote the welfare of
the State, and so much the more as they enjoy protection from it, and freedom
in the exercise of religion.

IT is the wisdom of the state to hold out public countenance and encouragement
to religion, not by religious establishments in favor of one and to oppress
another sect; but by extending equal patronage to all literary and religious
institutions, and by the appointment of friends to religion to public offices.
Then the influence would be reciprocal. The state would derive a salutary
influence from the temple, and that in turn, the countenance of the state.

THE sanctions or civil law can reach no further than the outward act, and that
only as discovered and supported by legal evidence; but those of religion
extend to the heart, take hold of the conscience, and strike at the root of
wickedness. While the one can only lop off the branches within its reach, the
other is tearing up the tree by the roots. Judge then whether the institutions
of religion deserve not the countenance of every wise and judicious citizen.

IN the application of the subject we are led to make the following reflections:

THE first is, that all good men will rejoice in the prosperity of the
christian church: Yea, that all who consult the good of society will pay
respect to the institution of public worship.

INDEED, the psalmist intimates that the want of this spirit of philanthropy is
inconsistent with an honest and good heart; and therefore takes it for granted
that all such would cultivate it. The more of this benevolent disposition we
possess, the more shall we resemble Him who is the standard of all perfection.
In whatever breast this spirit prevails, toward the church in general, there
will be an attachment to the particular christian society with which we are
connected; not to the exclusion of any others from our charity; much less to
their injury.

THE rational ends which men have in view in forming into distinct religious
societies are, the opportunity of worshipping GOD according to the dictates of
their own consciences, and the convenience of attending an uniform mode of
social worship with their families. -- How important this is to the education
of children and youth, let the experience of the world declare!

BUT in vain do men profess an attachment to society unless they are willing to
exert the abilities which GOD has given them to promote its welfare. Expenses
necessarily arise in erecting houses of worship and upholding the stated
ministry, which requires their united exertion to defray, because it is for
common good. A moment's consideration will show every wise man the necessity of
the former, and convince him of the propriety of the latter. It is a sentiment
that meets the common ideas of justice, that "the laborer is worthy of his
hire;" and it is a statute of immutable obligation in the christian kingdom,
that -- "they who preach the gospel shall live of the gospel." -- But I will
not offend the understanding of an enlightened audience by dwelling on so plain
a case.

ANOTHER sentiment arising from the subject, is, that some respect is due to
the construction of houses erected for the worship of GOD.

GREAT and magnificent was the temple of the Jews at Jerusalem, built under the
direction of the great head of the church. Although this may not afford a
suitable model for the more spiritual institution of christian worship, yet it
is presumable that a rational veneration for the Deity will lead to the
bestowment of much labor and expense upon buildings dedicated to GOD. Will it
be objected that GOD is not confined to the walls of houses, nor pleased with
the elegance of buildings or costly offerings -- that all nature is his temple,
and that he is worshipped through the vast amplitude of space? Be it granted!
yet though we cannot be profitable to GOD, His worship made respectable, may be
so to us. He is not confined to houses, but houses built for convenience of
social worship are appropriated to Him. And if we follow the allusion in the
objection, may we not ask in turn -- Why ought they not, in humble imitation of
the superb structure of his universal temple, to be the master strokes of human
ingenuity, the highest efforts of human skill? At least, fitness requires that
the beauty and elegance of houses for worship should ever correspond to the
progress of wealth and refinement in society, with which other buildings keep
pace. Otherwise there would be a marked inattention to religious order; and the
want of decent accommodations might be pleaded by people of taste for the
neglect of public worship.

HAPPILY, the people of this town can have no such apology for such neglect!
Few towns, of its size, perhaps, none in the United States exceeds it in this
respect. The new meeting house in Providence, at the dedication of which this
sermon was also delivered, is 87 by 71 feet on the ground plat. That in
Brookfield west-pa^^sh, is 64 by 51, and considering its remoteness from any
great commercial town, must be viewed as possessing a high degree of elegance.
This society finding their house of worship out of repair and not sufficiently
large to accommodate their growing numbers, conceived the bold design of
erecting another which will stand as a lasting monument of praise to the
present generation. What seemed to be wanting in ability has been supplied by
generous and harmonious exertions; and Divine Providence smiling on efforts so
laudable has rendered them successful. And we are this day called to
felicitate you on the cheerful, but serious occasion of dedicating to GOD the
house ye have builded for His name! May the same spirit of concord and*
brotherly love, that have marked your proceedings in projecting and
accomplishing this noble edifice, continue among you and render you happy in
the enjoyment of it!

A THIRD observation that results from the foregoing discourse, is the union of
duty with pleasure in attending public worship.

IN vain are houses erected for this purpose, unless we have some pleasure in
hearing it said -- " Let us go into the house of the LORD," and our hearts
respond -- " My feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem." That we should
worship GOD together is a dictate of reason. What can be more fit and
reasonable than that beings constantly dependent on GOD should acknowledge this
to Him; should thank Him for His favors; commit themselves to His protection,
and seek His blessing? This joint offering is necessary in our social state
because our wants are common, and so are our blessings; and this is a public
and visible mark of respect and reverence for the giver of every good gift.

BUT, besides those outward expressions of worship and homage, the public
institutions of religion afford a convenient opportunity of communicating
useful instructions to all, old and young. There are always to be found, in
society, many individuals who need the benefit of such communications from
those whose business is study and improvement. How many are there who have
neither time nor means for gaining this knowledge? And how much need have those
who possess both to be quickened in the knowledge they have? What method so
suitable to effect* this as public addresses to people congregated for that
purpose, in rational and well digested discourses on moral and religious
subjects? The benevolent design of such institutions, and the rational ends of
such public religious assemblies, must be a reason sufficient to induce every
well wisher to the best interest of society to give their exemplary attendance,
though it were only of human appointment. But where to this motive, is added
the weight of Divine authority, how does the obligation increase?

THE institution of social worship is coeval with society itself, and has met
the approving voice of men in all ages. Particular directions were given about
it to the Jews. Solemn assemblies were continued under the gospel; and the
neglect of them was considered as apostasy from the faith. And to the
preservation of these may be ascribed all the appearances of religion which we
this day behold in the world. It requires no great penetration to discern, nor
force of argument to prove, that without this method of preserving a
remembrance of the Deity in the world, and of cultivating on the mind a due
reverence for Him, a general forgetfulness of Him would ensue. The feeble light
of natural reason would soon be clouded; and human nature under the weight of
its own infirmities and degraded passions would soon degenerate into wildness
and barbarism.

HENCE among all civilized nations stated seasons for calling of the mind from
the employments of this life have been observed, and means used for directing
it to the concerns of another. Without the restraints of religion, what
happiness, yea, what safety could be enjoyed in the world? Take away those
ties, and you let loose the whole army of the wretched and the desperate upon
the industrious, the affluent, and the happy; and open the door for violence to
stalk at noon day, unawed by fear, and unrestrained by principle. To awaken
these principles is the office of religion, and to keep alive this restraint is
the tendency of public worship. How can parents expect dutiful children, or
masters faithful servants, unless they are seen openly and publicly to
acknowledge, in a dutiful manner, the athority of the great Parent and Ruler of
men?

IT cannot be thought an improper use of the subject if I make use of the
occasion to remind you of one circumstance that should ever attend your
assembling here.

THE house is such as reflects honor upon you. Its walls are sacred by
consecration and appointment only, your principal pleasure therefore in coming
hither should not be the gratification of the eye but the exercise of devotion
in worshipping GOD in spirit and in truth. May your delight in coming to this
house of the LORD be in communion with Him, and in hearing from Him out of His
word! Must not that heart be awfully engrossed with the vanities of this world
that can take no pleasure in those things -- that cannot separate the Sabbath
from the common business of the week and devote it unto GOD?

IT is the character of the true worshippers that " they love the habitation of
His house and the place where His honor dwells." Their hearts are there and
where their hearts are they will endeavor to be also. They will conscientiously
attend the appointed means of moral instruction and religious improvement, with
a view to benefit themselves by " adding to their virtue, knowledge;" and for
the benefit of others, by their countenance and example.

THIS whole assembly will permit me to recommend to them to preserve a due
respect to religion.

THERE are never wanting those who endeavor, by the force of ridicule, to
undermine the pillars of the christian church, and to sap the foundation of all
religious worship and order. Let not your respect for so useful an institution
be lessened either by the raillery of those who make a mock at sin, or by their
example -- whose conduct casts contempt on the institution of religious
worship. But rather rejoice that there are still so many who favor the cause of
Zion, and that, in this, you have the countenance of the wisest and most
virtuous, who rejoice in hearing it said -- " Let us go into the house of the
LORD.

THE things there discoursed on carry in them an air of high importance. They
claim to be from GOD. They have respect to the best interests of men. They
therefore, demand the attention even of the infidel himself, who can never
disprove their truth; and on account of their great public utility claim
attendance on these forms of instruction. Shall the polished period of the
Orator be listened to with attention -- shall the artful mimicry of the actor
excite alternate joy or grief or indignation, and shall not the awful majesty
of the gospel warm and affect the heart? What subjects so deserving our
attention as those contained in the gospel? They are of all others the most
interesting. They have an influence on our present condition; yea, their
effects run parallel to our existence. They open to us the great things of
eternity. They treat of a day of final judgment -- of worlds dissolving with
fervent heat -- the universal wreck of nature -- the joys of heaven, and the
perdition of ungodly men.

SUCH, and so great are the subjects that chalange your attention in this
house! And it should be remembered that the day is approaching in which we must
all render an account of our doings, how we have heard, and how we have
improved the privileges we have enjoyed. To that momentous period may all our
conduct bear reference; that from worshipping GOD in earthly temples, we may,
in His own time, be translated to the temple above to join the general choir in
ascribing unto Him, blessing and honor and glory and power forever and ever.
AMEN.


