AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE REPUBLICAN SOCIETY, OF ULSTER COUNTY, AND
OTHER CITIZENS,

Convened at the house of DANIEL SMITH, in the Town of Montgomery, for the
purpose of celebrating the Anniversary of American Independence, The 4th of
July, 1795.

BY PHINEAS HEDGES, M. D.

GOSHEN: PRINTED BY DAVID M. WESTCOTT, MDCCXCV.

IN SOCIETY.
RESOLVED, that John Nicholson, John Barber, John Blake, jun. Charles Clinton
and Nathan H. White, be a Committee to wait on PHINEHAS HEDGES, and request a
copy of his ORATION for publication.

CHARLES CLINTON, Sec.
Montgomery, July 4th, 1795.
AN ORATION, etc.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WHENCE is it that the doctrine of the equality of man has so long been hidden
from the human race? Shall we impute it to imbecility of mind, or to the
necromancy and enchantment of political institutions? Man was created equal,
and endowed with the powers of perception and ratiocination. Have these powers
slept since the first existence of man? Has he not opened his eyes to the
plainest facts that exist? If we survey his exterior and interior structure, we
have no reason to infer a diversity in man. The doctrine that inculcates our
descent from a common head, implies a recognition of the equality of man -- The
same equality pervades the vegetable and animal kingdoms. It is true, that a
large tree receives more support from the earth than a smaller one, but if the
latter receives sufficient to support its physical existence, it is upon a
footing of equality with the former; but man, feeble in his origin, and his
mind destitute of ideas, has been passive to the first impressions made by
friend or foe. There has not been wanting men artful enough to take advantage
of the weakness of his intellect. The mind tenacious of former, has been
obstinate to the reception of new impressions -- sunk into mental indolence and
sloth, man has been the continual sport of fortune.

The weak and ignorant have been the submissive dupes of the cunning and
wicked. The latter lost to every sentiment of justice have unfeelingly
domineered over the former -- Influence and power once acquired has been easily
retained with a small portion of caution and deceit. Hence the arbitrary
governments of the whole world, hence has it been that the faint, imperfect
perceptions of liberty that history records, has easily been extinguished by
the industrious agency of tyrants. The page of history relates a melancholy
tale of the condition of the human race. From the earliest time, ignorance,
stupidity, and bondage have been the uniform lot and condition of man; had he
drank of the waters of Lethe, or been bathed in the Stygian pool, a more
confirmed lethargy of mind could not have existed, than has arisen from the
arts of his equals and his fellows. It is true, poet's have feigned, and sung
of a golden age, of a state of freedom, of a community, of goods and interests;
but such a state has existed only in the poet's song, it is entirely beyond the
ken of history -- Neither the records nor the remains of ancient kingdoms,
exhibit any marks of freedom. The pyramids of Egypt are monuments of pride,
folly and tyranny. A gleam of political light has at times broke in upon the
benighted mind; but imposture tampering with ignorance, has almost always been
successful in its extermination; the weak efforts of liberty have been unable
to withstand the overwhelming torrent of despotism -- Liberty an alien and an
outlaw at courts, no one dare to admit the guest into their bosom; its
votaries persecuted and oppressed, have been glad to fly to the altars and
sanctuaries of despotism for safety. O! Unhappy man! Let us drop a tear upon
the misfortunes of our predecessors and blot out their mistakes. Egypt as old a
government perhaps as any on record, has left no trace of freedom; in the whole
period of its kings and tyrants, we have no mention of any exertions for
liberty, they are historied to be wise in the arts and sciences, but with
knowledge as with power, it must have been monopolized by the few, and not
imparted to the many; had it been otherwise, some notions of liberty would have
started into the informed mind. The Jews when confined in Egypt, were kept in
profound ignorance, and although Moses was learned in all the learning of
Egypt, he imparted a small share of it to his countrymen; in delivering them
from the tyranny of Egypt, he brought them under the bondage of a ceremonial
law; their political institutions were not more favorable to personal liberty,
than the institutions of a less favored people. The invention of letters and
the consequent increase of knowledge among the Grecian States, revived some
ideas of liberty; but as science was monopolized by their philosophical sects,
no permanent change in political institutions followed.

Moral truths by a perversion of intellect were far beyond the reach of vulgar
apprehension, political discoveries were rare, and man condemned to
unchangeable ignorance continued in perpetual slavery. The expulsion of the
Tarquins from Rome, and the institution of a republic was rather the effect of
accident than design -- the same ideas and passions pervaded the citizens of
Rome. The desire of military glory engendered in the reign of their monarchs,
still existed in the people, and the abolition of the tyranny of its monarchs,
was succeeded by that of its consuls. The factions of Patricians and Plebeians,
continued with increased violence, and the sovereignty, instead of being
transferred from Tarquins to the people, existed in the patrician order. The
republic was succeeded by the bloody reign of the Caesar's, those monsters of
the human race. To the destruction of the Roman Empire, succeeded a long night
of impenetrable darkness -- The human mind bewildered in a maze of puerile and
religious sophistry, sunk almost to the level of the brute creation; not the
least glimpse of political light pervaded the mind. The thick gloom of
superstition that overspread Europe, intercepted every ray. Literature
gradually declined, during the violent and imperious reign of the Caesar's, and
the irruption of the Goths and Vandals, extinguished both the monuments, and
spirit of literature and liberty. They who had been drove to the North, by the
conquering sword of the Romans, now turned its point upon their conquerors; and
Rome, once the glory and admiration of the world, became a scene of violence,
anarchy and confusion. To the irruption of the Goths and Vandals, succeeded the
unnatural and impious sovereignty of the papacy. This prolific fountain of
corruption disgorged its pestilential water over the whole European world; the
poor benighted inhabitants drank largely of its draughts, and a universal sleep
and death of mind, followed its soporiferous influence; genius expired, and
liberty affrighted and appalled, fled from its sphere of influence. The
literature that survived the extirminating sword of the northern nations, was
monopolized by the priesthood of the Roman Pontiff; locked up in a dead
language, inaccessible to common understanding, the imperious priesthood
profited, by the ignorance of their disciples -- Man lost, and bewildered in a
maze of uncertainty and conjecture, blinded, followed the path marked by his
imperious and deceitful guides. From the destruction of the Roman Republic, to
the exertions of the Swiss, in the 14th century, not a spark of liberty existed
among nations, whose transactions history has recorded. The slothful progress
of truth and science began to shed its optical influence over the drowsy
inhabitants of Europe, when the Cantons of Switzerland, irritated by the
rigorous administration of their Austrian governors, repelled their authority,
and established their independence -- This continues to be the most free and
independent of all European nations. But from the establishment of liberty in
this country, notwithstanding the astonishing improvements in every branch of
science, they have made few, if any improvements in their political
institutions. In many of their Cantons, aristocracy preponderates, and their
mercenary troops are a reproach to a free government. The next ray of political
light appeared in the establishment of the independence of the United Provinces.

The invention of Printing, the most useful perhaps of all discoveries, opened
a new avenue to the sciences. The mind as it acquired ideas, began to expand,
its views were enlarged, and the inventors of printing, (the Dutch) immediately
participated of its beneficial consequences. The reformation of religion by
Luther, aided the progress of political truth. The daring spirit of Luther, in
opposition to the Holy See, by the powerful influence of example, animated the
politician as well as priest. The warm discussion of religious topics, infused
elasticity and vigor into mind; and other branches of science participated of
the benefits of freedom of thought and enquiry. The mind loosened from the
chains of imposing superstition explored with dauntless courage, the regions of
political and religious science. The Dutch became sensible to the exactions and
oppressions of their Spanish Governors, and they unanimously resolved to throw
off their imperious yoke -- By patriotic exertions, and the assistance of
Elizabeth, they extorted a recognition of their independence; in the formation
and operation of their political institutions they experienced urgent
embarrassments and defects, to remedy which they resorted to the miserable
expedient of creating an hereditary Stadtholder; it distorted every republican
feature of their government; it betrayed a want of political discernment, and
the exertions of the patriots in 1787, manifested a conviction of their
mistake. Their struggles were ineffectual, but the progress and valor of the
French arms, has lopped off this cumbrous, and unnatural graft, from the tree
of Dutch liberty. The next struggle for freedom began in England, under the
reign of the infatuated and misguided Charles 1st. The citizens of England,
animated by the recent example of the Dutch, and irritated into revolt by the
oppressive impositions of their sovereign, openly opposed his authority. To
particularize the unhappy events of those times, would exceed the limits I have
assigned to this oration. The decapitation of their monarch; the treachery of
Cromwell, and the restoration of the 2d Charles, are facts familiar to the
public mind -- Wearied with a civil war, and unskilled in political science,
they were unable to remedy the evils which they felt and suffered; they gave up
the cause of Republicanism for lost, and submitted again to royalty. The
commotions in England, deserve particular consideration; for although the
spirit of liberty was smothered in that country, the first emigrants to this,
retained their unction, and transmitted it from generation to generation, until
it broke forth with increased vigor, in the revolution of America.

But of all events in the history of man, the discovery of America seems to be
the most auspicious to freedom. It was at a time when Europe groaned under
ecclesiastical and political oppression, when no hope was left to solace the
woe of the vanquished; when all hopes, of the regeneration of Europe were cut
off; when the scaffold streamed with the blood of its victims, and the measure
of political iniquity was almost full, that Columbus discovered the new world;
that fortunate event in the annals of time, opened a new and chearing prospect
to the disciples of liberty. Had America continued an undiscovered country, is
it probable that the energy of the French would have been roused to cut off
their tyrant? Surrounded as they are by despotic States, would they have
undertaken the arduous task of a revolution? Could they have supported their
numerous fleets and armies necessary to maintain their ground against a host of
combined and exasperated foes. The diminution of their agricultural productions
in consequence of war, and the difficulty of obtaining supplies from their
enemies, would have forbid the attempt.

The discovery and revolution of America, is unequivocally a necessary prelude
to the regeneration of Europe -- and by a happy concatenation of causes, the
discovery of the one has led to a beginning regeneration of the other. Let us
now take a nearer view of the revolution in America, that luminous era of
human happiness. Need I to inform you that a few centuries past, these verdant
fields, and this delightful village, were a solitary desert, the residence of
every venomous and hostile animal, and the abode of the still more ferocious
savage; but a few revolving years has past, since our forefathers fled from
the religious and political persecutions of European governments, to secure an
asylum in which freedom of opinion, might not be fettered in wicked, selfish,
and prostituted establishments. They encountered a tempestuous ocean; they
encountered fatigue, poverty, disease, and every hardship of human life. They
voluntarily banished themselves from connections, friends, and every natal
attachment; and with a perseverance, the natural offspring of uncontrouled
liberty, converted the gloomy desert into a blooming paradise. The early
history of our country is full of wars with merciless savages who spared
neither age, sex, or condition of life. Whose heart is so barred against every
social impression, as not to commisserate their sufferings? Remote from all
governmental assistance, unprotected by their mother country; on one side, a
boundless ocean, and on every other hemmed in by hordes of savages, implacable
in their nature, and whose determination was their total extirpation,
Vigilance, industry and unanimity, were their only protection* when by labor
and incessant toil, they had subdued the intractable nature of the soil, when
they had ameliorated its appearance and made it a comfortable residence for
man, and when they had conquered their inveterate foes (the savages,) a new and
unexpected enemy, their mother country began to oppress them. They who before,
had considered this country, as a place of banishment, only for the most
infamous convicts, now began to look with a jealous and invidious eye on the
growing wealth and prosperity of the new world. Transportation was no longer a
punishment, but a blessing; for in this country where liberty and equality had
as yet reigned, the means of subsistence were open to all -- the burdensome and
oppressive impositions on the industry and commerce of Europe had not as yet
withdrawn the scanty pittance from the laboring peasant and mechanic.

England exhausted with wars to support an imaginary balance of power, while
she weeped over an empty treasury, viewed with envy the affluent condition of
the citizens of America. It excited the rapacity of her ministers. Eager to
grasp the wealth which industry had acquired, they violated the chartered
rights of her colonies.

America penetrated their designs. They sought constitutional redress by loyal
petitions to the throne and parliament; but ambition had marked her object,
infatuation had seized the parliament, and an unwarrantable lust of domination
goaded them to such measures as finally to produce a decided opposition to
their authority. The monarch lured by the prospect of gain, and his ambition
fanned into a flame by artful treacherous, ministers was drawn into the same
vortex with the parliament. Who among us but remembers the numerous oppressive
acts of king and parliament? The Stamp act, the Tea act, the Boston port-bill
act, were all legitimate measures of despotic power. The king to reduce us to
unconditional submission, cast us out of his protection; captured our seamen,
and compelled them into a service against their inclination and all the laws of
a civilized people. Our citizens were subjected to be transported to England
for a trial, torn from their relations and necessitated by very expensive means
to establish their innocence, or suffer conviction.

Who can contemplate the Boston massacre without emotions of horror and
indignation, and who can contemplate the tyrannical nature of their acts of
parliament, without an abhorrence for their dereliction of all principle?
Legislation without representation, is, the greatest of all absurdities. But
neither entreaties, petitions, nor remonstrances could prevail upon the
stubborn obduracy of Britain; she was deaf to the calls of justice; she had
hardened her heart in wickedness; had inured herself to view scenes of
slaughter, carnage, and oppression without the least emotion, and nothing
except unconditional submission and unlimited power could satiate her
inordinate ambition. Resolved upon the fatal step, she transported her fleets
and armies to reduce us to the laws of a despotic parliament. America, when no
other hope was left, resolved to oppose force to force, and at the expense of
every thing dear to life to maintain her independence or die in the attempt.
She organized a Congress, enlisted an army, and our virtuous citizens, with
ardor and enthusiasm relinquished their peaceful occupations for the noisy,
painful, and dangerous scenes of a military life. Congress, when all hopes of
reconciliation vanished, resolved to publish the separation of America from
Britain. They stated the causes which led them to this painful measure, and on
the 4th of July, 1776, published the following luminous and emphatic
declaration:

WE the Representatives of the United States of America in General Congress
assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the World for the rectitude of our
intentions do, in the name and by the authority of the good people of these
colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that these United Colonies are, and of
right ought to be, Free and Independent States -- that they are absolved from
all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between
them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought totally to be dissolved; and
that as free and independent states, they have full power to levy war, conclude
peace, contract alliances, and to do all other acts and things, which
independent states may of right do. And for the support of this declaration
with a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge
to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor."

The difficult and trying scenes we had to pass through, I hope has made an
indelible impression upon the minds of a greater part of my audience. The
arduous and gloomy campaign of 1777, I trust is still fresh in your
remembrance. Burgoyne pushing with rapidity from the north; Clinton rushing
from the south, and our army undisciplined, unclad and unfed, must have created
the most dismal apprehensions in the patriot's breast. But when driven to the
verge of despair, when we had given up all for lost, when columns of
impenetrable smoke encompassed our dwellings and enveloped our horizon -- when
our fields were deluged with blood -- when the air was rent with the thundering
peal of cannon and the shrieks of the dying, and when our fate was suspended
upon a mere incalculable possibility, then was our deliverance near.

Can you forget that we shed the blood of our most invaluable citizens? Can you
forget that a Warren and Montgomery fell? The bare remembrance of the dangerous
precipices from which we escaped, and the plots and machinations of our
adversary, must excite gratitude in the most unfeeling heart. The bare
remembrance of the dismemberment of families, and the tender sympathies that
were cut off, must wring a tear from the eye of the most ferocious and inhuman
soul. But shall I draw a veil over these transactions and direct your attention
to a period of peace and felicity, the peace of 1783. England exhausted with a
seven years war and convinced of the valor of Columbia's sons, relinquished her
swelling hopes of conquest, and acknowledged the independence of the United
States. The independence of America in all its consequences, is one of the most
important revolutions in the history of man. The bosterous and precipitate
revolutions of Greece and Rome, vanish into nothing, when compared to the
revolution of America. They took place when men were ignorant of the true
principles of political science, when the lessons of poets and philosophers
served rather to confound and distract, than illuminate the understanding. The
power of legislation was vested in the body of the people, and they collected
in turbulent factious assemblies, better adapted to produce scenes of blood,
than wholesome laws.

The violent impulse given to the passions by harrangueing demagogues broke
down every barrier of decency and the public good was swallowed up in the
turbulence of parties. But a genuine representative republic, is an experiment
in political science reserved for the new world. When we contemplate the
sublime aspect of republicanism in opposition to monarchy, how majestic does it
appear -- built on the general good, uniting in one august assembly, the
wisdom, the virtue, integrity and responsibility of a nation, extending its
fatherly protection to the lowest member of the community -- Monarchy, thou
pest and enemy of the human race, drop your glittering crown and submit to its
empire!

A legislative assembly deliberating for the good of a great nation, studious
in the investigation of truth, and which looks with a single eye to the good of
the whole, is one of the most noble and animating spectacles in nature. While
the cabinets of monarchs, plotting the extermination of the human race,
engendering schemes replete with mischief and of death, and whose only object
is to add splendour and pageantry to royalty, strikes every moral sentiment of
the heart with disgust -- humanity shudders, honesty and justice affrighted and
astonished, turn from the petrifying sight and sensibility on the rack, vents
herself in tears and in groans. O, monarchy! what have thou to answer for? Not
content with excluding from thy courts the wise, the poor, and the virtuous;
but thou must wring from poverty its last morsel, and sacrafice thousands of
innocent men to satiate thy inordinate, thy internal ambition: but thanks to
the auspices of republicanism, thy gaudy trappings are fast losing their
fascinating influence.

In a free government, commerce expands her sails; prompted by a spirit of
enterprise and a desire of gain, men venture the dangers of a bosterous ocean,
in pursuit of new commodities. An acquaintance with man hence results. He
participates of the pleasures and miseries of his species; he feels for all
that suffer, he assists their wants, his heart melts into affection, and the
rough impenetrable particles of the monk and barbarian, dissolve into the
sympathising heart of a citizen of civilized life. Commercial intercourse too
has its evils. By our extensive trade we import false ideas of honor, we import
prejudices more pernicious to the sanity of the body politic, than infection to
the body natural. The pernicious influence of commercial intercourse with
despotic kingdoms, has long been observed, both by the philosopher and
politician. It was on this principle that Lycurgus substituted iron instead of
the precious metals, as a circulating medium and interdicted foreign commerce.
It is a subject of weighty consideration for every American legislature to
determine upon the propriety of changing our trade into channels where dangers
of this kind would be less to be apprehended; but we fondly hope, that the new
order of things taking place in Europe, will anticipate this necessity.

Among the advantages of a free government its influence on the progress of
science, stands very conspicuous. The enlightened sun of reason already begin
to shed its benign influence in every branch of science. The heart and mind
begin to expand -- subjects heretofore impenetrable and interdicted by
authority, are now developed with remarkable boldness and success. Genius has
expanded its wings and soars aloft under the genial sun of liberty, in quest of
scientific treasures. The literary productions of the present day wear a
boldness of aspect; a depth of investigation, and precision of argument
unrivalled in any former age. May we not indulge a hope that the reign of
liberty will usher in the discovery and the reign of truth? Who can calculate
the possible and probable consequences of the revolutionary principles of the
present age. Unfettered, unrestrained, may we not by progressive improvement,
penetrate into the mysteries of animate and inanimate matter? May we not
discover the secret spring of life and animation? Another portion of our
history yet remains; the articles of our union formed in the hurry and bustle
of war when invasion and danger prompted the several state governments to
supply deficiency of power in the general government, we experienced few
difficulties; but when peace took place, the counteracting regulations of the
several States, created very urgent embarrassments. England, eager to throw
every obstacle in the way of our prosperity, refused to enter into amicable and
reciprocal regulations. Under this pressing exigency, we were under the
imperious necessity of delegating more power to the general government. To pass
over the merits and defects of the new constitution, new and unexpected changes
have taken place in Europe. Our allies the French, have compassed a revolution
unparalelled in history. The change of commercial regulations which was
expected to follow the new constitution, and which was urged as a strong reason
for its adoption, has not equalled the promises of its votaries. Suspicions
have arisen that the conduct of our administration, discovered pu^^^imity to
England, and a secret hostility to the success of the French Republic. Whatever
of truth these suspicions may contain, it is my opinion that the feelings of
the government have not been in unison with those of the people. On this
account has it been thought proper that the people should come forward in
societies and express their opinion of public measures. The decay of liberty in
every country in which it has ever got any footing; the powerful propensities
of the human heart to corruption, and the difficulty of concentring, the public
will, warrant us in using every precaution against the assumption of power, or
the omission of duty; and it is always a strong mark of suspicion, when
government draws a veil over its transactions, that power delegated, has not
been exercised for the good of the people. For the laudable purpose of
re-kindling the expiring flame of liberty have we associated, and not for the
dark secret purposes of sedition and disorganization, which our enemies have
surmised. I am sure we have, and ever will evince ourselves friends to law,
peace and order. The tree of liberty has taken some root in America; water it;
cherish its growth; let not its foliage wither, nor the rude blast of tyranny
and faction shake its aspiring trunk -- while its roots are yet tender, beware
of the devouring worm, beware of the insidious efforts of foreign and domestic
foes. We are far from a state of moral and political perfection; born and bred
under a motly mixture of democracy, aristocracy, and despotism, its impressions
and its dictates are hard to be obliterated -- But the corroding ulcerated
heart of monarchy, must be probed to the bottom before a permanent foundation
can be laid for republican establishments.

I might remind you of a prevalent idea, that representation is a
representation of property and not of the people: -- an idea the legitimate
offspring of feudal despotism. I might remind you of the homage paid to the
wealthy, while the poor and the virtuous are treated with neglect and with
scorn. I might remind you of numerous outrages upon natural and immutable
justice in the decision of courts. I might recount numerous instances of the
despotism of our hearts. The great work of reformation is but just begun. When
peace established our independence, and the mind was left free to inquiry and
investigation, I certainly expected a reformation of civil and criminal
justice: but the material features of the English code are still prominent. A
few notorious abuses of natural justice are amended. The severity of the
criminal code is a reproach to freedom and to justice. Shall we turn from
America, the first favorite seat of liberty, to France for an example? Shall we
be outstripped in the universal career of improvement? Shall we be distanced in
the Olympian games of virtue? Forbid it shame! forbid it justice! It is better
to instruct than correct; it is better to correct than destroy; and government
is never more in the sphere of duty, than in opening every avenue to knowledge.
The atrocious crimes that have heretofore stained the character of man, have
been more owing to ignorance and the powerful temptations strewed in his path
by government, than any inherent depravity.

How many crimes has government created? And what a powerful interest does she
feel in the discovery of crimes, and in the conviction of offenders, when her
coffers are filled by the decisions of her courts -- When the deprivation of
life will not satiate her vengeance, what shall we expect from her clemency or
justice?

A family deprived of its head, deprived of its property, and a reproach in
society, is a sight so truly affecting, that the ferocious, vindictive heart of
government itself might relent. The vindictive spirit of the laws, the
implacable, intolerant disposition of the heart, obscure the brilliancy of our
revolution. The intolerance of sectaries, the intolerance of faction and party
spirit, darken and discolor the rays of political light that have penetrated
our horizon.

The heart of man has been too deep in the mire of corruption to purify itself
instantly. The violent ferment in America has expelled a small portion of it
upon the surface. Be vigilant, be active that the minions of despotism do not
regain an empire in our hearts, and in the resolutions of our councils.

The violent tide of the passions in favor of despotism, requires the most
vigilant caution. They have always been the voluntary tools of despotism; and
reason, the watchman upon the tower of republicanism, should be perpetually
awake to their insidious approaches. We are in a comparatively happy land. We
are in the lap of plenty. The choicest blessings of providence are shed upon us.

Our sensibility is not wounded with the extreme poverty of European despotism,
nor our indignation aroused at the unmerited profusion shed upon her vicious,
ignorant, and abandoned nobility. With temperance, industry and care, health,
plenty, and liberty may be the universal lot of Columbia's sons. Our fields are
clothed with grass, our harvests wave in token of plenty, our trees bow with
their loads, and the air itself breathes sweetness. But while we are basking
under the warm sunshine of freedom, a greater part of man are groaning under
an insupportable tyranny. Some are pining under the galling chain, some wasting
the vigor of their days in gloomy and hopeless confinement, without one ray of
consolation, while others are wading through seas of blood to attain liberty
and independence. We may sit on the clift of neutrality without the sphere of
the boisterous tempest, and quietly observe the sublime, the awful, and
tremendous prospect of the conflict of armies and of battles, and of the wreck
and fall of empires, while the political atmosphere of Europe is dissolving
with fervent heat, consuming and sweeping away the vile fabrics of despotism,
we are sitting under our vines and fig trees enjoying the sweet fruits of our
former exertions.

Permit me to call your attention to the particular observance of this day; a
day noted in the annals of fame. The celebration of festivals is a custom of
great antiquity. It is coeval with the creation and the first existence of man.
The FOURTH OF JULY deserves the most cordial celebration. It contains within
its acts the most ineffable of blessings. A day dear to every freeman, and
which the brazen trumpet of fame is now sounding through the four quarters of
the globe. A day that has taught kings their weakness and the people their
strength. A day that has inspired into man his primitive sense of freedom and
the rank he was designed to hold in the varied scale of creation. When all
creation mourned, when genius was smothered in embryo, when every exertion of
intellect was palsied in its origin, when darkness pervaded our horizon, and
the iron scepter of despotism had fastened man under its imperious reign, the
Fourth of July broke the bands asunder, and opened a new and animating prospect
to Columbia's sons. All hall, auspicious day! thou have unlosened the gordian
knot of despotism; -- thou have set the captive free -- thou have given birth
to a new empire in the west -- thou have paved the way to the emancipation of
the human race. Shall we not chaunt the blessings of freedom? Shall we hang our
harps upon the willows, forgetful of the day that gave us birth?

Were we uninterruptedly to pursue our several occupations unmindful of our
political welfare, how long would the Goddess of liberty illuminate our
prospects, and animate our hearts. The coldness, the unanimating employments of
common life, would benumb our feelings, disunite our hearts and exertions, and
again we would become the fit tools of despotism.

We must occasionally visit the altar of liberty if we retain the spirit of
freedom. The celebration of festivals vivifies the torpid faculties of the
soul, awakens intellect, enlarges our views, and animates to virtuous and
heroic deeds. What a magnificent spectacle would all the sons of Columbia make,
met in one august assembly, celebrating the day of their political birth. And
what an indignant sight would it be, to behold the slaves of despotism covering
round their tyrant and oppressor. Can it be that human nature is so degraded?
Can it be that their joy on such occasions, flows from a pure, voluntary, and
untainted fountain? The 4th of July, has put a final termination to the
progress of despotism. Despotism like a roaring lion has pursued man in all his
steps. Did he fly into the wilderness, despotism would pursue and overtake.
Despotism has traveled with unvaried and measured steps from the rising almost
to the setting sun.

Asia the first seat of man, and once the garden spot of the world, has been
swept with the bosom of despotism and destruction. It has stained the plains of
Asia with crimson gore, converted its fertile fields into barren heaths,
degenerated the minds of its inhabitants below the level of their species, and
man intended for the ornament and crown of the creation, has become an object
of pity, contempt and indignation. Despotism has uniformly kept pace with the
population of the world -- neither sea, ocean, rivers, mountains, nor
continents, could interrupt its invincible progress. In Africa how is humanity
outraged by the infamous traffic and merchandise of the human species. In Asia
how is intellect crucified, and every benevolent emotion stifled in embryo. The
imbecility of mind and servile disposition of its inhabitants are a living
momento of the pernicious reign of despotism to every votary of freedom.

In what a degrading aspect does Europe place a great part of its inhabitants
by the creation of her privileged orders, by the severity of its laws and
edicts, and the pusillanimous, political and religious superstition that
universally reigns in her domain.

But fortunately for man, when despotism had extended its empire over three
quarters of the globe, and with gigantic strides traversed the atlantic to
invade the new world, the political rays of light that beamed upon the minds of
Columbia's sons, animated them to repel the invading monster. Appalled at the
sight of light, the monster vanished, the proud waves of despotism were stayed,
and the empire of reason, liberty and truth gained an honorable and memorable
victory. The 4th of July opened a new fountain of authority, and turned its
current from west to east. The rays that enlightened the hemisphere of America
have rebounded to Europe, and now enlighten and animate the cold, lifeless,
dark regions of despotism. The mind entombed in ignorance felt its invigorating
and resuscitating influence. The thick fog of despotism dissipates before the
penetrating rays of reason, the horizon of liberty begins to enlarge and
expand, and we have a real hope that despotism will retire to its original
kingdom of choas and darkness. The long expected and predicted age of peace and
felicity, the hope of the virtuous and abhorrence of the wicked has already
begun. And I look forward, fellow-citizens, with anxious* solicitude to a time
when benevolence shall gush in limpid streams from the heart consoling all the
afflicted, and when wisdom shall dart with electrical velocity from mind,
enlightening and invigorating the whole family of man. I anticipate an age when
the temple of Janus shall be forever shut, when men shall no longer array
themselves in hostility, when the sword shall be beat into plough-shares and
pruning hooks, when the tree of liberty shall extend its branches over the
habitable globe, and when liberty wafted on the wings of time shall pervade all
hearts and all climes, and the large family of man join in one general chorus
in commemoration of the 4th of July.


