AN ADDRESS FROM ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER, OF SOUTH CAROLINA, TO HIS CONSTITUENTS,
CONTAINING HIS REASONS FOR APPROVING OF THE TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE AND
NAVIGATION, WITH GREAT BRITAIN,

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ORMROD AND CONRAD AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, No. 41,
CHESNUT-STREET. M.DCCXCV.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
THAT public servants, my fellow-citizens, owe those who employ them an exact
account of whatever they do in discharge of their trust, has always appeared to
me a truth equally clear and important. This trust, from its very nature and
its objects, must be exercised according (...) the discretion of the agent. He
is appointed for that very purpose; appointed to enquire, gain information,
deliberate, and decide on public measures, according to what he may consider as
the best interest of his constituents and the community. But though they give him
the power of acting for them, they retain the right of judging whether he has
exerted that power with prudence and fidelity; of continuing or withdrawing
their confidence, as he may appear to have merited approbation or become justly
liable to censure.

It is therefore the duty of every representative to give his constituents a
faithful account not only of what he has done upon every important occasion,
but of the reasons and motives which have influenced his conduct, that they may
be enabled to judge whether that conduct and those motives are such as they
ought to approve, and to decide at a future election, whether they ought to
continue or alter their choice.

Under the influence of this persuasion, fellow-citizens, I have thought it
incumbent on me to address you on the subject of the treaty with Great Britain
-- a subject which has produced a stronger and a more universal impression on
the public mind than any that has occurred since I received your appointment,
to tell you the means I have used to form a right judgment, the decision I have
at length made, and the reasons on which (...) i^ founded.

And here let me declare that if I could consider this treaty as "degrading to
the National honor, dangerous to the political existence, and destructive of
the Agricultural, Manufacturing, Commercial, and Shipping interests of the
people of the United States" Charleston Advertisement, City Gazette, July 14th,
1795.
. Could I consider it as "prostituting the dearest rights of freemen and laying
them prostrate at the feet of Royalty" Chief Justice Rutledge's Speech, City
Gazette, July 17th, 1795.
. Could I consider it as "a prostitution of the Sovereignty of the United
States, and a wanton sacrifice of the rights of this free nation" Savannah
Resolutions.
. Could I consider it "insulting to the dignity, injurious to the interests,
dangerous to the security, and repugnant to the Constitution of the United
States" Richmond Resolutions.
. If I could consider it as containing "concessions incompatible with the
object of the embassy, derogatory to the honor and injurious to the interests
of America, and openly and pointedly hostile to the cause of France" Petersburg
Resolutions.
. If I could consider it as "highly injurious to the commercial interests of
the United States, derogatory to their National honor and Independence, and
dangerous to the peace and happiness of their citizens" Boston Resolutions.
-- If I could consider it as pregnant with "many evils that threaten our ruin"
Portsmouth (N. H.) Resolutions.
-- If I could consider it as "injurious to the Agriculture, Manufactures and
Commerce of the United States, derogatory from their national honor, and (...)
to their welfare peace and prosperity" New York Resolutions.
-- (...) inconsider it "as invading the constitution and legislative authority
of the country; as abandoning their important and well founded claims against
the British Government: as imposing unjust and impolitic restraints on their
commerce; as injurious to their agriculture: as conceding without an
equivalent, important advantages to Great Britain; as hostile and ungrateful to
France; as committing our peace with that great Republic; as unequal in every
respect to America, as hazarding her internal peace and prosperity; and as
derogatory from her sovereignty and independence" New York Resolutions.
-- Could I believe that it "in effect admits another government to control
the legislative functions of the Union" Philadelphia Memorial.
-- Could I believe it "degrading to the national honor, dangerous to the
public interest, and destructive to the agricultural and commercial views of
the United States" Trenton Resolutions.
-- Could I, after sober reflection and a careful investigation of the subject,
regard this act of our government in these hideous and formidable points of
view; did that cool and deliberate consideration of which every important
public act ought to be the result, present it to my mind in these fearful and
horrid colors: I have no hesitation in declaring that I should think it my
indispensible duty to lift up my voice against it in Congress, to struggle to
the last against its going into operation; and if all these means should be
found ineffectual, to return among you, sound the alarm, and join you in a
resort to the last expedients for preventing the execution of a contract which
was to place the legislative functions of the Union, under the control of a
foreign government, and end in "prostituting the dearest rights of freemen, and
laying them prostrate at the feet of Royalty."

But, fellow-citizens, let me ask you, and let me appeal to your calm
dispassionate judgment for an answer, let me ask you can these frightful
events, these destructive consequences, (...) justly apprehended from a treaty
the whole commercial part o^^ which is to expire at the end of twelve years,
and may be terminated by ourselves within two years after the close of (...)
sent war? Can any possible operation of a treaty, admittion to be a
disadvantageous, an unwise one, so soon destroy, so speedily ruin, or even in
so short a period materially injure the agriculture, the manufactures, the
commerce of America, which during the present universal shock in Europe, and
under the depredations of all parties, have flourished and increased beyond all
former example? I confess I cannot conceive it.

Let me further ask you, fellow citizens, what reasons there are to believe
that Mr. Jay would conclude, major Pinckney approve, two thirds of the Senate
sanction, and the President finally ratify a treaty "degrading to the national
honor, and dangerous to the political existence of the United States," -- a
treaty containing "a prostitution of their sovereignty, and a wanton sacrifice
of their rights." -- a treaty which "admits another government to control the
legislative functions of the Union," "prostitutes the dearest rights of
freemen, and lays them prostrate at the feet of royalty?"

Mr. Jay had a reputation to support, a reputation gained by a long and active
public life; would he blast it at once? He has a family growing up around him:
would he throw a gloom over all their opening prospects, and nip the bud of
their prosperity by an act which must involve himself and them in one common
disgrace? He held a distinguished office from which the voice of his country
might remove him; would he raise the voice of that country against him, by
"prostituting its sovereignty, and making a wanton sacrifice of its rights?" At
the time when he agreed to this treaty, at the time when he dispatched it to
the United States, at the time when, without unforeseen and accidental delays,
it must have arrived and been made public, at that time he was a candidate for
an high office in his own State, to which he could be raised only by the
approbation of his fellow citizens at large; would he ensure their
disapprobation by betraying their dearest interests? He was opposed by a
numerous and powerful party, by a popular and respectable competitor; would he
furnish this opposition with irresistible arms against himself, by an act which
must have drawn on him the public execration? He is said to be a candidate for
the highest trust his country can bestow, a candidate in opposition to men
distinguished throughout Europe as well as America, for their talents and their
virtues: would he forever blast whatever prospects he may have by agreeing to
"admit another government to control the legislative functions of his
country?" No, (...) citizens! The stations which Mr. Jay has filled, the long
period for which he has enjoyed a spotless reputation and possessed the
confidence of his country, argue at least, a common portion of talents and
integrity; and a man must be depraved and foolish to an unusual degree, who,
situated as Mr. Jay was, could consent to so attrocious an act as the treaty is
represented; could consent to "degrade the national honor, endanger the
political existence, and destroy the agricultural, manufacturing, commercial,
and shipping interests" of his country: foolish if he could consent to it
without seeing its tendency, and both foolish and depraved if he saw it and yet
consented.

But if Mr. Jay was corrupted by the British court, as a person in Charleston
has thought proper to insinuate; Mr. Charles Pinckney's speech. The expression
is, "to oppose him (Mr. Jay) singly, at their own court, to the talents,
experience, and perhaps temptations, of their ablest statesmen."
if, as is alleged, "his dislike to the French" and "his partiality for
British government and measures" be so great that "the British minister was
sure of his acquiescence in every demand," Ibid.
If he was of a disposition to "barter away the rights of his country, to
sacrifice the interests of the western territory, and dissever it from the
Union," Ibid.
If he was inclined to make "an easy and ready concession to the British of
every privilege they could think of inserting," Ibid.
If he was willing to make "an infamous and degrading surrender of the rights
and character of his country," and has "attempted to impose ignominious
shackles" Ibid.
upon it: If we should believe all this of Mr. Jay upon the assertion of
persons, who, to say the least of them, have given no greater proofs than he
has of ability or virtue, what shall we say of major Pinckney? Are we to
include him in this charge of folly and wickedness? He was on the spot during
the whole negotiation, and for many months preceding it; he had frequently
communicated with the British court on the subject, he knew their jealousy,
haughtiness, and obstinacy; he was consulted by Mr. Jay in every stage of the
negotiation, and gave his most decided approbation of the treaty. In a letter
to the Secretary of State dated, London, Nov. 16th 1794, he says, "Mr. Jay
communicated freely with me upon this subject during the course of the
negotiation, and I have witnessed the great difficulties which have occurred in
adjusting several of the articles. Although some points might have been
arrang^^ more benefically for us if the treaty had been dictated entire^^ by
the United States, yet when it is considered as a composition of differences
where mutual complaints had rendered mutual concessions necessary to establish
a good understanding, I think it may fairly be said that as little has been
conceded by Mr. Jay, and as much obtained for the United States, as all
circumstances considered, could be expected. The business upon the whole has
been concluded more beneficially for us, than I had any hope we could obtain by
negotiation six months ago, and in my opinion places us in a more advantageous
situation than we should have been by becoming parties to the war." This
opinion, fellow citizens, I confess had great weight with me. You all know
major Pinckney, you know his modest worth, his retiring virtue, his
disinterestedness, his unassuming firmness of character, his solid judgment,
his conscientious attention to the discharge of every public and private duty.
You have seen him act in all the various stations of civil life, and many of
you have seen him bleed at your sides in defense of the rights and liberties of
America. Can you conceive that he has given his sanction to an instrument by
which those rights and liberties are to be laid prostrate at the feet of
royalty; by which our national honor is to be degraded, our independence
destroyed; our public prosperity ruined or endangered, and the legislative
functions of our country subjected to the control of a foreign government?
Could he be so deceived in the nature of that instrument as to think it
advantageous to America, if it were in f^^t subversive of our rights,
liberties, constitution, and happiness?

But if Mr. Jay and major Pinckney be entitled to no confidence, if we conclude
that they were imposed on or corrupted, is no regard due to the opinion of two
thirds of the Senate, acting on oath and in discharge of the high trust which
their fellow citizens have reposed in them? These men have been selected from
various parts of the Union for those qualities which entitle citizens in a free
government, to public confidence. Their interests are involved with the
interests of the community. Their promotion depends on the approbation of their
fellow citizens. Many of them are old and tried servants who have grown gray in
the public councils of their country, and whose wisdom and integrity have
hitherto been highly valued. I know many of them personally, and I know no men
of more accurate or extensive information, than are to be found among them, no
men more respectable for their talents or their virtues. Why should such men
betray their trust? What temptation have they to prove unfaithful to a country
whose confidence they possess? They enjoyed the best means of information; they
possess a good capacity of judging; they bestowed a long and (...)
considerations on the subject, and why should (...) conclude that they have
decided unwisely? Have we better means of information? Have we more wisdom than
they? Or have we given the business a more mature, a more attentive
investigation? Have we given more proofs than they of wisdom and integrity,
that we should harshly and positively pronounce their act to be "a prostitution
of the dearest rights of their country at the feet of royalty?"

But if the perfidy or folly of two thirds of the Senate have been added to
that of Mr. Jay and major Pinckney, can we derive no security from the
integrity of Genesis Washington; from his prudence, his long tried patriotism, his
sound understanding, his cautious deliberating character, from his extensive
means of information, from the long consideration which his situation has
enabled him to bestow on this subject? These qualities were once thought to
entitle him to public confidence; how has this title been forfeited? Has it
been by the firmness and wisdom with which, a thing unexampled in other
countries and other times, he suppressed a formidable insurrection without
shedding one drop of blood? Has it been by the singular mixture of prudence and
fortitude wherewith he has preserved to this young and rising country all the
blessings of peace and unexampled prosperity, amidst the destructive fury of
that tempest by which Europe and the West Indies have been afflicted and torn?
Is it because we have dwelt safely under his administration, and there have
been none to make us afraid? Is it because our credit has been restored, our
agriculture doubled, our commerce, manufactures, and shipping increased nearly
threefold during the short period for which he has presided over our
government, that we ought now to withdraw from him our confidence; now to
suppose that he would ratify a treaty by which "our dearest rights would be
laid prostrate at the feet of royalty"? Is it the magnanimity wherewith he was
foremost in acknowledging the French Republic, This is a fact. Our government
was the first to acknowledge the French Republic.
while every power in Europe was leagued against it, or stood aloof, from which
we are to conclude that he would enter into a compact "hostile and ungrateful
to France"?

If mischiefs of this kind really lurked in this treaty, is it conceivable that
they could escape the President's knowledge and attention? He has hitherto been
considered as prudent and cautions. He had the best possible means of
information on this subject. He was apprized of every step that was taken, knew
the whole course of the negotiation, and understood well the substance of the
treaty before it was concluded. He (...) the instrument in his possession from
the time of its arrival in this country, early in March, until he finally
ratified it s^^^ (...) in July. During this whole period it was under his
consideration, aided by the advice of every man in the United States whom he
thought it necessary to consult, furnished with all the information, from every
quarter, that was requisite for enlightening and guiding his own understanding,
he at length decided. And is no respect due to such a decision? I confess,
fellow citizens, I cannot think so. Were I disposed to differ from it, I should
still imagine that with such an authority opposed to me, I might probably be in
the wrong. I should hold it necessary, before I pronounced positively that this
decision was wicked or foolish, to ask myself whether I had given more
evidences of wisdom, virtue, and patriotism than General Washington; whether I
had passed through more or severer trials; whether I had possessed more ample
means of information on this subject than he, or bestowed on it a longer, a
more (...) examination? And finally, whether I ought, on a short investigation
of my own, or a still shorter one of others, to reject this decision, supported
by the talents and knowledge of two thirds of the Senate, by those qualities of
Mr. Jay which have gained him such high and repeated testimonies of public
confidence, and by the prudence, the sound discretion, the knowledge, and the
tried patriotism of major Pinckney?

These considerations inclined me to think favorably of the treaty before I
had given it that attentive and thorough consideration which ought to precede
every decision on important public measures. But I knew that it was my duty to
how implicitly to no authority, however weighty, but to judge and act for
myself. I knew that you had sent me to form opinions of my own, not to adopt
those of other persons, however respectable. I therefore resolved to spare no
pains for understanding the subject, and forming a right judgment about it. For
this purpose I conversed, as far as I had opportunity, both with the friends of
the treaty, and its opposers. I carefully weighed all their objections. I read
attentively every thing that was written in favor of it and against it. I
gained all the information in my power, and from the most respectable sources,
respecting those branches of our commerce which it affects. I took the treaty
itself with me on my journey, as well as the publications respecting it, which
from time to time appeared. I faithfully and repeatedly studied it, recurred to
it on every occasion, and carefully compared it with our other treaties, with
the laws of nations, and with our own constitution.

From the time when the treaty was published, till the present moment, more
than five months, this has been my chief occupation.

The result, fellow citizens, of this examination, which I am hold to declare
has been a fa^thful, a laborious, and an impartial one, is a firm and complete
persuasion that the treaty, situated as we were, was proper and expedient;
that, to use the words of major Pinckney, "as little has been conceded by the
United States, and as much gained for them as, all circumstances considered,
could be expected: That the business has been concluded more beneficially for
us than there was reason to hope could be obtained by negotiation, some months
before; and that it places us in a more advantageous situation than we should
have been in by becoming parties to the war."

The case between us and Great Britain, at the time when Mr. Jay was sent,
stood thus:

We charged Great Britain with having, greatly to our detriment, retained the
western posts which she was bound by the treaty of peace to give up; with
having carried away from New York, at the evacuation of it, a great number of
negroes, the property of American citizens, contrary to the express
stipulations of that treaty; and with having given orders, during the present
war, for the capture of a great number of our vessels, contrary to the law of
nations and the rights of neutrality.

Great Britain, on her part, alleged, that we had committed the first
infraction of the treaty of peace, by permitting legal impediments to the
recovery of British debts, contrary to the fourth article, and that she
retained the posts as a pledge for our performance of that article; she denied
that the negroes carried away from New York were American property at the time
of signing the treaty, having been made lawful prize by her army during the
war. And as to the captures made on us in the present war, she pretended that
they were authorized by the law of nations.

In this state of things there were but three possible courses for us to take.
First, To submit quietly to the continuation and repetition of the injuries.
Secondly, To pursue redress by measures of compulsion: Or thirdly, To seek it
by measures of negotiation.

To remain as we were, to sit down quietly under the injuries of which we
complained, would have been not only dastardly and dishonorable, but unwise in
the extreme; for experience proves, that among nations as well as individuals,
to submit tamely to injuries is to invite a repetition of them; and our
government must have relinquished all claim to the respect of foreigners and
the confidence of its own citizens, had it suffered important parts of our
territory to be withheld, and extensive depredations to be made on our
property, without taking any steps to assert and vindicate its rights. To seek
effectual and honorable redress then, in some mode or other, was clearly
indispensable. The choice was between measures of compulsion and measures of
negotiation.

Compulsory measures were of four kinds: First, war -- secondly, commercial
restrictions -- thirdly, prohibition of intercourse -- and fourthly,
sequestration of debts and stock in our banks and funds.

War had but few open advocates, and probably not a very great number of secret
ones. The public resentment was at one period inflamed to such a degree by the
depredations of the British that great numbers felt strongly disposed to the
most hostile measures; but when they reflected on the state of total
un-preparation in which we were, without a frigate at sea, or a regiment on
foot, more than was necessary for the Indian war, our harbors unfortified, our
arsenals and magazines unfurnished, and five hundred thousand tons of shipping
afloat with cargoes of immense value: when they reflected on the uncertain
event of war, and the certain mischiefs by which it is attended; the immense
expense, the vast accummulation of debt, the increase of taxation, the
destruction of property, the suspension of industry, the loss of revenue, and
the total derangement of our finances; when they maturely weighed all these
considerations, they regarded war as the greatest of evils, to be submitted to
only in the last resort, only when every other expedient had be^n fairly tried
without success.

The case, however, was different with respect to commercial restrictions. They
found support in the first talents and reputation of our country, and became a
favorite object with very considerable numbers. It was conceived that by laying
heavy burdens on the British commerce, on their shipping in our ports and their
commodities in our country, their government might be brought to a temper more
amicable or more just toward us, might be compelled to make us reparation for
the past, and to refrain from future injuries. But it was observed, on the
other side, that these restrictions would probably widen the breach between us
and Britain instead of closing it; would irritate rather than heal the wound;
would provoke them to further acts of injustice, not entice them to a conduct
more equitable and friendly: that the restrictions would be hurtful to
ourselves as well as the British, and perhaps in an equal, or even a greater
degree; that they would probably lay on our commerce counter restrictions,
whereby we should soon be engaged in a war of commercial restrictions with
them, in which it might happen that they would hold out longest. In fine, it
was considered, that this mode of compulsion would be attended by great and
certain inconveniences, that its success would be very doubtful, and that, if
unsuccessful, it could not fail to prove highly mischievous. -- The plan of
commercial restrictions was therefore rejected.

It was next proposed to suspend all commercial intercourse with Great Britain,
to receive none of her commodities in our ports, and to send her none of our
own. The supporters of this plan supposed our commerce to be of such importance
to Great Britain, that sooner than lose it, even for a time, she would come to
our own terms. But here again it was objected, that the inconveniences of this
measure were great and certain, its success doubtful; that it would injure us
extremely, as well as the British; that they could, and in all probability
would, do without our commerce quite as long as we should find it convenient to
do without theirs; and that if their government should happen to be obstinate,
an event extremely probable, considering its arrogance and pride, we should be
obliged at last to give up the measure, and recur to other means, after having
uselessly embarrassed our trade and deranged one of its most considerable
branches.

These propositions therefore of a commercial war, of restrictions and
prohibitions as means of compulsion, were rejected, and, as it appears to me,
upon unanswerable reasons.

The last compulsory expedient proposed was sequestration. Debts to a very
great amount are known to be due in our country to the subjects of Great
Britain; and they are supposed also to possess property to a considerable
extent in our banks and public funds. It was supposed that by seizing on these
debts and this property, and subjecting them to sequestration, we might so
embarrass the British government as speedily to bring it to terms; or at any
rate, that the sequestered effects would serve as a fund out of which our
losses by her violent acts might be indemnified.

But it was objected, in the first place, that to infringe the security of
private property would be a very unwise measure, as it respected ourselves:
that it would greatly lessen the confidence reposed at present by foreigners in
the good faith of our government; prevent the extension, if not put an end to
the existence, of that commercial credit by which the want of capital in this
young country, has hitherto been supplied, and such immense advantages given to
our commerce, our agriculture, and our infant manufactures; and that in
proportion as debts were less secure, all that we borrowed or bought on credit
must be borrowed at an higher interest or bought at a greater price, the
injuries arising from which would soon be much greater than those for which
these measures were intended as a remedy.

It was urged, in the second place, that so violent a measure as the
sequestration of debts and property in funds, could hardly fail to be
immediately introductive of an open rupture; that we could hardly expect the
British government to submit to it without reprizals; and as we have little or
no property of that kind in their reach, their mode of reprisals would probably
be to issue lettres of marque and privateer commissions against our commerce;
in which case we must either negociate, wherefore our situation would be far
more unfavourable than before, or have recourse to lettres of marque and
privateers on our side, and thus be immediately involved in a war, for which we
were totally unprepared, and which could not fail to he productive of the
greatest injury, beside being most uncertain in its event. This measure also
was therefore given up; and it was resolved to make an effort for obtaining
redress by means of negotiation, and, in the mean time, to prepare vigorously
for the worst, in order that, if this effort should fail, we might be in a
condition to adopt and pursue, with effect, such measures of compulsion as the
circumstances of the case might render unavoidable. By this expedient it was
conceived that we should not only gain time for preparation, which was
absolutely necessary, but give ourselves the opportunity of profiting by that
favorable change of circumstances in Europe which the enthusiastic valor of
the French, their wife measures, and unheard of exertions, joined to the
divisions and folly conspicuous in the councils of their enemies, rendered
extremely probable.

This system of conduct being agreed on, it being resolved to adopt measures of
negotiation in the first place, and reserve measures of compulsion for the last
resort, the next question was as to the mode of negociating. It was thought
that an embassy extraordinary was preferable, that being the customary mode in
cases of unusual importance, and carrying with it stronger indications of a
determina^ion on the part of our government, to pursue its object with the
utmost firmness and (...). Mr. Jay, at that time chief justice of the United
States, was nominated by the President for this purpose, and approved by the
Senate.

Objections both personal and constitutional, have been made to Mr. Jay. He has
been said to be prepossessed in favor of Britain, and an avowed e^^^y to
France. If this had been true it would surely have been a sufficient reason for
rejecting him; but it is not true. I can contradict it, and do so, on my own
knowledge. I have heard Mr. Jay express in public and private, and those who
have been much more and much longer acquainted with him, assure me that he
always has expressed the utmost pleasure in the French revolution, and the
warmest wishes for its success, the greatest dislike of the former government,
and sentiments of the highest esteem and regard for the nation. Mr. Jay indeed
thought that the conduct of a late French minister was exceedingly improper,
that he was endeavoring to gain and undue influence over the government, and
involve the country in confusion: but Mr. Jefferson also thought so, as his
letter on that subject to our minister at Paris fully proves, and Mr. Jefferson
was never thought to hate the French, though like Mr. Jay and numberless others
of our best and wisest citizens, he thought that our government ought not to be
subject to the control, or insults of their minister. So Mr. Jay has given it
as his opinion, as chief justice of the United States, that interest ought to
be paid on British debts during the war. This is not my opinion, but I know
that it is the opinion of several other judges of the supreme court, if not
all, and of a great number of our soundest and most eminent lawyers. Was it
ever heard before that because a judge decided against one party and in favor
of the other, he was an enemy to the former or a friend to the latter? Mr. Jay,
as secretary for foreign affairs, gave it as his opinion, it is said, that we
had made infractions of the treaty as well as Great Britain. The fact is
notoriously so. We agreed not to impede the recovery of just debts, and we did
impede it in various inhances. Such are the proofs of Mr. Jay's hatred to
France and partiality to Great Britain. But if he were ever so partial to one
and inimical to the other, what has that to do with the treaty? Must it stand
or fall by its own merits or demerits, or by those of the negociator?

It is also said that it was contrary to the constitution to bestow this
appointment on Mr. Jay, while chief justice of the United States. If the
President in this instance wilfully infringed the constitution, let those who
think so impeach him. If I can be convinced of it, I, for one, will not only
vote for the impeachment, but support it with all my might. For, considering
that the constitution is the charter of our liberties, and the guarantee of
them to our posterity, I think the wilful infringement of it an offense which
no consideration should induce us to pardon or overlook. If it were only an
error in his judgment, and he too is liable to error, though perhaps not more
so than those who accuse him, the error should have been corrected, and all
legal and proper means used for that purpose. But in the mean time, what has
the merit or demerit of the treaty to do with the error o^ the offense? The
question is, whether the treaty be a proper, a beneficial one; not whether the
minister who negociated it, were constitutionally appointed. If the minister
were weak, ignorant or wicked, that would be a good reason for suspecting the
treaty to be a bad one: but can his talents for negotiation, or his integrity,
be lessened or increased by the constitutionality or unconstitutionality of his
appointment? But how does it appear that Mr. Jay's appointment was
unconstitutional? The constitution says, that the legislative, executive, and
judicial powers shall be distinct and separate. But is negociating a treaty a
legislative or an executive act? So far from it, that it is not, in the eye of
the law or the constitution, an act of any kind. To make a treaty is partly an
executive, partly a legislative act; but the minister does not make it any more
than a lawyer makes a will or a deed which he is employed to draw up. It
derives its legal existence and efficacy not from the act of the minister who
negociates and signs it, but from that of the President and Senate, who ratify
it. They make the treaty, and the negociator is only an instrument in their
hands for that purpose; as much an instrument a^ the clerk who is employed to
engross, or the messenger who carries it. But the same person, it is said,
cannot perform two different functions at once. How does this appear? The
constitution says no such thing. It will seldom be possible, and more seldom
will it be expedient, for the same person to sustain two functions at one time;
but the constitution does not forbid it, when possible and expedient; and of
this possibility and expediency, the President and Senate, in whom rests the
power of appointment, are to judge. It is further contended, that a judge will
have an improper bias, in favor of a treaty which he has negociated, which he
has been concerned in making; and should therefore never be employed for that
purpose. It would be just as wise to say, that no person who had negociated a
treaty, who had been a member of Congress, or of any State Legislature, could
ever after be made a judge; because in all those cases he would be called upon
to expound and enforce laws which he had been concerned in making. At this
rate, before the President can place a man of the most distinguished talents on
the federal bench, he must enquire, whether the candidate has ever been thought
worthy of a seat in the Legislature of his own state, and if he has, reject
him. He will probably find but few who possess this necessary qualification; of
which I am sure that not one of the present judges can boast. They have all
been members of their state legislatures, and most of them members of Congress.
One of them was taken from the senate to be made a judge. I would ask whether
it would be unconstitutional for the President to call for the advice of the
judges about some executive act, the ratification of a treaty for instance? And
yet a judge who advises a treaty may have as strong a bias in favor of it, as
one who negociates it; and one case is just as much a blending of the executive
and judicial departments ^s the other. Would it be unconstitution (...) the
President if he were going on a military expedition during the recess of
Congress, to make a member of either house his aidde-camp? Yet this would be
employing a member of the legislative body in functions appertaining to the
executive department.

For these reasons, fellow-citizens, it appeared to me that Mr. Jay's
appointment could not be justly considered as unconstitutional, or improper;
and that if it were both the one and the other, still this would not affect the
merits of the treaty; from an attentive and impartial examination of which, a
correct judgment can alone be formed.

Among the numerous objections which have been made to the treaty itself, none
appear to have produced a stronger impression on the public mind, than its
giving up the claim for negroes carried away at the end of the war, and its
making no provision against the impressing of American seamen into the British
naval service.

The last of these objection seems to me to arise from an overfight; or from
very great inattention to the instrument. The nineteenth article provides, that
"for the security of the respective subjects and citizens of the contracting
parties, and to prevent their suffering injuries by the men of war or
privateers of either party, all commanders of ships of war, privateers, and all
others the said subjects and citizens, shall forbear doing any damage to those
of the other party, or committing any outrage against them." Does not this
amount to a complete prohibition against the impressing of American seamen? For
what greater injury or outrage can be done to a man than to seize him by force,
and carry him to serve on board a ship of war? Beside even this was
unnecessary; for to impress our seamen is an illegal act, expressly contrary to
the law of nations; as much so as to take our ships, invade our territory, or
burn our towns; and it would have been just as reasonable to require a
stipulation against these or any other acts of hostility. It would be like
insisting on a neighbor to give bond and security that he would not rob us or
burn our houses. It will often be difficult to distinguish American from
British seamen, and mistakes no doubt will sometimes be committed. The British
claim a right to impress their own seamen wherever they find them; there are
great numbers of them on board of our ships, where they get better wages than
in their own. In taking them, American citizens will often be taken by mistake,
and sometimes by design; for we can never be perfectly guarded against
insolence and violence; but this would also happen if a thousand treaties were
made. The treaty on some occasions would, through mistake or design, be
disregarded, as the law of nations now is. Our government must pass a law to
furnish its citizens with proper certificates, and if those who have them are
impressed, it must interfere efficaciously in their behalf, and get them
released.

On the subject of the negroes, there has been much misconception. The number
taken away, as far as it can be ascertained, does not exceed three thousand, of
these one thousand were free, or belonged to persons who went off with the
British. Two thousand consequently is the whole number for which payment could
be demanded. A very great number died, and a still greater perhaps was sent off
to the West Indies during the war; but the treaty of peace does not comprehend
these. Its words are "his Britanic majesty shall, with all convenient speed,
and without causing any destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other
property of the American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, etc. This can
relate only to negroes to be carried away at the evacuation, by British
authority, and the number of these does not exceed two thousand. Stating these
two thousand at two hundred dollars each, the whole amount is four hundred
thousand dollars. Is this a sum for two countries to quarrel about? A war of
three months would cost five times as much. The British government absolutely
refused to give up the point. They were pressed again and again, and still
adhered to it with inflexible obstinacy. They contended, that we had no right
to payment for these negroes; that the treaty of peace mean only such negroes
as were American property at the time of the evacuation; and that they having
been taken in war, had by the laws of war become booty and were no longer
American property, any more than horses, cattle, or any thing else which had
been taken. Whether they were in the right, or we, is not easy or necessary to
decide. They insisted on it, and the question was whether we would give it up,
or break off the negotiation and come to an open quarrel with them. Would it
have been wise to do so? I think not. I think it was much better to give up the
four hundred thousand dollars; and for our government to pay it, if necessary
to the sufferers. To act otherwise would, in my opinion, have been like two men
going to law about the value of a cow, and expending an hundred pounds a piece
in the dispute. Nations as well as individuals, must sometimes make concessions
if they wish to live in peace; and for each party to insist obstinately on all
that he thinks himself entitled to, would prevent the possibility of
terminating differences in an amicable manner.

Another objection of great force against the treaty is, that it is hostile
toward France.

But wherein does this hostility consist? All the rights of France under her
treaties with us are expressly saved* for in the twenty fifth article, it is
stipulated that "nothing in this treaty contained shall, however, be construed
or operate, contrary to former and existing public treaties with other
sovereigns or states." These are the words. How then can any of the rights of
France be infringed? The treaty, it is said, will prove disadvantageous to the
interests of France. But, fellow citizens, what does this amount to? It
amounts, as I think, to saying, that the government of America is not to be
guided by the interests of its own citizens, but by those of its allies. We
have nothing to do with the interests of France or any other power. We must
take care not to infringe their rights, and leave the care of their interests
to themselves. It is the interest of France to make us quarrel with Britain,
and of Britain to make us quarrel with France; because both wish to render us
subservient and useful to themselves, and to make their commerce flourish at
our expense. It is our interest to be in peace with them both, and to prevent
either from gaining influence in our councils; which we may be assured they
will direct, as far as they can direct them, for their own interest and not for
ours. What becomes of the independence of our country, if we can make no treaty
without first enquiring whether France or any other power, will be injured or
benefited by it? This would make us her subjects, not her allies. Has she
consulted us in any of the treaties which she has made? It would be very much
to our interest for her to remain at war with all Europe, because she and her
enemies are obliged to purchase our provisions at an enormous price, and our
neutrality gives us immense advantages in the carrying trade; yet it would be
unreasonable in us to expect, and very foolish in her to agree, that the war
should continue longer than necessary, because it conduces to our advantage.

It is contended that this treaty puts our commerce with Britain on a footing
very injurious to France, and is therefore an infringement of her rights under
the laws of neutrality. This would be a solid objection, if it were true; but
is it true? I apprehend not. The treaty, it is said, prevents us from exporting
to France the commodities of her islands. But it was the twelfth article from
which this effect was apprehended, and the twelfth article was rejected by the
Senate. Beside, the twelfth article did not say that we should not carry the
produce of the islands to France. It only said that we should not bring them
into our own country, and then re-export them to any country; but we might
still, even if the twelfth article had been ratified, carry them from the
islands directly to France, whenever the French themselves would allow us the
privilege. It is further said, that the treaty, by the eighteenth article,
gives up the right of carrying provisions to France during the war, and allows
the British to capture our vessels if they make the at^empt. This, if true,
would be a sufficient objection to over-set the treaty; but it is not true: The
words of the eighteenth article are these; "And whereas the difficulty of
agreeing on the private cases in which alone provisions and other articles not
generally contraband, may be regarded as such, renders it expedient to provide
against the inconveniences and misunderstandings which might thence arise, it
is further agreed, that whenever any such articles so becoming contraband
according to the existing law of nations, shall for that reason be seized, the
same shall not be confiscated; but the owners thereof shall be speedily and
completely indemnified." Every body knows that there are cases in which
provisions may become contraband by the law of nations. If there be no such
cases, then this clause has no effect; for it applies to cases where such
articles become contraband according to the existing laws of nations, and to
them only. If there be such cases, then the article provides that the
provisions instead of being confiscated, as they would be by the law of
nations, shall be paid for, with frieght, charges, and a mercantile profit.
This stipulation of consequence, is greatly in our favor; since in many cases
it saves our provisions from confiscation, to which they would otherwise be
liable. It also operates favorably to France; for our merchants will be more
apt to send provisions there, when all the risk they run is that of being
carried into England and paid for, than if they were in danger of being not
only carried in, but confiscated. Yet this article is represented as hostile to
France, and has been called "an attempt to bring even provisions under the head
of contraband."( a)

With as little justice has the treaty been charged with defining and punishing
piracy. It does no such thing. It agrees in the twenty-first article, that if
any of our citizens privateer against the British under foreign commissions,
and are taken, the British may punish them as pirates. That is, that if our
citiizens choose to put themselves out of the protection of our government by
committing hostilities against a nation with which we are at peace, we will not
countenance them; we will not protect them; we will not quarrel with that
nation on their account. The treaty does not say that we will punish them as
pirates, but that the British may, if they catch them. And the British make the
same agreement on their part. Is not this perfectly reasonable? Ought we to
engage in the quarrel of every person among us whom avarice or idleness may
induce to turn privateer against nations with whom we are at peace? I conceive
not. When our citizens take commissions from other powers for privateering,
they must look to those powers for protection, and not expect that we should be
drawn in to endless quarrels for the irregularity of their conduct.

This clause about piracy has been represented as extending to persons who take
commissions in the land and naval service of powers at war; but this is a
mistake. It is confined entirely to privateers and lettres of marque. As to
other commissions it is agreed, that our citizens shall not accept them against
the British nor the British against us; and that the laws against such offenses
shall be punctually executed. The treaty speaks of no new laws on this subject;
it expresses only that those already made or which may be made hereafter, shall
be enforced.

Surely such laws as the legislature has thought proper to make ought to be
enforced. If they are unwise or improper the legislature can repeal them; and
whether there shall be any additional ones, depends on its own wisdom, and
future consideration. Surely those who have the strongest impression of our
obliga^ions to our allies, will not contend that we ought, through complaisance
to them, to suspend the execution of our own laws, or forbear to make such
others, from time to time, as we may judge expedient for the safety and
prosperity of our country. make, but also what laws we shall make, and what we
shall execute, we must give up; in my opinion, all claim to the character of an
independent nation.

In all our other treaties, ^in that with France, article 21, in that with
Holland, article 19, in that with Sweden, article 23, and in that with Prussia,
article 20, it is expressly stipulated, that if, while the two parties are at
peace, the citizens or subjects of one take commissions or lettres of marque
from any foreign power to privateer against the citizens or subjects of the
other, they shall be liable to be punished as pirates. In every treaty which we
have made this has been a part. If it were unwise or improper, why has it been
done on every other occasion; or why has it never been complained of? If wise
and proper why should it not be done now? Why should we refuse to do that in a
commercial treaty with Great Britain, which we have already done in commercial
treaties with the kings of Sweden and Prussia, with whom we have little or no
intercourse, and whose commerce with us is of very little importance?

Another ground of strong objection to the treaty is, that it did not obtain an
immediate, or at any rate, an early, surrender of the western posts. (a) The
true state of that business seems to me to be thus: Great Britain is in
possession of the Posts, and we, to whom they belong, wish to get them.
Great Britain promises to give them up in eighteen months; but absolutely
refuses to do it sooner. The question then is, will we wait this eighteen
months, or attempt by force to get them sooner? If we do it sooner, it must be
by force; for though very hard pressed on that subject, and repeatedly pressed,
as I am authorized to declare, they positively and obstinately refused. Let
those who might be inclined to use force, recollect that such an attempt would
be the beginning of a war; and that is a short war which lasts only eighteen
months. Let them recollect how much trouble the Indians have given us in that
quarter; what a vast expense; and how many years it has cost us to bring them
to reason; and how much more unmanagable we should have found the British and
Indians together. The British, it is said, have encouraged the Indians in the
war. That may be. I belive it is so; but there is a vast difference between
secret encouragement and open direct assistance. It has been said, that our
Envoy ought to have broken off the treaty, unless the posts were immediately
delivered. But would that have brought us any nearer getting them? Suppose the
treaty had been broken off, what should we have done next? We must have let the
British keep the posts, fought to recover them, or begun a new treaty. Would
this new treaty have been likely to succeed better than the other? I think not.
They who say the negotiation ought to have been broken off, seem to me to
forget that it was we not the British, who wished to treat. They were in
possession of all they wanted, except their old Debts, and they held the posts
as a security for them. We wished to get possession of our rights unjustly
witheld from us; and we had the choice of negotiation or compulsion, for that
purpose. Which was best? negotiation in my opinion; because compulsion is
uncertain, tedious, and very expensive.

But it is said, that we have only the promise of the British to give up the
posts on the first of June 1796, and they may break their word. So they may:
and if they had promised to surrender them in six months, or three, or in a
fortnight, still we should only have their word; and that is all we can have in
agreements with nations or individuals. Suppose we should go to war with them,
and get the advantage; it is very uncertain whether we should be able to take
the posts, for that would require a very great force: All we could do would be
to compel the British to make peace, and agree to give them up by such a day.
Here we should have no more than their promise: and that we have got without a
war. It is their interest however to keep this promise; for our government, in
consideration of it, has agreed to pay their subjects the damages which they
have sustained by the legal impedement to the recovery of their debts. The
posts are to be delivered before this payment becomes due; and if they should
not be delivered, we shall be at liberty to withhold the payment. This promise,
beside, is now soon to be performed. The posts are to be delivered the first of
next June, about six monhts, and we understand the British are now making
preparations for the surrender. Had we not better wait this six months, and see
whether they will perform their promise, than quarrel about the delay?

Suppose fellow citizens, one of you should come to me as a lawyer and tell me
that a person was in possession of a tract of your land, lived on it, and had a
crop growing: that provided you would leave some old accounts to arbitration
and agree to pay what might be given against you, he was willing to acknowledge
your request, and give from under his hand to move off in the fall, as soon as
he could get in his crop, and provide a place for his family; but absolutely
refused to go sooner. Should I advise you to go to law under these
circumstances, or wait till the (...) advised the ^^^mony for me, I think, that
I never gave such advise, But how much more mischievous would it be in the
affairs of a nation; where millions of expense, and thousands of lives would
probably pay the forfeit!

The treaty has been charged with permitting by the first article, "the
unconditional return to our country of all persons who were proscribed during
the late war." (a) I confess I cannot see how this permission is to be found in
the first article. It says, "there shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal
peace, and a true and sincere friendship, between his Britanic Majesty, and the
United States, and between their respective countries, territories, cities,
towns, and people of every degree, without exception of persons or places." If
this permits the unconditional return of banished persons, how comes it to pass
that they did not return under the treaty of peace, between us and Great
Britain, which contains precisely such a stipulation. In the seventh article of
the treaty of peace, it is asserted that "these shall be a firm and perpetual
peace between his Britanic Majesty and the said States, and between the
subjects of the one and the citizens of the other." The persons who adhered to
the British, the royalists and tories, were all British subjects, and yet none
of them had a right to return under this stipulation in the treaty of peace.
How then can they have it under a similar stipulation in the treaty of
commerce? The truth is, as it strikes me, that peace and residence, are things
entirely distinct. A nation may be at peace with another, and yet preclude from
its territories, or from all but certain places, all the individuals of that
other; as the Chinese and Japanese constantly do; as well as the English and
Dutch with respect to their East India possessions, and the Spaniards with
respect to their dominions in South America. Where two nations intend not only
to be at peace, but to give the people of each other mutually the right of
residence, for commerce or any other purpose, there is always an express
stipulation to that effect. Suppose we should pass a law making a certain
offense punishable by perpetual banishment, and a subject of Great Britain
should come here, commit the offense, be convicted of it, and banished? Would
he have a right under this article, to return, notwithstanding his banishment?
I conceive not. Suppose a British subject should be transported to Botany Bay,
for fourteen years, should escape from thence immediately, and come to America?
By residing here five years, concealing his circumstances, and conducting
himself well, he might become an American citizen. Could he, under this
article, return and (...) whom they are willing to be at peace. Because I agree
to live peaceable with my neighbors, are they at liberty to come and live in
my house?

It has been charged against the treaty, that it "establishes by the second
article, a British colony within our limits, with peculiar privileges." (a) One
would suppose from this expression, that the persons whom the treaty permits to
remain within our limits without becoming American citizens, were to be free
from our laws and jurisdiction, and subject to those of Great Britain; for that
is the import of the word "colony." But is this the case? Certainly not. These
persons, as it appears to me, are to remain within our territory, as British
subjects, precisely in the manner as hundreds of British subjects and subjects
of every other country, remain in other parts of our territory; at Charleston,
Philadelphia, New York, and elsewhere; subject to our laws in every respect,
liable to taxes, military duty, and all the other burdens of citizens, but
deprived of the privileges. The number of these people is inconsiderable; not
more than four thousand at all the posts; some affirm not more than three. By
the surrender of the posts to the United States, the inhabitants would not only
have become citizens, but would have lost the character of British subjects,
which numbers of them, may wish to retain. Sooner than relinquish this
character, many of them, perhaps all, would probably have removed before the
evacuation, and carried with them into Canada their capital, their industry,
their knowledge of Indian trade, and their Indian connections. Thus by the
surrender of the posts we should have obtained some spots of earth, of little
value, while the Indian trade, the great object of our wishes, would have been
transferred with the inhabitants, to the British dominions. To prevent this,
the treaty wisely provides, that these people though they continue in our
country, may if they please, remain British subjects; a provision without which
they would by the act of continuing have become American citizens. By this mean
man of them may be induced to remain. Their industry will be for us; the
prosperity they acquire, the improvements they make, the commerce they
establish, for us; their families will grow up citizens; and it is highly
probable, that they themselves will soon wish to become so. Those who accuse
the treaty of having admitted these people to the rights of citizenship, seem
to have forgotten, that if the posts had been given up without saying a word
about them, they would have become citizens. And if they had not, what should
we have done with them? Drive other cases, which has been to entice people into
our country, not expel them from it. They are disposed, it is said, to do us
mischief, and have joined the Indians against us. Some of them may have done
so; but there is no proof that the number was considerable. And if it were what
should we have gained by driving them off? Would their hostile disposition be
diminished by being expelled from their homes, and seizing their property? Or
would it lessen their power to hurt us? No: for they need only move to the
other side of a river, and then they would be in the British dominions, free to
execute their malice and resentment on every favorable occasion; whereas,
while they stay among us, we have their families and their property, as pledges
for their good conduct. But extraordinary privileges, it is said, are granted
to these people. What are these privileges? To keep their property if they
stay, and fell it if they go. These privileges do not seem to have any thing
very extraordinary in them. To let them stay, and yet take their property from
them, would be somewhat extraordinary; and as to allowing them to sell it if
they go away, that is always permitted even to enemies, on the breaking out of
a war.

It has been alleged that these people hold vast quantities of land, which by
the treaty they are allowed to retain. They can hold no lands but what were
held at the treaty of peace, either by them or those under whom they claim. The
British government has made no grants since; and if it had, they would be
invalid, being made within what that government itself acknowledged to be our
territory. The quantities of land held there at the treaty of peace, are not,
as far as I have been able to learn, by any means considerable: and be it much
or little, the persons who held it, had a right to retain it by the treaty of
peace, in common with all other persons whose lands lay within the limits then
established.

A further accusation against the treaty is, that it "erects a tribunal new and
unknown to our constitution; inasmuch as it transfers the right of deciding on
the claims of British creditors from the courts and juries of America to
commissioners; a majority of whom may be British subjects and by their
decisions, tax the revenue of these states at pleasure." (a) This objection is
made to the sixth article.

But is this the sense of the article? The case appears to me to stand thus.
Our citizens owed considerable debts to British subjects, contracted before the
peace. The recovery of these debts had, in many instances, been delayed since
the peace, by (...) under laws. During these delays many of the debtors became
insolvent, wholly or in part, so that even after the impediments were removed,
the creditors were not able to obtain payment "in the ordinary course of
Justice." In these cases our government undertakes to indemnify them for the
loss, provided it should appear not to have arisen from their own "delay,
negligence, or wilful omission," or from "such other causes as would have
equally operated to produce such loss, if the illegal impediment had not
existed." The claim must still be decided on by our own courts; the creditor
must sue there; the debtor may make any defense, may show that the debt never
was due, or has been paid, or that a composition has been accepted, judgment
must be obtained, and execution issued, and the money recovered from the debtor
if he be able to pay. Till all this is done, it cannot appear that the debt
cannot be obtained "in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings." When this
appears, the business of the court ends, because they have done all that was in
their power. The government then undertaken to be answerable, and the creditor
goes before the commissioners. The insolvency being ascertained by these
proceedings, the commissioners enquire whether it arose from the "lawful
impediments aforesaid," or has been occasioned by the delay, negligence, or
wilful omission of the creditor, or any other cause which would have produced
it, had no legal impediment existed? In the latter case he can recover nothing.
If the insolvency took place during the war, before the legal impediments
commenced, or after they ceased, he can recover nothing. If while the legal
impediment existed, he neglected to go as far toward securing his debt as it
would have permitted, he can recover nothing. The legal impediment for
instance, might hinder him from selling the property of his debtor, without
hindering him from obtaining a judgment and execution so as to bind that
property: if he neglected to do so he can recover nothing. It might hinder him
from obtaining judgment, but not from compelling security; if he did not compel
it, he can recover nothing. Hence it appears, that the United States will be
liable in comparatively few cases; and that the business of the commissioners
is, not to decide upon the debt, to liquidate or enforce it, but where it has
been lost, to pronounce whether the loss has proceeded from a legal impediment
created by our government, or from the neglect of the creditor himself.

Fault has been found with the method of appointing commissioners. Our
government is to appoint two, the British son, and those of the British
another; and from these two persons, so named, one is to be drawn by lot, and
to be the (...) commissioner. This fifth commissioner, and one of those chosen
by each party, must always be present in order to make a board. Could there be
a fairer way of appointing these arbitrators? I think not. A majority it is
true, may be British subjects, and British creditors; but it may likewise,
happen that the majority will be American citizens and American debtors. The
chance is precisely as great for one as for the other. The probability is, that
the choice will be an impartial one on both sides, and will fall on men of
talents and integrity, as little connected as possible, with either party.

"The seventh article," it is said, "makes restitution for the extensive
spoliations lately committed on our commerce, remote, expensive, and
uncertain." (a) It seems to me, just as much so, and no more, as the
restitution which we undertake to make British creditors for the losses
occasioned by legal impediments to the recovery of their debts. Nor do I see
how it could be more speedy in either case. They undertake to pay us for
irregular captures, where indemnification cannot be obtained in the ordinary
court of judicial proceedings, we must sue in their courts as they must in
ours, before it can appear whether indemnification can be obtained in that
mode. Thus far it is perfectly equal on both sides; but we have a very great
advantage i^ this respect, that our government indemnifies the British
creditors against the insolvency of the debtor only, and that in those cases
alone where the loss has arisen in consequence of some legal impediment;
whereas the British government indemnifies our merchants not only against the
insolvency of the captors, in all cases where they themselves have been guilty
of no neglect, but also against the orders of the government, and the decisions
of their courts, where those orders and decisions are contrary to "justice,
equity, and the laws of nations" those being the land marks established by the
treaty to guide the decisions of the commissioners.

There have been a great variety of other objections made to this instrument,
which the compass of this address, already, I fear, too long, does not permit
me to consider. I have, however, carefully examined them all, and think them
all capable of a satisfactory answer. Those which I have stated appear to me to
be the most material. Perhaps they may have more weight than I have imagined;
but while I think them void of foundation, I cannot allow them to influence my
conduct; for which I have, and ought to have, no other guide than my own
understanding.

These objections are against the expediency of the treaty, (...) is also
objected to as unconstitutional. The President and Senate, it is said, have
exerted powers which belong to the whole legislature, and in so doing have
violated the constitution. But, fellow citizens, the constitution is the
supreme law of the land, and any treaty, or other act of the government, which
is contrary to it must be a nullity. The judges of the supreme and inferior
courts, whose office it is to expound and enforce the laws, must disregard such
an act. They are to judge whether it is law or not; in other words, whether it
is contrary to the constitution. In one instance, they declared a law passed by
congress to be void, because they thought it against the constitution; and no
doubt if this treaty should appear so, to them, they will treat it in the same
manner.

But I cannot conceive that the treaty is contrary to the constitution. The
legislative power, and the treaty-making power are distinct in their nature,
different in their objects, and placed in different hands. The legislative
power depends for its exertion, on the will of our own government alone: the
treaty-making power requires the consent of another government. The legislative
power applies to objects internal, to acts within our own territory, to
relations existing between our citizens themselves, or between them and
strangers who come among us. The treaty-making power on the contrary applies to
objects external, to acts which may be done in foreign countries as well as our
own; to the relations between us as a nation, and other nations. The
legislative power regulates the conduct of one individual toward another
individual; the treaty-making power, that of one people toward another people.
The first of these powers, the legislative, is by our constitution vested in
congress; by which I understand the two houses, the senate and representatives;
the second, the treaty-making power, is given to the President, under the
control of the Senate.

When therefore the constitution says in one place, that congress, meaning the
two houses, shall have power "to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and
among the several states, and with the Indian tribes;" and in another that the
President "shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
to make treaties, provided two thirds of the senators. present concur" how is
it to be understood? The power to make treaties is unlimited and universal; and
we know very well that four fifths of the treaties which have been made for the
last hundred years, either relate wholly to commerce, or contain commercial
regulations. Out (...) six treaties which the old congress made, four are
commer^^ (...). If we say that the President and Senate (...) of commerce with
a foreign nation, we shall render the power to make treaties, which the
constitution gives them, almost a dead letter. Yet the same constitution says,
that congress "shall have power to regulate commerce with foreign nations." The
difficulty at once disappears by recurring to the difference between the
legislative and treaty-making powers, in their nature and objects. Congress
possesses the legislative power: it being declared by the 1st section of the
1st article of the constitution, that "all legislative powers therein granted
shall be vested in a congress of the United States, which shall consist of a
senate and house of representatives." The regulations of commerce therefore
which congress is authorized to make, are legislative regulations; regulations
which depend solely on the will and act of our own government, without
requiring the consent and concurrence of another government; regulations which
are to operate in our own country alone. But those regulations of commerce
which are not legislative, which require the concurrence of other governments,
which are to operate in foreign countries, cannot be made by the legislature;
they can be effected only by treaty; and the power of making treaties is given
by the constitution, not to congress, not to the legislature, but to the
President and senate.

When therefore the constitution says in one place that "all legislative powers
shall be vested in congress" and afterward enumerates among these powers that
of "regulating commerce," it explicitly declares, that the regulations of
commerce which congress is to make, are legislative regulations and no other;
and when it goes on to give the treaty making power to the President and
senate, it declares no less explicitly, that those branches of the government
shall have power to make all those commercial regulations, which requiring the
consent of other governments, lie beyond the reach of our own laws, and can be
affected only by treaty.

This construction is supported by the authority of a gentleman whom every
American must always be proud to quote. Mr. Madison, supporting the
constitution in the convention of Virginia, and refuting some objections which
had been made to the manner of placing the treaty-making power, laid down the
distinction between that and the legislative power, and observed, "that the
exercise of the power must be consistent with the object of the delegation."
That is, that the treaty making power must apply only to such acts, such
regulations, as are the proper objects of treaties; and the legislative power
to such as are the proper object of laws. To raise money for instance, is the
object of a law, but to agree with a foreign nation for the the President and
Senate therefore may contract with another power by treaty, to pay it a sum of
money, yet they cannot lay a (...) by treaty to raise the money. That must be
done by congress; by the legislative power.

This distinction has been adopted and acted upon by our government in a
variety of instances which have never been complained of. Treaties have been
made with most, if not all, of the Indian nations on our borders; and one has
lately been concluded with all the tribes northwest of the Ohio. All these
treaties contain regulations respecting our commerce with the different tribes.
This has never been considered as unconstitutional; has never been objected to;
and yet the constitution says that congress, among the legislative powers that
are vested in it, shall have that of "regulating commerce with the Indian
tribes." The meaning, evidently is, and has always been so understood, that
congress shall have power to make all the legislative regulations that may be
necessary in our commerce with the Indians: all the regulations which,
depending solely on the act of our own government, might be effected by our own
laws: while those which required the concurrence of the Indians themselves,
considered as independent nations, and could therefore be accomplished only by
treaty, were left, under the treaty making power, to the President and Senate.

This has also been the constant sense of the American people, and of the
United States, in Congress assembled under the old confederation. The old
Congress had no power to make any legislative regulations respecting commerce
of any kind. All this the States reserved to themselves. The first section of
the ninth article of confederation and perpetual union, enumerates the powers
granted to the United States in Congress assembled, and among them is that of
"entering into treaties and alliances; provided that no treaty of commerce
shall be made whereby the legislative power of the respective states shall be
restrained from imposing such imposts on foreigners as their own people are
subject to." Here the people of the United States, by their representatives in
the state legislatures, declare in the most explicit manner, that under the
power of "entering into treaties and alliances" treaties of commerce may be
made; and also that those treaties, unless it had been expressly guarded
against by a proviso, might "restrain the legislative powers of the respective
states," in regulating their own commercial affairs. According to this
principle the old Congress, under the power of "entering into treaties and
alliances" exactly the same power which is given to the President and Senate by
our present constitution, went on to make commercial treaties with all the
powers of Europe that could be prevailed on to enter into them; with France,
Holland, Sweden and Prussia; and made repeated over into (...) the same
purpose, to Great Britain. Had he states confide^^ (...) these commercial
treaties entered into by the old Congress, (...) an infringement of their
rights, as an undue extension of the power of "entering into treaties and
alliances" which had been granted to the confederation, would they not have
complained? Would they not have remonstrated? They were sufficiently jealous of
the confederation; sufficiently (...) in the powers with which they agreed to
invest it. Would (...) have quietly submitted to see th^se powers illegally,
improperly enlarged? Surely not. They understood perfectly the distinction
between legislative regulations of commerce, and regulations by treaty, and
while they retained the former in their own hands, saw the propriety of leaving
the latter to that body which the American nation had appointed to represent it
in its transactions with foreign nations; had invested with the power of
"entering into treaties and alliances."

The President and Senate, with respect to treaties, and commercial
regulations, now stand on the same ground, which under the old confederation,
was occupied by the United States in congress assembled. The Constitution gives
the power of making treaties to the President, under the control of the
Senate: the old confederation; gave that power to Congress. Whatever therefore,
the old Congress could do on this subject under the confederation, the
President and Senate can do under the constitution. The old congress could
regulate commerce with foreign nations and the Indian tribes, as far as those
regulations were to depend on foreign powers, and to be made by treaty. They
did it in many instances, attempted it in more, and the people of the United
States confirmed their acts. It can of consequence be done by the President and
Senate, who have the power, formerly vested in the old congress, of "entering
into treaties and alliances." Under the old confederation the power of
regulating commerce internally, by legislative acts, remained with the
respective states; under the constitution, it is given to Congress. In both
cases it is equally distinct from the treaty making power. Its being expressly
given to Congress makes no difference in that respect; for before it was so
given it remained in the states, was the same in nature and extent, and could
no more control the treaty making power in one case than in the other.

Hence it appears clearly to me that the treaty is not contrary to the
constitution; not beyond the powers thereby given to the President and Senate.

It has often been asked, what benefit do we derive from the treaty? How does
it conduce to our advantage? In the first place it settles our former
differences with Great Britain, differences which every day became more and
more serious and embarrassing, and settles them in a manner consistent with our
rights and our honor. As it was a case of mutual and contrary demands, we have
given up something in order to gain the rest, and to avoid the danger of a
quarrel; which, in my possible event, must have been attended with very great
mischief. And secondly as to our commerce, we have gained important advantages
in many parts of it, particularly the East India and Canada trade, without
making any unusual or improper concession; we have placed the whole of it, for
a certain time, on a permanent footing instead of the precarious state in which
it formerly was, dependent on the temporary proclamation of the British
government; and we have laid the foundation for a more lasting, and a more
extensively beneficial arrangement.

The question is not whether this treaty be as advantageous as we could wish,
or had a right to expect; but whether, such as it is, our interest requires,
all circumstances considered, that it should be accepted? Whether there be
reasonable ground to hope for more advantageous terms by further negotiation;
and if not, whether these terms, such as they are, be not preferable to an
acquiscence under the injuries of which we complain, or an attempt to redress
them by measures of compulsion? I can discern, after the most careful
consideration, no reasonable ground to hope for more advantageous terms from
negotiation; and I am most decidedly of opinion that between accepting these,
and either acquiescing tamely in our wrongs, or attempting to vindicate them by
compulsory measures, of any kind, there ought to be no hesitation.

I cannot conclude, fellow citizens, without taking some notice of the means
which have been employed to prejudice and inflame the public mind against this
measure. The most unlimitted abuse has been heaped on its authors, its
advisers, and its supporters. They have been charged with being corrupted by
British gold, with being actuated by a violent hatred to France, and a servile
attachment to Great Britain. Its particular provisions have been
misrepresented, and the whole instrument, the result of many months
consideration, has been stigmatized and condemned after a hasty reading, and
very often without any reading at all. One writer Features of the treaty.
among various other gross misrepresentations, has been so shameless as to call
this treaty, "an alliance with Great-Britains' no less than ten times in a work
of 67 pages; and to fill several of those pages with objections founded wholly
on the 12th article which he knew to have been rejected by the Senate, and
consequently no part of the treaty. I say "shameless," because the other parts
of the book show that he is by no means so ignorant as not to understand the
difference between a treaty of commerce, and "an alliance." Thus also a person
in Philadelphia writing to his friend in Charleston, on June 29th, 1795. a few
days after the treaty was ratified, says, that in consequence of the treaty "we
must either limit exceedingly our West-Indian trade, or burn the returns which
we bring from thence over and above our own consumption, because Britain, Mr.
Jay, and the Senate, have prohibited the citizens from re-shipping them,
Charleston City Gazette, July 14, 1795.
This writer, as he had read the treaty, must have known that all the
regulations respecting the West India trade were contained in the twelfth
article, which the senate had rejected; and yet he wilfully misrepresents that
very article as the express act of the senate. With the same view of misleading
and inflaming the public mind, it is constantly repeated that the great body of
the people are opposed to the treaty; that it has received the unequivocal
disapprobation of the citizens from New Hampshire to Georgia. Nothing is less
true. I have lately seen in the South Carolina State Gazette, of October 27,
1795, a letter from some person in Philadelphia to his friend in Charleston,
dated October 10th, in which the writer says, that he had lately made a tour
through the eastern states, and found seven eighths of the people disgustted
with the administration, and opposed to the treaty and that system of intrigue
and wicked policy which contrived it. I can contradict this assertion on my own
knowledge. I have spent the whole fall in traveling through those states, and
I have no difficulty in declaring that a very great majority of the people in
all of them, perhaps I might say seven-eighths, are perfectly well satisfied
with the treaty: and that I believe is nearly the case with all the states
north of the Patowmac. I mention these among a vast variety of instances, to
show how much passion and misrepresentation has been employed in deciding on a
measure which ought to have been judged of with coolness, candor, and good
sense.

But, fellow-citizens if the treaty were, what I do not think it is, a
disadvantageous and unequal one, are there no reasons why we should acquiesce
in it? It is an act of our government, a law, agreed on and enacted by the
proper majority of those whom we ourselves have appointed to make treaties. Is
it right to resist every law which we do not approve, which we believe to be a
bad one? When a measure is under deliberation it is the duty, as well as the
right of every citizen to express (...) opinion about it, and to give his
reasons. When the rea^^^s have been heard, and the majority have decided, the
rest ought to submit: otherwise government never can go on, never can exist. If
the government be wrong alter it; If its powers be too great, abridge them: but
while it remains unaltered it ought to be obeyed; otherwise the laws will cease
to rule, and the dominion of force be set up in their stead. On this subject I
^ake great pleasure in citing the opinion of a very respectable senator, who
voted against the treaty. The day after it was ratified in the senate, he told
me "that he disliked it, and had thought it his duty to vote against it in the
senate; but that it was now done, was so far an act of government, to which
every good citizen ought to submit; and that he wished sincerely that the
people of the United States might be satisfied with it." This sentiment does
him the highest honor, and is worthy in my opinion, of imitation by every
friend to his country.

Such, fellow citizens, are the reasons which have induced me to believe that
the treaty in question is "proper and expedient." It is uncertain whether any,
question will arise upon it this session; I do not know or believe that there
is any intention in any part of the house to appear it. The ratification (...),
though we have (...) the English newspapers, of its having taken place.
Whenever it comes before us. I shall give my voice for its going fully into
effect; convinced that it is consistent with the honor and conducive to the
interest and happiness of my country; of that country among whose citizens, and
whose sons it is my boast, and my pride to be numbered, and to which it is my
highest ambition to be useful. But if I cannot be retained in its service
without renouncing my independence, without giving up my understanding, on
questions of the greatest magnitude, to the guidance of others, without
exercising that trust which the people have reposed in me, in a manner which,
after the fullest consideration, my own mind condemns, let me return to a
private station. I know that the opinions of many of you, on this subject,
differ from mine. I have told you the truth without disguise or concealment: I
have explained my motives and principles; and it is for you to judge whether
they merit a continuation of your confidence. If you desire a faithful
representative, who will employ all his time and talents, whatever they may be,
in finding out the best means of promoting your interest and happiness; who
will think and act for himself, and not by the direction of others; who will go
with you at all hazards, when he thinks you in the right, and have courage
enough to differ from you and oppose you when he thinks you in the wrong, I am
bold to declare that I deserve your choice. But if you (...) for one of a
contrary character, one who before he gives (...) in congress will consider,
not how far it may conduct to (...) public good, but what effect it may have on
his own population whose object it shall be not to serve his country, but to
(...) himself in place; who instead of assisting, with whatever abilities he
may have, in carrying on the government so as to promote and secure the public
happiness, shall content himself with making declamations against all its acts,
I am not the man: (...) your choice on another. I shall be grieved at losing
your confidence, but I shall not repine or complain; for I shall carry with me
the consciousness of having deserved to retain it. I shall return among you,
pursue those occupations to which my life has been devoted, and prepare myself
to serve my country with effect, whenever and in whatever manner, it may think
proper to call for my services. You will do me the justice to declare that
although I wished for your appointment, I did not pursue it by means unbecoming
the independence and dignity of the republican character; that I sought your
approbation and your suffrages, by services and industry, not by solicitation
or flattery; that I waited till I was called for, and might have been called
sooner had I expressed such a wish. Such of you I have seen me (...) the
legislature of our own state, will also (...) witness that I attached my self
to no party, and that I devoted my whole time to the public business, that
while I advocated your rights with a firmness and zeal I trust not unbecoming
their importance, I voted differently from your other representatives, when I
thought the public good lay on the opposite side. You can attest that while I
labored to change our state government in that part where I thought it hostile
to the rights of a great majority of the people, I nevertheless constantly
recommended a perfect submission to it while it should continue to be our
government, and dissuaded from any attempt to effect the desired alteration in
any other than the constitutional mode: convinced that the business of the
people is to make or alter governments, not to direct their administration; and
that although it be not only their right but their duty to amend whatever may be
wrong in the established system, every principle of social order and public
happiness requires that until they think, proper to make the alteration, the
government, however defective, ought to be obeyed. The same conduct I shall
pursue here; the same principles shall still be my guide. If you approve them,
your approbation will be a pleasing and precious reward: if you shall
disapprove, I shall cheerfully submit to your determination*

ROBERT G. HARPER.
Philadelphia, Dec. 17, 1795.

