Columbus's first interview with the Natives of America.


THE HISTORY OF AMERICA, ABRIDGED FOR THE USE OF CHILDREN OF ALL DENOMINATIONS.

Adorned with Cuts.

Unto children give suck, and to maturity ripe fruit. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by
WRIGLEY and BERRIMAN, for JOHN CURTIS. -- 1795.

PREFACE.
THE Editor flatters himself that this abstract of the History of America, will
not be unworthy the acceptance and patronage of his fellow-citizens. The
importance of having our children taught so useful a branch of knowledge, is
too obvious to need his feeble recommendation: for 'twill be universally
acknowledged, that the mind takes a turn in future life, suitable to the
tincture it has received in youth; I will naturally conclude, that there is
not a necessity to regard, or at least to lay any stress upon what was never
inculcated upon it as a matter of importance then: and so will grow up in a
total neglect or disesteem of those studies necessary to form the wise and
truly understanding man.

Conceiving it therefore a matter of great importance to each individual as an
inhabitant of any country, that he or she has a knowledge of the history
thereof; and being well persuaded, that the following is well adapted to the
youthful mind, has excited the present attempt.

CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, a native of Genoa, discovered the Continent of America
A. D. 1492.


THE HISTORY OF AMERICA.
AMERICA, the western continent, is situated between 35 and 145 degrees of
western longitude, and between 80 north, and 58 south latitude: bounded by the
lands and seas about the Artic pole on the north; by the Atlantic ocean on the
east; by the vast Southern ocean on the south; and by the Pacific ocean which
divides it from Asia, on the west. Its computed length, from north to south, is
nine thousand miles, and three thousand miles in breadth.

It is not an improbable conjecture to suppose this country was first peopled
by the Carthtganians, who were situate on the north-west coast of Africa, and
possessed several islands in the Atlantic ocean, where they frequently sent
thousands of men, women, and children. It is certainly natural to expect that
some of their ships, which were very large, might miss those islands, and be
driven to the west, beyond their intended port; and if this ever happened, they
must have been carried to America, which is but three weeks sail from the
Canary or Cape de Verd islands, from whence it was impossible they should
return to the Eastern continent, as the trade winds always set against them,
and the use of the compass was not known in those early ages. Thus this
extensive country, and its valuable productions remained unknown to the more
enlightened parts of the world, until Christopher Columbus, a native of Genoa,
suggested the idea that there was another continent beyond the Atlantic ocean.
But however sanguine Columbus might be in his expectations, it appears that his
proposals for carrying his bold schemes into execution was treated with cool
indifference by the different courts he applied to: and it was not until the
expiration of several years close application, that he was to proceed on his
voyage. At length the court of Spain began to listen more favorably to the
proposed undertaking, and Columbus was commissioned to equip three ships with
the title of admiral of the western seas: with these ships he set sail from
Palos in Andalusia the 3d of August A. D. 1492, and arrived at the Canary
islands on the 12th; from thence he sailed, September 1st, to the westward, but
his men began to mutiny, before they had been out fourteen days, imagining he
was leading them to certain destruction; he notwithstanding persuaded them to
continue the voyage until the 16th, at which time they were consulting to throw
their admiral overboard and return to their own country, but he had the good
fortune at ten o'clock the same night to see a light on shore, and the next day
made land which proved to be one of the Bahama islands: from thence he sailed
to Cuba and Hispaniola, and from thence back to Europe, having performed his
voyage to the new world and back again in seven months and eleven days, and was
received by the court of Spain with all the honors due to a man that had found
out another continent; yet how unstable is the favor of princes: this
deserving man after bringing such a large acquisition to the crown of Spain as
astonished Europe, was superceded in his government in the new world, and sent
home in chains, after he had made his third voyage in quality of viceroy, of
the country he had discovered, and died poor. They however were so grateful to
his memory that the court of Spain ordered his remains a magnificent burial in
the cathedral of Seville, and over his tomb was this inscription:

Columbus has given a new world to the kingdoms of Castile and Leon.

AMERICUS VESPUTIUS, a Famous Discoverer, and Cotemporary with COLUMBUS.

AMERICUS VESPUTIUS, a Florentine, was sent by the court of Spain to make
further discoveries, A. D. 1497; and having made the Canaries, sailed from
thence south-west 1000 leagues, and arrived at the Carribe islands in 16
degrees north latitude, and continuing his course 900 leagues further, west,
arrived at a country under the tropic of cancer, supposed to be some part of
Mexico. In the next year, 1498, he made another voyage, and sailing from Spain
south-west, passed the equator and came to Brazil, 5 degrees south latitude. In
the year 1501, we find him engaged in the service of Emanuel, king of Portugal,
who fitted out three ships for an expedition to the new world, and after
touching at Brazil, and sailing 52 degrees south latitude along the coast,
returned. From him the vast and extensive continent of America took its name.
Thus Columbus was robbed of the honor due to his extensive genius and justly
acquired fame. After him there were several other adventurists employed by the
different courts of Europe; as Sebastian Cabbot, of Italian extraction, who was
employed by Henry the seventh of England, to find out a north-west passage to
China, he departed from England, 1498, and sailed along the north-east coast of
America to 67 degrees north latitude, but failed in his attempt. The English,
nevertheless, were benefitted by the voyage as they claimed a large tract of
country in consequence of the discoveries made by Cabbot, and was called
British America, which was divided into colonies: of these we shall treat
separately, under the title of the United Independent States of North America.

DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.
"Franklin, in politics grown old and sage,
"Whose name adorns the philosophic page;
"The main-spring he to great Columbia's cause,
"Graceful he spoke, and won the world's applause."
See Columbia. NEW ENGLAND.
NEW ENGLAND is bounded by Canada on the north, by the Atlantic ocean and
Nova Scotia on the east and south, and by New York on the west. It is divided
into four governments or states, viz. New Hampshire, Massachusetts Rhode Island
and Connecticut.

The land next the sea in New England is generally low, but farther up the
country it rises into hills, and on the north-east it is rocky and mountaneous.
The north-west wind blowing over a long tract of frozen country makes the
winters excessive cold; the climate in general healthful and agreeable to
European constitutions. Fruit comes to great perfection, particularly peaches,
it is not very uncommon to find seven or eight hundred peaches on one tree, and
seven barrels of cider has been made from one apple tree.

English wheat, it is said, does not thrive here; but Indian corn will
frequently produce from one grain two thousand. Ship building is a considerable
employment in this country. The spermaceti whale, and other whales are found on
the coast, of which the New England people take great numbers. This country was
first settled from England. In the year 1619, some zealous dissenters of the
independent persuasion, uneasy at being required to conform to the church of
England, purchases what was called the Plymouth patent, and obtained another
from king James; a number of adventurers, to the amount of 150, embarked in a
ship, at Plymouth, which sailed the 6th of September, A. D. 1620, and arrived
at Cape Cod in New England, the ninth of November following, where they built a
town and called it New Plymouth; and Mr. John Carver was elected their first
governor. The Indians at this time were so engaged in wars amongst themselves
that these strangers were suffered to remain pretty quiet, and they having
learned from one Quanto, an Indian, who had been to England, what a powerful
people the English were. This induced many of the sachems the following spring
to seek an alliance with them, professing themselves subjects to the crown of
England. More ships arriving with planters and provisions, a colony soon became
established, but differences arising on account of religion had like to have
been of fatal consequence. The independents, who were the most numerous,
refusing to tolerate any other sect or persuasion but their own. Several of the
adventurers removed to other parts of the country and others returned home;
thus the colony became so weakened that had it not been for the civil war that
kept the Indians employed, they would in all probability have been driven out
of the country.

The inhabitants of New England were early distinguished for an ardent love of
liberty, and thereby became obnoxious to British power, especially in the
beginning of the late revolution; wherein they sustained with firmness the
first shocks of an enraged and powerful nation, until they were supported by
the whole force of the sister provinces; now called the United Independent
States of North America: when after a struggle for their natural and political
rights for several years, with their mother country they at last shook off the
British yoke and established on the broad basis of liberty that constitution
which is at once the envy and admiration of Europe. Dr. Benjamin Franklin, a
native of New England, universally admired for his philosophical and political
talents had a large share of the public confidence in the beginning of the
dispute, and on him in a great measure depended the success of an opposition
which in the beginning promised little to the opposers, and till very near the
close was variously chequered with light and shade.

His Excel. SAMUEL ADAMS, Governor of the state of Massachusetts.
MASSACHUSETTS.
MASSACHUSETTS still preserves its original Indian name, from Massassoit the
native prince found on the spot by the first adventurers from England, with
whom they entered into alliance, offensive and defensive: they then proceeded
to build a town which they called New Plymouth, and made Mr. John Carver their
first governor, A. D. 1620. This infant colony was made unhappy by
disagreements on the score of religion, which was carried to so great a length
that those in power actually put several to death for not conforming to their
way of worship, until king Charles the second put a stop to the sanguinary
measures of the court of Boston, in the year 1650, and during the
administration of John Endicot, esquire a furious independent.

The present ruling powers in this state, inherit none of that persecuting
spirit, but are universally respected for the mildness of their laws and equal
distribution of justice; and happy would it be, if those in power throughout
the United States, were equally solicitous to check immorality of every kind.
About the year 1627, another set of adventurers purchased a grant of the
Plymouth company, and fitted out six ships with 300 planters; they also
procured a grant of king Charles, and nominated Mr. Craddock their first
governor: this company arriving on the coast with live cattle and other stores
proper for a settlement, built the town of Salem, between the promontaries of
Marblehead and cape Anne. Craddock refusing to go over with these planters they
chose John Winthrop, esquire their governor, and in 1630 built Boston as before
mentioned, on Massachusetts bay. These people inherited a love of liberty from
their forefathers who had suffered much for their principles in old England,
and sought in a wilderness that freedom which was denied them in the mother
country. As they grew in power, they carefully watched over and guarded against
the encroachments of the British government, and afterward sought, with
distinguished fortitude, a redress of grievances; thus keeping alive the spirit
of opposition, they paved the way for the rest of the colonies, to come forward
and join them in a united struggle against the unlawful claims of a country,
whose chains had sorely galled them for many years: till finally the grand and
astonishing stroke was struck which demolished the power of Great Britain, over
the colonies, and left them in possession of an envied sovereignty; as
independent states, likely one day to become respectable and dreaded by all
Europe, for their opulence and power. Yet it must be acknowledged, that much
depends on wise legislation, and a free and equal distribution of law and
justice. Boston is the capital of this state, and makes at this time a
considerable figure in the union; and sends fourteen members to congress.

His Excel. SAMUEL HUNTINGDON, Governor of the state of Connecticut.
CONNECTICUT.
CONECTICUT, bounded by the state of Massachussetts, was granted by king
Charles to the Earl or Warwick, in 1630, who conveyed his right to William,
lord viscount, Say and Seal, Robert lord Brook, Sir Nathanial Rich, Charles
Finnes, esquire John Pym, and John Hampden, esqs gentlemen, at that time
disaffected to the government, who designed to transport themselves with the
chief of their party to that colony, in case they had not succeeded in their
opposition to king Charles, of which (...) appears they had their doubts; for
it is strongly insisted upon that Oliver Cromwell, Sir Arthur Aslerig, John
Hampden and several more were on the point of leaving their native country but
were prevented by a proclamation published in 1637, which prohibited people
from transporting themselves without license, and these afterward prevailing
against king Charles, sold their right in the country to others, who embarking
and bringing over with them great numbers of their countrymen, the New England
provinces were planted and well peopled within the space of twenty years,
during which time they were very little troubled by the Indians. But the
inhabitants of Connecticut beginning to erect fortresses, and extend their
improvements to the westward, without leave of the natives, the Indians began
to be alarmed, apprehending they should in time be dispossessed of their
country, and finally be enslaved by these foreigners. King Philip, alias
Metacomet, son of Massassoit, who first entered into an alliance with the
English, observing the danger his country was in, and that the English no
longer treated with that forbearance and kindness they formerly were accustomed
to, but, on the contrary, tyrannized over his people, and in a manner deprived
him of his authority; sent messengers to all the tribes of the neighboring
Indian nations, strongly stimulating them to take up arms in the defense of
their country; which, having its designed effect they united and became
formidable enemies to the new settlers, and gained advantages in several
engagements; but king Philip, the soul of the undertaking, being killed by a
musket shot, the English at last prevailed, and great numbers of the Indians
were massacred, others were driven out of the country, and joined the French in
Canada, who granting them protection they still had it in their power to
disturb the frontier settlements, until all Canada was ceded to the crown of
Great Britain by France, ratified at Paris, March 10th, 1763. Connecticut sends
seven members to congress.

His Excellency JOHN SULLIVAN, Governor of New Hampshire.
NEW HAMPSHIRE.
NEW HAMPSHIRE, bounded by the former described states, was divided off to
another set of adventurers; these arrived about the same time that the province
or state of Connecticut was settled. Who attending industriously to the
cultivation of the country, it has become a flourishing state, and bears
considerable weight in the Union; sends four members to congress. The present
governor was a general officer in the late war, and his name is enrolled in the
catalogue of those patriots who early distinguished themselves in the cause of
American liberty and independence; possessing a high sense of the rights of men
they cheerfully bore their part in the opposition to the claims of
Great Britain. It is divided W. N. W. by Connecticut river from the state of
Vermont. Portsmouth is the capital town. Some part of this state is
mountaineous. The white mountains, part of a ridge, extending North and
South-west, to a length not yet ascertained, claims the notice of the curious.
The height of these mountains is fifty-five thousand feet; the foot of the
mountain is thirty-five hundred feet from the level of the sea. The snow and
ice cover them for nine or ten months in the year. The air is serene and
healthful, and not so subject to change as in the more southern states.
Dartmouth college, so called from the earl of Dartmouth, is a seminary under
good regulations, and commands a large number of students from different states
of the union.

His Excellency GEORGE CLINTON, Governor of the state of New York.
STATE OF NEW YORK.
HENRY HUDSON, an Englishman, in the year 1608, under a commission from the
king, discovered Long Island, New York, and the river which still bears his
name, and afterward sold his right to the Dutch. The Dutch writers contend
that he was sent out by their East India company in 1609 to discover a
north-west passage to China, and having first discovered Delaware bay, he came
hither, and sailed up Hudson river as far north as the latitude 43 degrees. It
however appears that the English objected to the sale, though they for sometime
neglected to oppose the Dutch settlement of the country. In 1610, Hudson sailed
again from the coast of Holland to this country, called by the Dutch, New
Netherlands; and four years afterward the states general granted a patent to
sundry merchants for an exclusive trade on the north river, who in 1614, built
a fort on the west side. Captain Argal, returning from an expedition against
the French, on the bay of Funday; commissioned by sir Thomas Dale, governor of
Virginia, paid a visit to the Dutch on Hudson river, who, unable to resist him,
prudently submitted for the present to the king of England, and under him to
the governor of Virginia; but the next year they built a fort on the south-west
side of the island then called Manhattans, now York Island. In 1621, the states
general determined upon the settlement of the country, made a grant of it to
their West India company. Wouter Van Twiller arrived at fort Amsterdam, now
New York, and took upon himself the government, in June, 1621, his style in the
patents granted by him was thus, "We director and council residing in New
Netherlands, under the government of their high mightinesses, the lords states
general of the Uunited Netherlands, etc." The Dutch, after many unsuccessful
struggles to keep possession of the country, at last, gave up their claims at
the peace concluded in 1674. The state of New York contains, Long Island,
Staten Island, and the lands on the east side of Hudson river, to the bounds of
Connecticut from the division line, between that state and Massachusetts bay,
northward to the line of the state of Vermont, etc. The city of New York is
built on an island, called by the Indians Manhattans: the island is very
narrow, not a mile wide at a medium, and about fourteen miles in length; the
South-west point projects into a fine spacious bay and opens the ocean to full
view. The passage up to New York from Sandy-Hook is safe, and not above
twenty-five miles in length. The city has in reality no natural basin or
harbor. The ships lie off in the road, on the east end of the town; the
streets are irregular and paved with pebbles. It remains to be a place of
considerable trade, and was long the rival of Philadelphia, the capital of
Pennsylvania; but the last has the ascendency of all the sea port towns on the
continent, both as to commerce and oppulence. There is perhaps the best fish
market at New York, but the streets and buildings when contrasted with
Philadelphia suffers much in the comparison. The state is divided into
counties, viz. Albany, Kings, Queens, Suffolk, Richmond, West-Chester, Ulstar,
Duchess and Orange.

The inhabitants of this state are generally healthy and robust, breathing a
free and serene air; they are sprightly in their tempers, and instances of
suicide are rarely seen amongst them. New York state sends ten members to
congress.

His Excel. THOMAS CHITTINGDON, Governor of Vermont.
STATE OF VERMONT.
THIS state, the least populous of any on the continent, and formed into a
separate state since the declaration and establishment of independence, is,
nevertheless, likely one day to become a valuable acquisition; is bounded by
the British line in Canada, northerly; by New Hampshire and the other eastern
states. As it lies open to incursions of the Indians, aided by the British, the
settlement on the frontiers will probably improve but slowly; there is,
nevertheless, a fine tract of land within this state, improving fast, and
husbandmen removing yearly from the neighboring states. The soil is in many
places rich, and affords good wheat, rice, etc. The capital town is Bennington:
sends two members to congress.

The wild animals found in the woods are, the panther, bear, buffaloe,
cato-mountain, elk, deer, and other small animals common to the continent. A
particular description of those of one state will answer for all the states of
the Union, with very small exceptions. The fur trade is carried on in this
state in time of peace, with the Indians, who, could they be persuaded to put
that confidence in the Americans, which they have hitherto placed in the
British, would prove a source of wealth to the inhabitants, by drawing the fur
trade into the state, and bartering for the skins and peltry, the produce of
the country, with the natives.

His Excellency RICHARD HOWEL, Governor of New Jersey.
Howel for social virtues tamed afar,
Shone in the ranks, and urged the dreadful war;
His graceful form expressed a noble mind,
The soul of honor -- friend of human kind.
STATE OF NEW JERSEY.
NEW-JERSY, east and west, were formerly proprietary governments, but the
proprietors as the country became more populous grew weary of governing, and
disputes often arising between their governors and the people, agreed to
surrender their power, unto queen Anne, A. D. 1702. Lord Cornbury, son to the
great earl of Clarendon, was immediately appointed governor, whose behavior
was so arbitrary, mean and trifling, as drew upon him the hatred of the people:
It was not uncommon for him to dress himself in a woman's habit and then
patrole the fort in which he resided. Such freaks of low humor exposed him to
the universal contempt of the people, and their indignation was kindled by his
dispotic rules, savage bigotry, insatiable avarice, and injustice, not only to
the public but even his private creditors; for he left some of his lowest
tradesmen unsatisfied in their demands, when he succeeded his father to the
earldom of Clarendom. When the conduct of such a man is contrasted with the
mild administration of the present governor, who unites the great qualities of
the statesman with the more amiable and endearing virtues of humanity, how it
degrades the former, and enhances the virtues of the latter, and dignifies that
pre-eminence he has obtained by his merit, and the united approbation of his
fellow citizens. It appears, from good authority, that the first English
settlers of New Jersey arrived at Salem, so called by John Fenwick, who brought
with him two daughters and several servants; there were also passangers in the
same ship, and several other families.

No other ships arrived for two years afterward: the beforementioned ship
arrived, A. D. 1677. In 1765, another ship arrived with two hundred and thirty
passangers on board; these landed near Rancocas, and finally settled at
Burlington. Indian corn and venison, supplied by the Indians, was their chief
food. The same year another ship arrived with a large number of passengers, who
settled at Burlington, aforesaid. It would be in vain, to pretend, to gve a
particular description of all the different tribes of Indians that inhabited
this country, before the Europeans came amongst them; their nations were
commonly distinguished by the names of Creeks, or noted places, where they
resided; as the Assunpink, the Rankokas, the Mingo, the Andastaka, the
Neshamine, and the Shackamaxon Indians, etc. Different nations were frequently
at war with each other, of which, farmers sometimes find remaining marks in
their fields.

A little below, the falls of the Delaware on the Jersey side and at Point no
Point, in Pennsylvania, and other places; banks of earth was found thrown up
for intrenchments against the incursions of neighboring Indians, who, in their
canoes used to go and attack the neighboring tribes. When the Indians bury
their dead, they put their family utensils, bows, arrows, and wampum into the
grave with the deceased; leaving the dead in a sitting posture, and covering
the grave pyramedically. Their employment was hunting, fishing, fowling, making
canoes, bowls, and other wooden ware: their women were employed in planting
corn; pounding and baking it it into bread: they would not allow a friend that
was dead to be mentioned. The state of New Jersey is bounded on the west and
south-west by Delaware bay and river; on the south-east and east by the
Atlantic ocean, the sound, which separates it from Staten Island, and Hudsons
river; on the north, by a line not yet settled, thence to the last river
mentioned, in the latitude of 40 degrees, to the notherly branch of the
Delaware in latitude of 41-40, which line, is the boundary of New York, on that
side. The greatest length of the state of New Jersey, from north to south, that
is from Cape May, in latitude 39 to the north station point in 41-40 at 69
miles to a degree, is one hundred and eighty-four miles; its greatest breadth
is about sixty miles, and contains above four millions eight hundred thousand
acres of land: it is divided into thirteen counties, and sends five members to
congress. The services of the late governor Livingston, will be long gratefully
remembered by every patriotic member of the state, both as an upright
magistrate, and useful citizen; and few have exceeded him on the continent, for
a manly zeal in defense of that liberty, which was so wantonly struck at by the
British cabinet, during the administration of lord North. It was this that
called forth those distinguished talents, which places him in the first list of
American writers.

His Excellency GENESIS WASHINGTON, President of the United States.
"Great without pomp, without ambition brave,
"Proud not to conquer fellow-men, but save.
STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THE state of Pennsylvania was granted by king Charles, in 1681, to William
Penn, son of sir William Penn, Admiral in the Dutch wars, in consideration of a
considerable debt due from the crown to his father; but, notwithstanding the
grants made him by the crown, he did not esteem himself the real proprietor,
until he had given the Indians a valuable consideration for their country. He
therefore came over from England and assembled the sachems or kings, and
purchased a very large extent of country from the natives; with whom, he and
his successors lived in good harmony: and to this day they mention the name of
William Penn with great respect. King Charles called the country, thus granted,
Pennsylvania: in the same year he founded the city of Philadelphia, now the
seat of government of the United States, and the residence of general
Washington; of whose merits, the most studious panegeric would fall far short
in describing; nor will the compiler of this abstract wound his delicacy in an
attempt to display those shining virtues, which has rendered him famous through
the world; but content himself with styling him the friend and father of a
numerous and grateful people; the great apostle and successful defender of
American liberty; whose name will be handed to distant ages as the model of
human perfection, and nations yet unborn shall venerate his name.

The mildness of the government under Penn, induced many of his countrymen,
chiefly of the people called quakers, and the prosecuted of other countries to
flock to Pennsylvania, as a safe asylum from their oppressors; nor were they
disappointed, finding on their arival that quiet in the peaceful woods, that
they in vain sought for under the dominion of tyrants, of various discriptions,
and of none had they more reason to complain than of the clergy, whose furious
bigotry, and blind zeal, pursued them to prisons, and confiscated their
estates: happy! thrice happy Americans! who have wisely taken care to bar
against the encroachment of a domineering clergy, by establishing, upon an
immovable basis, that liberty of conscience so long, and so ardently, panted
after in monarchial governments.

Philadelphia is the capital of Pennsylvania, and is now by far the greatest
commercial city on the continent, and is rising fast to that oppulence and
magnificence as will soon make her the envy of European powers. The majestic
Delaware, upon which the city is built, is exceeded by none on the continent,
and by few in Europe, for its convenience as a harbor for shipping: the Jersey
shore, on the other side forms a pleasant prospect from the city; and from
thence the market is daily supplied with vegetables, and other country produce.
This state sends thirteen members to congress.

JOSHUA CLAYTON, Esquire Governor of Delaware state.
STATE OF DELAWARE.
THE Delaware state, the smallest in the Union, sends but one (...) to
congress; is situated on the Delaware river, its capital town is New Castle, a
place of considerable inland trade; was formerly within the bounds of
Pennsylvania, but now a distinct and separate state. It contains a rich soil,
and produces annually, large quantities of wheat, barley, and other grain,
which they export to Philadelphia: the wheat they make into flour, and this
being the staple commodity of this part of America, great care is taken, at
Philadelphia, that no damaged flour shall be shipped from that port: for this
purpose, they have inspectors appointed who examine all the flour, and such as
is unfit for transportation they set a mark upon, each barrel, and, if this
condemned flour is afterward shipped, is seizable, one half to the informer
and the other goes to the poor; by this care the credit of the flour is
preserved abroad, and proves a great source of wealth to the states.

THOMAS S. LEE, Esquire Governor of Maryland.
STATE OF MARYLAND.
MARYLAND, is bounded on the north by Pennsylvania, by the Atlantic ocean on
the east, by Virginia on the south, and by the Apalachian mountains on the
west. Maryland is divided into two parts by the bay of Chesapeak, viz. the
eastern and western division. This state is watered by innumerable springs and
rivers, king Charles the first named the state in honor to his queen,
Henrietta Maria, daughter of Henry the fourth of France, when he granted it to
George Calvert, lord Baltimore, A. D. 1613. It is separated from Virginia by
the river Potowmac. It was discovered, in 1606; the lord Baltimore, in the year
1633, sent over his brother, the honorable Leonard Calvert, esquire with several
Roman catholic gentlemen, and other adventurers, to the number of two hundred,
who arrived in the bay of Chesapeak the same year, and planted the first colony
near the mouth of Potowmac river, and advancing to the Indian town of Yoamico,
they were permitted to reside in one part of the town in consideration of some
presents they made to the weorance, or prince of the country, who left them in
possession of the whole town, as soon as his people had got in their harvest.
Whereupon, the governor, Calvert, gave the town the name of St. Mary. While the
English were improving the country, the Indians hunted for them in the woods,
and brought in great quantities of venison and wild fowl. Many other Roman
catholics coming over from England to avoid the penal laws it soon became a
flourishing colony; of which, the Calverts remained governors, until the civil
wars in England; when the family were deprived of it, but recovered it again at
the restoration of king Charles the second, when the honorable Charles
Calvert, son of lord Baltimore, remained governor near twenty years. Tobacco is
raised in this state in large quantities. The inhabitants are remarkable for
their hospitality, yet they do not exceed their neighbors the Virginians, in
the practice of this engaging virtue, accompained with pleasing manners, and a
graceful easy carriage. This state sends eight members to congress. The rivers
and numerous bays and creeks that indent the land on every side enable the
sailors to bring their vessels to the planters doors, to receive their freights
of tobacco, etc. The air in this country is excessive hot in the summer season,
and equally cold in winter, when the north-west wind blows. On the first
planting of Maryland there were several nations of Indians; but now it is rare
to see one in the state: It is, however, well stocked with negroes, which some
people think a poor exchange.

His Excellency HENRY LEE, Governor of Virginia.
VIRGINIA.
THE rich and populous state of Virginia is bounded by the river Potowmac,
which divides it from Maryland on the north-east; by the Atlantic ocean on the
east; by Carolina on the south; and by the Apalachian mountains on the west;
into the west side of the bay falls four great rivers, which rise in the
Apalachian mountains, running from the north-west to the south-east; the most
southerly is James river; the Indian name of this river was Powhatan. The great
bay of Chesapeak runs up through Virginia and Maryland, almost due north, three
hundred miles and upwards. North of Rappahanic river is the great river
Potowmac, which runs, and is navigable, near two hundred miles. As we approach
Virginia from the ocean, it appears to be low lands, and for a hundred miles up
into the country, there is scarce a hill or stone to be met with. The woods are
lofty, and but little under-wood to intercept travelers in their passage,
through the state, who never want a fine shade to protect them from the summer
heats. No country produces greater quantities of excellent tobacco: sir Walter
Raleigh obtained a grant from queen Elizabeth, A. D. 1584, of all such lands as
he should discover in North America, between 33 and 40 degrees of north
latitude; and to dispose of them in fee simple, or otherwise, to any of the
subjects of Great Britain. Whereupon, sir Walter formed a society amongst his
friends, who contributed large sums and provided two ships to go upon the
expedition, who set sail the 20th of April, A. D. 1514, and arrived on the
coast of Carolina, in 34 degrees 15 minutes north latitude, where they bartered
with the natives for skins and furs, and loaded their ships with sasafras,
cedar, and tobacco; which last, was cried up in England as a most valuable
plant, and a remedy for almost every disease. There is a diverting anecdote in
sir Walter's life, in which, we are informed, that as he was privately smoking
a pipe in his closet, his servant, a stranger to the use of it, coming into the
closet with a mug of ale, and seeing the smoke issuing from his master's mouth,
was astonished, and emptyed the mug in his face, and immediately alarmed the
family, insisting in positive terms that his master was on fire. Sir Walter
called the country he had discovered Virginia, in honor to his mistress, a
maiden queen. Another set of adventurers arrived from England, April 26th,
1607, and came up the Chesapeak, and thence up James river, and landed on a
Peninsula, about fifty miles up the river, where they built a fort, and a town,
which they named James town: this was the first town built upon the continent
of America by the English. This state sends nineteen members to congress; and
has the merit of having produced some of the greatest men in the union: a
Washington, a Randolph and a Lee, with other distinguished characters.

None were more zealous than the Virginians, in the cause of American liberty;
none possess the powers of eloquence in a greater degree; but yet, there is not
a Willberforce amongst them.

This gentleman added the charms of eloquence, to the affecting and feeling
language of humanity, to obtain an act for the prohibition of the slave trade
See his speech in the house of commons.
.

JOHN RUTLEDGE, Esquire Governor of South Carolina.
SOUTH CAROLINA.
Bounded by Georgia on the south, by the Mississippi on the west, which falls
into the gulf of Mexico; by Virginia on the north, and by the Atlantic ocean
on the east. It has a low level coast, not a hill to be seen from St. Augustine
to Virginia: the country rises into hills about one hundred miles west of the
coast; and continues to rise gradually, to the Appalachian mountains, which are
about one hundred and fifty miles from the ocean. They ship off from
South Carolina, yearly, large quantities of rice, deer skins, pitch and tar, to
a considerable amount. Their tar is esteemed in Europe as good as the Norway
tar: their chief trade for skins and furs, is with the Creeks and Cherokee
Indians. This state suffered much in the time of the late war, when lord
Cornwallis, the most enterprizing officer in the British army, reduced the
inhabitants to great straits; they also suffered much from the disaffected of
their own state: hence, murders, house-burning, and all the concomitant
horrors of civil war desolated this once flourishing state, and banished for
many months the comforts of domestic life; until the independence of the United
States was finally ratified, by the court of Great Britain. Carolina, was the
last country planted in America, that was planted by the British, the first
proprietors, after sir Walter Raleigh relinquished his claim, was Edward earl
of Clarendon, lord Chancellor, George, duke of Albemarl, William lord Craven,
John lord Berkley, the lord Anthony Ashley Cooper, sir George Cartarect, sir
William Colleton, and their heirs; but these being unsuccessful, sold their
shares to the crown. This state sends six members to congress: Charleston is
the capital of the state, and is a considerable seaport.

BENJAMIN HAWKINS, Esquire Governor of North Carolina.
NORTH CAROLINA.
THIS state was included with South Carolina and Georgia in one grant, and was
a proprietary government; but by the disagreement of the parties concerned
became subject to the crown. Edenton, situated near the Pasquotank, is an
ancient town, but is not in a flourishing state, owing to the badness of the
navigation: Newbern is the capital. The country near the rivers is unhealthy;
intermitting fevers are common in Autumn, and the people look sickly. In the
bays, and by the side of large rivers are found the alligators, or American
crocodile: It has a large mouth, furnished with sharp teeth; this dreadful
creature grows to the length of seventeen or eighteen feet. As we go to the
south they are more fierce and ravenous: like the wolf, when pressed by hunger,
it will swallow mud or even stones: they float on the water, in summer seasons,
and look much like an old log; and should any person venture to gratify his
curiosity, the attempt might be fatal. There has been several examples of
crocodiles taking a man out of a canoe, in sight of his companions, without
their being able to lend them any assistance. It often lurks by the side of a
bank near the river, and there patiently waits for some land animal, coming to
drink, be it a man, tiger, bull or dog; it seizes the victim with a spring, and
having secured his prey with teeth and claws, he sinks with it to the bottom of
the river, and it is soon drowned. The tiger, as soon as he is seized by this
enemy, immediately turns with great agility and forces his claws in his eyes,
while he is plunged by his fierce antagonist into the water, where he is soon
destroyed. Notwithstanding all this it is related by good authority, that a
single negro will jump into the river, and make battle with this monster, in
his own element; with a knife in his right hand, and his left arm wrapped round
with a piece of cow hide: being thus prepared, as the crocodile approaches he
holds out his left arm, which is instantly and greedily swallowed, but as it
sticks in his throat, the knife in his right hand is busily employed in
stabbing him below the chin, a place easily vulnerable and the water also
getting in the mouth, the creature is soon bloated up as big as a tun and
expires. This state sends ten members to congress.

His Excel. GEORGE MATHEWS, Governor of Georgia.
STATE OF GEORGIA.
GEORGIA is the most southern state of the Union: the country is not so
fruitful as the other states, consequently not so populous; it sends but two
members to congress. There are several fine rivers runs through it, and the
banks being fortified makes a good barrier for the Carolinas, which were much
exposed formerly to the incursions and ravages of the Spaniards and their
Indian allies. General Prevost and Colonel Maitland gained much applause for
their brave and successful defense of Savannah, the capital of this state,
against the united forces of France and America, under De Estang and Lincoln in
the late war. In the rivers are found, and often to be seen, the aligator or
American crocodile, a description of which is given in the history of Carolina.

ISAAC SHELBY, Esquire Governor of the state of Kentucky.
STATE OF KENTUCKY.
KENTUCKY was formerly a part of the state of Virginia, but admitted into the
Union as an independent state, by act of congress, on the 1st day of June,
1792: this state is situated between 36-39 of north latitude; and between 8 and
15 degrees of west longitude, from Philadelphia, being about four hundred miles
in length from north-east to south-east; and about two hundred miles in
breadth. It is bounded to the westward by the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, on
the south by a parrallel of latitude, which divides it from the territory ceded
to the United States by North Carolina, to the eastward by the Cumberland
mountain, and to the northward by the Great Sandy river. The Ohio river, washes
the north-western side of this state, in its whole extent; except about thirty
miles, which is bounded by the Mississippi. The rapid settlement and population
of the state, notwithstanding the united opposition of all the western Indians,
almost exceed belief. It was in the year 1775, that the first family settled in
this country, at that time a forest, inhabited only by wild beasts. By the
census taken in 1791, according to the returns, it contained 75,000 souls; but
from the great numbers of emigrants, who daily repair to that country, from the
different states, there must now be more than double that number. The
inhabitants enjoy a happy temperature of climate: snow seldom falls deep or
lies long, and the rivers are rarely frozen over: it includes the largest body
of the most fertile land in the United States, suitable to the production of
every kind of grain. Horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, and poultry of every kind are
raised here in great numbers, and with little trouble or expense, owing chiefly
to the shortness of the winters, and great abundance of food. The rivers afford
swans, geese and ducks, and a variety of fish; the wild beasts of the woods
are, the buffalo, elk, deer, and bears. Frankfort is the capital town, or where
the seat of government is established. This state sends two members to congress.

His Excel. -- BRADLEY, Governor of the state of Rhode Island.
The following article was compiled too late to be inserted in its proper place.

STATE OF RHODE ISLAND.
RHODE ISLAND, a small state, was first planted by quakers, who were driven
there by the independents of of New England, who had long persecuted, and
actually hanged some of them for not conforming to their way of worship. There
is yet a majority of this sect on the island. The Indians who were formerly
very numerous here, are almost extinct, or gone to other parts, more remote
from the settlements. There was formerly a good whale fishery on the south side
of the island, but is now almost entirely neglected. The inhabitants both in
the towns and country are praised for their hospitality. They are sober,
industrious, and intent upon gain, and sustain the reputation of honest and
fair dealers. Great part of the island is a rich soil and fit for grazing; this
renders it a desirable situation in the summer: they send two members to
Congress.

GENERAL MONTGOMERY.
THE LIFE OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY.
GENERAL MONTGOMERY descended from a respectable family in the North of
Ireland, and was born in the year 1737. His attachment to libery was innate,
and matured by a fine education and an excellent understanding. Having married,
and purchased an estate in New York, he was, from these circumstances, as well
as from his natural love of freedom, and from a conviction of the justness of
her cause induced to consider himself as an American. From principle, he early
embarked in her cause, and quitted the sweets of easy fortune, the enjoyment of
a loved and philosophical rural life, with the highest domestic felicity, to
take an active share in all the hardships and dangers that attend the soldier's
life.

Before he came over to America, he had been an officer in the service of
England, and had successfully fought her battles with the immortal Wolf at
Quebec, in the war of 1756, on the very spot, where when fighting under the
standard of freedom, he was doomed to fall in arms against her. No one who fell
a martyr to freedom in this unnatural contest, was more sincerely, or more
universally lamented. And what is extraordinary, the most eminent speakers in
the British parliament, forgetting for the moment, that he had died in opposing
their cruel and oppressive measures, displayed all their eloquence in praising
his virtues and lamenting his fate. A great orator, and a veteran fellow
soldier of his in the French war of 1756, shed abundance of tears, while he
expatiated on their past friendship and mutual exchange of tender services in
that season of enterprise and glory.

All enmity to this veteran soldier expired with his life; and respect to his
private character prevailed over all other considerations. By the orders of
General Carlton, his remains received every possible mark of distinction from
the victors, and was interred in Quebec, on the first day of January, 1776,
with all the honors due to a brave soldier.

Congress were not unmindful of the merit of this amiable and brave officer,
nor remiss in manifesting the esteem and respect they entertained of his
memory. Considering it not only as a tribute of gratitude justly due to the
memory of those who had peculiarly distinguished themselves in the glorious
cause of liberty, to perpetuate their names by the most durable monuments
erected to their honor, but greatly conducive to inspire posterity with
emulation of their illustrious actions, that honorable body

"Resolved, That to express the veneration of the United Colonies for their
late General, Richard Montgomery, and the deep sense they entertain of the many
signal and important services of that gallant officer, who, after a series of
successes, amidst the most discouraging difficulties, fell at length in a
gallant attack upon Quebec, the capital of Canada; and to transmit to future
ages, as examples truly worthy of imitation, his patriotism, conduct, boldness
of enterprise, insuperable perseverance, and contempt of danger and death; a
monument be procured from Paris, or other parts of France, with an inscription
sacred to his memory, and expressive of his amiable character, and heroic
achievements; and that the Continental treasurer be directed to advance a sum
not exceeding three hundred pounds sterling, to Dr. Franklin, who is desired to
see this resolution properly executed, for defraying the expense thereof."

This resolve was carried into execution at Paris, by that ingenious artist,
Mr. Caffiers, sculptor to the king of France, under the direction of Dr.
Franklin. The monument is of white marble, of the most beautiful simplicity,
and inexpressible elegance, with emblematical devices, and the following truly
classical inscription, worthy of the modest, but great mind of a Franklin.

TO THE GLORY OF RICHARD MONTGOMERY, Major General of the armies of the United
States of America, Slain at the siege of Quebec, the 31st of December, 1775,
aged 38 years. This elegant monument has lately been erected in front of St.
Paul's church in New York.

There is a remarkable circumstance connected with the fall of this brave
officer, that merits to be recorded, because the fact is of a very interesting
nature, and will serve to perpetuate the memory of a very amiable and deserving
character, who was also a martyr in the cause of his country. The circumstance
is this:

One of General Montgomery's Aids-de-Camp, was Mr. Macpherson, a most promising
young man, whose father resided at Philadelphia, and was greatly distinguished
in privateering in the war of 1756. This gentleman had a brother in the
sixteenth regiment, in the British service, at the time of Montgomery's
expedition into Canada, and who was as violent in favor of the English
government, as this General's Aid-de-Camp was enthusiastic in the cause of
America; the latter had accompanied his General a day or two previous to the
attack in which they both lost their lives, to view and meditate on the spot
where Wolf had fallen; on his return he found a letter from his brother, the
English officer, full of the bitterest reproaches against him, for having
entered into the American service, and containing a pretty direct wish, that if
he would not abandon it, he might meet with the deserved fate of a rebel. The
Aid-de-Camp immediately returned him an answer, full of strong reasoning in
defense of his conduct, but by no means attempting to make the opposite
principles of his brother, and not only free from acrimony, but full of
expressions of tenderness and affection; this letter he dated, "From the spot
where Wolf lost his life, in fighting the cause of England, in friendship with
America." This letter had scarcely reached the officer at New York, before it
was followed by the news of his brother's death. The effect was instantaneous,
nature, and perhaps reason prevailed; and a thousand, not unworthy sentiments
rushed upon his distressed mind; he quitted the English service, entered into
that of America, and sought every occasion of distinguishing himself in her
service!

GENERAL GREEN.
SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF THE LATE NATHANIEL GREEN, Major General of the Forces
of the United States of America.
THIS gallant officer, whose death is so generally and so justly regretted, was
born in the town of Warwick, Kent county, Rhode Island, in or about the year
1741, and was the second son of a respectable citizen of the same name
(descended from some of the first settlers in the colony,) who was extensively
concerned in lucrative iron-works, the property of which, at his death, (prior
to the war) he left to his children.

The subject of this sketch was endowed with an uncommon degree of judgment
and penetration, which with a benevolent manner and affable behavior, acquired
him a number of valuable friends, by whose interest and influence, he was, at
an early period of life, chosen a member of the assembly of the then colony of
Rhode Island. This trust, in which he gave the highest satisfaction to his
constituents; he continued to possess until, and at the period, when the folly
and madness of England severed a world from her empire.

After the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord, when a spirit of resistance
spread like wild fire over the continent, Rhode Island was not deficient in her
contributions for the general defense: she raised three regiments of militia,
the command whereof was given to Mr. Green, who was nominated
brigadier-general. The liberty, safety, and prosperity of his country being
exposed to imminent danger, the pacific principles of Quakerism, in which he
had been educated, proved insufficient to combat the ardent spirit of liberty
with which his bosom glowed.

He led the troops under his command to Cambridge, and was present at the
evacuation of Boston, by a force which had in England been vauntingly stated
treble the number that would be requisite to dragoon America into unconditional
submission.

General Greene's merit and abilities, as well in council as in the field, were
not long unnoticed by Genesis Washington, who reposed in him the utmost
confidence, and paid particular deference to his advice and opinion on all
occcasions of doubt and difficulty. This excited the jealousy of several
officers of older date and higher rank, who were not wanting in endeavors to
supplant him: but in vain -- the commander in chief knew, and prized his worth
as it deserved.

He was appointed major general by congress, the 26th of August, 1776. Toward
the close of that year he was at the Trenton surprise, and at the beginning of
the next, was at the battle of Princetown, two enterprises not more happily
planned than judiciously executed, in both of which he highly distinguished
himself, serving his noviciate under the American Fabius.

At the battle of Germantown, he commanded the left wing of the American army,
and his utmost endeavors were excited to retreive the fortune of that day, in
which his met with the approbation of the commander in chief.

In March, 1778, he was appointed quarter-master-general, which office he
accepted under a stipulation that his rank in the army should not be affected
by it, and that he should retain his right to command in time of action,
according to his rank and seniority. This he exercised at the battle of
Monmouth, where he commanded the right wing of the army.

About the middle of the same year, an attack, in conjunction with the French
fleet, on the British garrison at Newport, Rhode Island, being planned, General
Sullivan was appointed to the command, under whom Genesis Green served. This
attempt was unsuccesful: the French fleet having sailed out of harbor to
engage lord Howe's fleet, they were dispersed by a storm, and the Americans
were obliged to raise the siege of Newport, in doing which General Green
displayed a great degree of skill in drawing off the army in safety.

After the hopes of the British Generals, to execute some decisive stroke to
the northward, were frustrated, they turned their attention to the southern
states, as less capable of defense, and more likely to reward the invaders with
ample plunder. A grand expidition was in consequence, planned at New York,
where the army embarked on or about the 26th day of December, 1779, and landed
on the 11th of February, 1780, within thirty miles of Charleston, which, after
a brave defense, was surrendered to sir Henry Clinton, on the twelfth of May.

A series of ill success followed this unfortunate event: the American arms in
South Carolina were in general unsuccessful, and the inhabitants were obliged
to submit to the invaders, whose impolitic severity was extremely ill
calculated to answer any of the objects for which the war had been commenced.

Affairs were thus circumstanced, when General Washington appointed General
Green to the command of the American forces in the southern district. He
arrived at Charlotte, on the second day of December, 1780, accompanied by
General Morgan, a brave officer, who had distinguished himself to the
northward, in the expidetion against Burgoyne. He found the forces he was to
command reduced to a very small number by defeat and by desertion. The returns
were nine hundred and seventy continentals and one thousand and thirteen
militia; military stores, provisions, forages and all things necessary, were if
possible in a more reduced state than his army. His men were without pay and
almost without clothing, and supplies of the latter were not to be had but
from a distance of two hundred miles. In this perilous situation, he had to
oppose a respectable and victorious army. Fortunately for him, the conduct of
some of the friends of royalty obliged numbers, otherwise disposed, to remain
neuter, or take up arms in their own defense. This and the prudent measures the
general took for removing the innumerable difficulties and disadvantages he was
surrounded with, and for conciliating the affections of the inhabitants, soon
brought together a considerable force, far inferior, however, to that of the
British, who esteemed the country perfectly subjugated.

The happy period at length arrived, when by virtue and bravery of her sons,
aided by the bounty of heaven, America compelled her invaders to recognize her
independence. Then her armies quitted the tented fields, and retired to
cultivate the arts of peace and happiness. Amongst the rest, General Green
revisited his native country, where he proved himself as valuable a citizen, as
the Carolinas had witnessed him a gallant officer. Dissensions and jealousies
had extended their destructive influence among the Rhode-Islanders, and their
animosity had arisen to such a degree, as to threaten the most serious ill
consequences: General Green exerted himself to restore harmony and peace
amongst them once more, and was happily successful.

In October, 1785, he sailed to Georgia, where he had a considerable estate,
not far distant from Savanah: here he passed away his time, occupied in his
domestic concerns, until the hour of his mortality approached. Walking out one
day in June last, we are told, he was overpowered by the extreme heat of the
sun, which brought on a disorder, that carried him off a few days after, on the
19th of the same month.

When the melancholy account of his death was arrived at Savannah, the people
were struck with the deepest sorrow.

All business was suspended; the shops and stores throughout the town were
shut; and the shipping in the harbor had their colors half masted.

The body was brought to Savannah, and interred on the 20th: the funeral
procession was attended by the Cincinati, militia, etc. etc. in the following
order:

The corpse of artillery, the light infantry, the militia of Chatham county,
clerygmen and physicians, band of music.

The corpse and pall-bearers, escorted on each side by a company of dragoons,
the principle mourners, the members of the Cincinnati as mourners; the speaker
of the assembly, and other civil officers of the state, citizens and strangers.
Immediately after the interment of the corpse, the members of the Cincinnati
retired to the coffee-house in Savannah, and came to the following resolution:

"That as a token of the high respect and veneration in which this society hold
the memory of their late illustrious brother, major General Green, deceased,
George Washington Green, his eldest son be admitted a member of this society,
to take his seat on his arriving at the age of eighteen years.

General Green left behind him a wife and five children, the eldest of whom is
about eleven years old.

On Tuesday the 12th of August, the United States in congress assembled came to
the following resolution:

That a monument be erected to the memory of Nathaniel Green, esquire at the seat
of federal government with the following inscription: Sacred to the memory of
NATHANIEL GREEN, ESQUIRE who departed this life, on the 19th of June, 1786; late
Major General in the service of the United States, and Commander of their Army
in the Southern department: The United States in Congress assembled, in honor
of his Patriotism, Valor, and Abilities, have erected this Monument.

GENERAL PUTNAM captured by the Indians.
A SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF ISRAEL PUTNAM, SENIOR MAJOR GENERAL IN THE ARMY OF THE
UNITED STATES.
ISRAEL PUTNAM, who, through a regular gradation of promotion became the Senior
Major General in the army of the United States, and next in rank to General
Washington, was born at Salem, in the province, now state of Massachusetts, on
the 7th day of January, 1718. His father, captain Joseph Putnam, was the son of
Mr. John Putnam, who, with two brothers, came from the south of England, and
were among the first settlers of Salem.

When we thus behold a person, from the humble walks of life, starting
unnoticed in the career of fame, and by an undeviating progress through a life
of honor, arriving at the highest dignity in the state; curiosity is strongly
excited, and philosophy loves to trace the path of glory from the cradle of
obscurity to the summit of elevation.

His disposition was as frank and generous as his mind was fearless and
independent. He disguised nothing; indeed he seemed incapable of disguise.
Perhaps, in the intercourse he was ultimately obliged to have with an artful
world, his sincerity on some occasions, outwent his discretion. Although he had
too much mildness in his nature to commence a quarrel, he had too much
sensibility not to feel, and too much honor not to resent an intended insult.
The first time he went to Boston, he was insulted for his rusticity by a boy of
twice his size and age; after bearing his sarcasms until his patience was worn
out, he challenged, engaged and vanquished his unmannerly antagonist, to the
great diversion of a crowd of spectators. While a strippling, his ambition was
to perform the labor of a man, and to excel in athletic diversions. In that
rude, but masculine age, whenever the village youth assembled, on their usual
occasions of festivity; pitching the bar, running, leaping and wrestling were
favorite amusements. At such gymnastic exercises (in which during the heroic
times of ancient Greece and Rome, conquest was considered as the promise of
future military fame) he bore the palm from almost every ring.

In the year 1739, he removed from Salem to Pomfret, an inland fertile town in
Connecticut, forty miles east of Hartford: having here purchased a considerable
tract of land, he applied himself successfully to agriculture.

Mr. Putnam, before he attained the twenty-first year of his age, married Miss
Pope, daughter of Mr. John Pope, of Salem, by whom he had ten children, seven
of whom are still living. He lost the wife of his youth in 1764: sometime after
he married Mrs. Gardener, widow of the late Mr. Gardener, of Gardiner's Island,
by whom he had no issue: she died in 1777.

Our farmer had to encounter not only the calamities occasioned by drought in
summer, blast in harvest, loss of cattle in winter, but the desolation of his
sheep-folds by wolves. In one night he had seventy fine sheep and goats killed,
besides many lambs and kids wounded: this havoc was committed by a she wolf,
which, with her annual whelps had for several years infested the vicinity. The
young were commonly destroyed by the vigilance of the hunters, but the old one
was too sagacious to come within reach of gunshot: when closely pursued she
would generally fly to the western woods, and return the next winter with
another litter of whelps.

This wolf at length, became such an intolerable nuisance, that Mr. Putnam
entered into a combination with five of his neighbors to hunt alternately
until they could destroy her. Two, by rotation, were to be constantly in
pursuit; having lost the toes from one foot, by a steel trap, she made one
track shorter than the other. By this vestige, the pursuers, recognized in a
light snow, the route of this pernicious animal. Having followed her to
Connecticut river, and found she had turned back in a direct course toward
Pomfret, they immediately returned, and by ten o'clock the next morning, the
blood hounds had driven her into a den, about three miles distant from the
house of Mr. Putnam. The people soon collected with dogs, guns, straw, fire,
and sulpher, to attack the common enemy. With this apparatus several
unsuccessful efforts were made to force her from the den. The hounds came back
badly wounded and refused to return. The smoke of blazing straw had no effect;
nor did the fumes of burnt brimstone, with which the cavern was filled, compel
her to quit the retirement. Wearied with such fruitless attempts (which had
brought the time to ten o'clock at night) Mr. Putnam tried once more to make
his dog enter, but in vain: he proposed to his negro man to go down into the
cavern and shoot the wolf; the negro declined the hazardous service: then it
was, that their master, angry at the disappointment, and declaring that he was
ashamed to have a coward in his family, resolved himself to destroy the
ferocious beast, least she should escape through some unknown sissure of the
rock. His neighbors strongly remonstrated against the perilous enterprise; but
he knowing, that wild animals are intimidated by fire, and having provided
several strips of birch-bark, the only combustible material which he could
obtain, that would afford light in this deep and darksome cave, prepared for
his descent. Having accordingly divested himself of his coat and waistcoat, and
having a long rope fastened round his legs by which he might be pulled back, at
a concerted signal, he entered head foremost with the blazing torch in his hand.

The aperture of the den, on the east side of a very high ledge of rocks, is
about two feet square; from thence it descends obliquely fifteen feet, then
running horizontally about ten more, it ascends gradually sixteen feet toward
its termination. The sides of this subterraneous cavity are composed of smooth
and solid rocks, which seem to have been divided from each other by some former
earthquake. The top and bottom are also of stone, and the entrance, in winter,
being covered with ice, is exceedingly slippery. It is in no place high enough
for a man to raise himself upright; nor in any part more than three feet in
width.

Having groped his passage to the horizontal part of the den, the most
terrifying darkness appeared in front of the dim circle of light afforded by
his torch. It was silent as the house of death: none but monsters of the desert
had ever before explored this solitary mansion of horror. He, cautiously
proceeding onward, came to the ascent, which he slowly mounted on his hands and
knees, until he discovered the glaring eye balls of the wolf, who was sitting
at the extremity of the cavern. Startled at the sight of fire, she gnashed her
teeth and gave a sullen growl. As soon as he made the necessary discovery, he
kicked the rope as a signal for pulling him out. The people at the mouth of the
den, who had listened with painful anxiety, hearing the growling of the wolf,
and supposing their friend to be in imminent danger, drew him forth with such
celerity that his shirt was stripped over his head, and his skin severely
lacetrated. After he had adjusted his clothes and loaded his gun with nine
buck-shot, holding a torch in one hand and the musket in the other, he
descended the second time, when, he drew nearer than before, the wolf assuming
a still more fierce and terrible appearance, howling, rolling her eyes,
snapping her teeth, and dropping her head between her legs, was evidently in
the attitude and on the point of springing at him. At the critical instant, he
levelled and fired at her head: stunned with the shock, and suffocated with the
smoke, he immediately found himself drawn out of the cave; but having refreshed
himself, and permitted the smoke to dissipate, he went down the third time;
once more he came within sight of the wolf, who appearing very passive he
applied the torch to her nose and perceiving her dead, he took hold of her
ears, and then kicking the rope, (still tied round his legs) the people above,
with no small exultation dragged them both out together.

But the time had now arrived which was to turn the instruments of husbandry
into weapons of hostility, and to exchange the hunting of wolves, who had
ravaged the sheep-folds, for the pursuit after savages who had desolated the
frontiers. Mr. Putnam was about thirty-seven years old, when the war between
England and France, which preceeded the last, broke out in America. His
reputation must have been favorably known to the government, since the first
troops that were levied by Connecticut. In 1755, he was appointed to the
command of a company in Lyman's regiment of provincials: the regiment joined
the army, at the opening of the campaign, not far distant from Crownpoint. The
time for which the colonial troops were to serve, terminated with the campaign.
Putnam was re-appointed, and again took the field in 1756.

The active services of captain Putnam, on every occasion, attracted the
admiration of the public, and induced the legislature of Connecticut to promote
him to a majority in 1757.

In the month of August, five hundred men were employed under the orders of
majors Rogers and Putnam, to watch the motions of the enemy near Ticonderoga.
Upon being, sometime afterward, discovered, they concerted measures for
returning to fort Edward: at the moment of moving, the famous French partizan,
Molang, who had been sent with five hundred men to intercept our party, was not
more than one mile and an half distant from them; having heard the firing, he
hasted to lay an ambuscade precisely in that part of the wood most favorable
to his project. Major Putnam was just emerging from the thickest, into the
common forest, when the enemy rose, and with discordant yells and whoops,
commenced an attack upon the right of his division. Surprised, but undismayed,
Putnam hastily returned the fire, and perceiving it would be impracticable to
cross the creek, determined to maintain his ground: inspired by his example,
the officers and men behaved with great bravery: sometimes they fought
aggregately in open view, and sometimes individually under cover; taking aim
from behind the bodies of trees, and acting in a manner independent of each
other; for himself having discharged his fusil several times, at length it
missed fire, while the muzzle was pressed against the breast of a large well
proportioned Savage. This warrior, availing himself of the indefensible
attitude of his adversary, with a tremendous war-hoop sprang forward, with his
lifted hatchet, and compelled him to surrender; and having disarmed and bound
him fast to a tree, returned to the battle.

The intrepid captains, D'Ell and Harman, who now commanded, were forced to
give ground for a little distance, the Savages, conceiving this to be the
certain harbinger of victory, rushed impetuously on, with dreadful and
redoubled cries: but our two partisans, collecting a handful of brave men, gave
the pursuers so warm a reception as to oblige them, in turn to retreat a little
beyond the spot where the action first commenced: here they made a stand. This
change of ground, occasioned the tree to which Putnam was tied to be directly
between the fire of the two parties. Human imagination can hardly figure to
itself a more deplorable situation. The balls flew incessantly from either
side, many struck the tree, while some passed through the sleeves and skirts of
his coat. In this state of jeopardy, unable to move his body, to stir his
limbs, or even to recline his head, he remained more than an hour: so equally
balanced, and so obstinate the fight. At one moment, while the battle served
in favor of the enemy, a young savage, chose an odd way of discovering his
humor: he found Putnam bound: he might have dispatched him at a blow: but he
loved better to excite the terrors of the prisoner, by hurling a tomahawk at
his head; or rather it should seem his object was to see how near he could
throw it without touching him; the weapon struck in the tree a number of times
at a hairs breadth distance from the mark. When the Indian had finished his
amusement, a French bas-officer (a much more inveterate savage by nature,
though descended from so humane and polished a nation) perceiving Putnam, came
up to him, and levelling a fusil within a foot of his breast, attempted to
discharge it; it missed fire. Ineffectually did the intended victim, solicit
the treatment due to his situation, by repeating that he was a prisoner of war.
The degenerate Frenchman did not understand the language of honor or nature*
deaf to their voice, and dead to sensibility, he violently and repeatedly,
pushed the muzzle of his gun against Putnam's ribs, and finally gave him a
cruel blow on the cheek with the butt of his piece: after this dastardly deed
he left him.

At length the active intrepedity of D'Ell and Harman, seconded by the
persevering valor of their followers, prevailed; they drove from the field the
enemy, who left about ninety dead behind them. As they were retiring Putnam was
untied by the Indian who had made him prisoner, and whom he afterward called
master. Having been conducted for some distance from the place of action, he
was stripped of his coat, vest, stockings and shoes, and loaded with as many of
the packs of the wounded as could be piled upon him: strongly pinioned, and his
wrists tied as closely together as they could be pulled with a cord. After he
had marched, through no pleasant paths, in this painful manner, many miles, the
party (who were much fatigued) halted to rest. His hands were now immoderately
swelled from the tightness of the ligature; and the pain had become
intolerable. His feet were so much scratched that the blood dropped fast from
them. Exhausted with bearing a burden above his strength, and frantic with
torment, exquisite beyond endurance; he entreated the Irish interpreter to
implore, as the last and only grace he desired of the savages, that they would
knock him on the head and take his scalp at once, or loose his hands. A French
officer instantly interposing, ordered his hands to be unbound and some of the
packs to be taken off.

By this time, the Indian who captured him, and had been absent with the
wounded, coming up, gave him a pair of mocasons, and expressed great
indignation at the unworthy treatment his prisoner had suffered.

The savage chief again returned to the care of the wounded, and the Indians,
about two hundred in number, went before the rest of the party to the place
where the whole were, that night, to encamp. They took with them Major Putnam,
on whom (besides innumerable other outrages) they had the barbarity to inflict
a deep wound with a tomahawk, in the left cheek. His sufferings were in this
place consummated. A scene of horror, infinitely greater than had ever met his
eyes before, was now preparing: it was determined to roast him alive. For this
purpose, they led him into a dark forest, stripped him naked bound him to a
tree, and piled dry brush with other fuel, at a small distance, in a circle
round him. They accompanied their labors, as if for his funeral dirge, with
screams and sounds inimitable but by savage voices: then they set the piles on
fire; a sudden shower damped the rising flame. Still they strove to kindle it,
until, at last, the blaze ran fiercely round the circle: Major Putnam soon
began to feel the scorching heat. His hands were so tied that he could move his
body. He often shifted sides as the fire approached. This sight, at the very
idea of which, all but savages, must shudder, afforded the highest diversion to
his inhuman tormentors; who demonstrated the delirium of their joy by
correspondent yells, dances and gesticulations. He saw clearly that his final
hour was inevitably come: he summoned all his resolution and composed his mind,
as far as his circumstances would admit, to bid an eternal farewell to all he
held most dear. To quit the world would scarcely have cost him a single pang;
but for the idea of home, but for the remembrance of domestic endearments, of
the affectionate partner of his soul, and their beloved offspring. His thoughts
was ultimately fixed on a happier state of existence, beyond the tortures he
was beginning to endure. The bitterness of death, even of that death which is
accompanied with the keenest agonies, was in a manner past; nature, with a
feeble struggle, was quitting its last hold on sublunary things; when a French
officer rushed through the crowd, opened away by scattering the burning brands,
and unbound the victim. It was Molang himself, to whom a savage, unwilling to
see another human sacrifice immolated, had ran and communicated the tidings.
That commandant spurned and severely reprimanded the barbarians, whose
nocturnal powers and hellish orgies he suddenly ended. Putnam did not want for
feeling or gratitude. The French commander fearing to trust him alone with
them, remained until he could deliver him in safety into the hands of his
master.

The savage approached his prisoner kindly and seemed to treat him with
particular affection, but being determined, however, not to lose his captive he
took the mocasons, from his feet and tied them to one of his wrists; then
directing him to lie down on his back on the bare ground, he stretched one arm
to its full length, and bound it fast to a young tree; the other arm was
extended and bound in the same manner: his legs were stretched apart and
fastened to two saplings, then a number of tall but slender poles were cut
down; which with some long bushes, were laid across his body, from head to
foot: on each side lay as many Indians as could conveniently find lodging, in
order to prevent the possibility of his escape. In this disagreeable and
painful posture he remained until morning. During this night, the longest and
most dreary conceivable, our hero used to relate that he felt a ray of
cheerfulness come casually across his mind, and could not even refrain from
smiling when he reflected on this ludicrous groupe for a painter, of which he
himself was the principal figure.

At night, the party arrived at Ticonderoga, and the prisoner was placed under
a strong French guard. After having been examined by the marquis de Montcalm,
Major Putnam was conducted to Montreal by a French officer, who treated him
with the greatest indulgence and humanity.

To mention the dangers and difficulties that this brave officer underwent both
before and after he was taken captive by the savages, is beyond my limits,
suffice it to say, that at the expiration of ten years from his first receiving
a commission, after having seen as much service, endured as many hadships,
encountered as many dangers, and acquired as many laurels as any officer of his
rank, with great satisfaction laid aside his uniform and returned to his
plough, which occupation he followed until the fatal day arrived, when
hostilities commenced between Great Britain and her colonies, now the United
States of America. As he happened to be often at Boston, he held many
conversations on these subjects with General Gage, the British commander in
chief, lord Peircy, colonel Sheriff, colonel Small, and many officers with whom
he had formerly served, who were now at the head quarters. Being often
questioned -- in case the dispute should proceed to hostilities, what part he
would take, he always answered, with his country, and, that let whatever might
happen, he was prepared to abide the consequence. Being interrogated, --
whether he, who had been a witness to the prowess and victories of the British
fleets and armies, did not think them equal to the conquest of a country which
was not the owner of a single ship, regiment or magazine. He rejoined, that he
could only say, justice would be on our side, and the event with Providence;
but that he had calculated, if it required six years for the combined forces of
England and her colonies to conquer such a feeble country as Canada, it would
at least, take a very long time for England alone to overcome her own widely
extended colonies, which were much stronger than Canada: that when men fought
for every thing dear, what they believed to be the most sacred of all causes,
and in their own native land, they would have great advantages over their
enemies, who were not in the same situation; and that, having taken into view
all circumstances, for his own part, he fully believed that America would not
be so easily conquered by England as those gentlemen seemed to expect. Being
once, in particular, asked whether he did not seriously believe that a well
appointed British army of five thousand veterans could march through the whole
continent of America? He replied briskly, no doubt, if they behaved civilly and
paid well for every thing they wanted, but, after a moments pause, added -- if
they should attempt it in a hostile manner (though the American men were out of
the question) the women with their ladles and broom sticks, would knock them
all on the head before they had got half way through. This was the tenor of
these amicable interviews.

Thus our hero on hearing of the commencement of hostilities at Lexington (who
was ploughing when he heard the news) he left his plough in the middle of the
field: unyoked his team, and without waiting to change his clothes, set off for
the theater of action, and so continued to act in defense of his country until
thea yer 1779, at which time he was taken with an unusual torpor in his right
hand and foot, which gradually increased upon him, until it deprived him of the
use of his limbs on that side, and which terminated the carreer of his servces.
He died the 29th September, 1790.

THE END.
BOOKS, Neatly bound and lettered by JOHN CURTIS, BOOK-BINDER, No. 43, North
Fourth street.
He likewise has for sale, at No. 40, North Front street,
BIBLES and Testaments, Spelling-Books of different sorts, Primers, Twelve
Cents Worth of Wit, Leputian Auction, Hermit of the Forest, Robinson Crusoe,
London Cries, History of Tom Thumb, Book of Knowledge, Economy of Human Life,
Blue Beard and Glass Broges, History of the Bible, New Years Gift, Divine
Breathings, History of a School Boy, and a number of other small books for
children.


