OF THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE PROPHECIES OF RICHARD BROTHERS, AND OF HIS MISSION
TO RECALL THE JEWS, By Nathaniel Brassy Halhed, M. P.

AND GOD SAID, "LET THERE BE LIGHT." PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS and
ROBERT BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, No. 116, HIGH STREET. M.DCC.XCV.

To Nathaniel Brassy Halhed, Esquire. MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, PALL MALL.
IN obedience to the sacred command of the Lord God, whose Servant and Prophet
I am, I inform you, that you are descended from his ancient people the Hebrews,
of the tribe of Judah, and of the family of David, King of Israel. His sacred
commands delivered to me by revelation for you, are, That you publish and
declare to the world in writing, without the least fear of any human power
whatever, that the revealed knowledge of his judgments given to me, and
published by his sacred command in two books (called a Revealed Knowledge of
the Prophecies and Times,) for the information, warning, and benefit of all
Nations, is from Him the Lord God, and is true.

I am likewise commanded to say to you, Write and publish, according to the
light, wisdom, and understanding, which the Lord my God gives you by his
blessed spirit; by the mighty power of which you was converted to the full
knowledge of his Word, and convinced that I am his Prophet.

I am likewise commanded to say to you, when your Testimony of the Judgments of
God, and of me the Prince of his People, is wrote and published, you are
directed by his sacred command to send printed copies to the King of England,
his Queen, and Family; all the Members of both Houses of Parliament; the
Judges, and all the foreign Ambassadors; the Mayor, and all the Aldermen of
London.

I am likewise directed by the Lord my God to inform you, that his command to
you is, that you publish this Letter, containing his directions, with your own
Testimony.

Richard Brothers, The Man that will be revealed to the Hebrews as their
Prince, to all Nations as their Governor, according to the Covenant to King
David, immediately under God.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington-street, 28th of the Month called January, 1795.
TESTIMONY, etc.
THE question of "Peace or War," has now been twice agitated in the Senate,
since the commencement of the present session: and whatever may have been the
decision in those assemblies, the discussion is still open before the tribunal
of the Public. It was undoubtedly my duty, if I thought I could throw any new
light on the subject, to have delivered my sentiments in Parliament. I was
prepared to do so, and very anxious to obtain a hearing -- Gentlemen who saw me
repeatedly rise for that purpose; and still more, the Speaker, to whom I
verbally communicated my wishes, cannot but bear witness, of my intention. --
Compelled however, by circumstances, to involuntary silence in that quarter, I
must now discharge my conscience through my pen. -- Here therefore I most
unreservedly publish my opinion, That resolutely to persist in offensive War,
is not the best method of procuring Peace. --

Our objections to treating with the present French Government are stated to
be, because it is too discordant not to be suspected of instability, and too
recent to afford any assurance of permanency. In all other respects, the
arguments in favor of Peace are clearly on the side of Opposition; and it only
remains to decide, whether for the bare chance of unsteadiness or versality in
the actual administration of France we are content to see almost the whole
world peopled with nothing but soldiers; and every established form of
government in Europe, not excepting our own, go to wreck in the contest. That
this must inevitably happen, unless the French be induced by general
pacification to lay down their arms, no man who coolly considers the nature of
their revolutionary system can well venture to deny. I shall say nothing of the
arguments founded on the propriety of our retaining the French colonies in case
of a peace, as a necessary indemnification for our enormous expenses; because I
think they have not a shadow of justice or good faith to support them. Had we
stood alone in the conflict, the doctrine would have been plausible enough; but
connected as we are and have been with various allies, each striving with all
his strength, as we are told, and many beyond their strength, in the common
cause, the conquests made by any individual member of the alliance cannot
possibly be viewed in any other light than as prizes taken by a single ship
attached to a fleet. The whole of the capture must be thrown into the general
mass, and should serve, as far as it will go, to balance the
partnership-account of profit and loss. If politics and good faith do not
always go hand in hand, I am heartily sorry for the country where they are
separated. But that conduct which, in my private situation, I hold to be
essentially wrong, I shall not henceforth, in my public capacity, support as
conditionally right; for that we should at all times, and under all
circumstances, profess a readiness to treat with all our enemies whomsoever, I
deem to be an indispensable obligation of the religion to which we have all
sworn obedience at our baptism. Whatever opinions men might have formed of the
justice and necessity of this war at its commencement, the ground has been so
completely shifted since that period, as to authorize different sentiments of
the propriety of its farther continuance, and to require new modes of conduct
for its termination. The situation and circumstances of all the great powers of
Europe are entirely changed from what they were only two years ago; and if this
be the case already, it behooves us seriously to consider, not merely the effect
of this change at the present moment, but what progress it may be likely to
make, up to any future given period: and at what time, or by what means, we may
flatter ourselves with a more favorable opportunity for concluding
hostilities. If we reason from past experience, the advantages in store for us
are not very inviting; and it is incumbent on ministerial logic to demonstrate
how the uniform successes of the French Republic should augment our
expectations of its speedy overthrow. But in the course of the present contest,
France has not only beaten our allies, she seems also to have made converts of
them to her cause; for I believe there is not a man well informed of what is
passing on the Continent, who will not readily agree that the French are less
obnoxious to the subjects of every one of the Belligerent Powers than their own
haughty purse-proud confederates the English. The consequences of this general
disesteem under which we labor, I leave to be computed by superior adepts in
political arithmetic: to my understanding, their gross amount is disaster,
subjugation, and ruin. It is not a little extraordinary to observe the very
same grounds of argument pressed into the service of two opposite parties, to
support two contrary conclusions -- Administration contends, from the very
victories of the French, that they are too extravagant to last: Opposition
maintains, from the reiterated defeats of the allies, that they are too much
reduced to recover. Here then we come directly to the point at issue. Does the
present political state of Europe authorize our perseverance in hostilities, or
warrant the necessity of immediate pacification.

O for a peep into futurity! may the plain observer allowably exclaim, -- A
peep into futurity? Pictures, indeed of the period to come, are exhibited to us
by both sides of the question; but who shall certify the ability of the
painter, and who shall vouch for the fidelity of the portrait?

It has always been observed, that times of calamity are peculiarly fertile in
visions and prognostications, predictions and prophecies. When the minds of men
are softened by the pressure or the apprehension of accumulating evils, then is
the moment for the salutary warnings of the internal monitor, and the
cautionary voice of the spiritual guide. The great mass of the people, too sore
with their sufferings not to grasp at any offer of consolation, and too
credulous to form accurate notions of the divinity of its origin, is easily
worked upon by every species of oracular pretension: and we all know, that when
men are once steadily persuaded of the authenticity of a prophecy, they are
almost involuntarily led to perform their part toward its completion. The
present moment teems with these anticipations of futurity, beyond the example
of every former period. Unfortunately, whatever be the designs or merits of the
various disseminators of these oracles, they are at least uniform in the
melancholy strain of their predictions: and it behooves every well-regulated
government to attend minutely to the irritation these forbodings may produce on
the public mind. For if their doctrines be well founded, we have not an instant
to lose in adopting a complete reversion both of our moral and political
system: if they be fallacious, no pains should be spared to undeceive the
victims of their imposition, and no punishment can be too severe for the
atrocious criminality of their propagators.

Among the productions to which I allude, there is not one so general in its
circulation, nor a thousandth part so forcible in its delineations of
approaching misery, as the two pamphlets entitled A revealed Knowledge of the
Prophecies and Times, and particularly of the present Time, the present War,
and the Prophecy now fulfilling, wrote by the command of Almighty God, and
published by Richard Brothers -- an author whose tremendous threats and
unqualified anathemas fulminate dethronement and speedy death on almost every
one of the Sovereigns of Europe by name, and particularly on our own beloved
monarch. Nor is he less liberal of his violent menaces against both our houses
of parliament, our civil and ecclesiastical establishment, the city of London,
and the whole British nation: and all this, too, in terms precisely suited to
the comprehension of the most ordinary capacity: replete with grammatical
faults; destitute alike of harmony of arrangement, and elegance of diction; in
the style of a peasant, exalting himself above the mightiest of princes:
affirming, that he is utterly invulnerable to all human power; and braving,
with the most unruffled indifference, that government, whose authority his
doctrines and destination are by himself declared to counteract, and whose
establishment the completion of his mission must necessarily subvert.

What shall we say or think of a man who has been in the habit of writing
letters to the King, the Queen, and the Ministers of State, ever since the
beginning of 1792; foretelling many events that would afterward, some of which
have actually already come to pass; advising or reproving them as occasion
seemed to him to require, in peremptory and dictatorial messages, said to
proceed from God himself; and persisting, though in the most unaffected
mediocrity of private life, to reiterate his intrusions, and reinforce his
remonstrances, on each new vicissitude of public events: nay more, who steps
forth to the world, in a sturdy publication, avowing all he has done, and
telling to whom, on what subject, in what manner, and how often he has repeated
this extraordinary correspondence: and makes the whole English nation a sort of
umpire between the constituted power of the State, and one obscure Individual?

The policy of Government, however, has, I believe, hitherto left himself and
his publications, to rise or fall by their own merits; and he has been brought
to trial, only by a very subordinate tribunal indeed: only a six-penny spouting
club! which some time ago, proposed, as a topic for debate, Whether Richard
Brothers, who calls himself God Almighty's Nephew, be an impostor or a madman?
-- overlooking, probably, as is often the case with very eager disputants, a
third possibility in the subject, namely, that he was neither the one, nor the
other.

The books which I have here brought forward, contain sumething more than that
mere peep into futurity for which I lately expressed so anxious a desire. They
pretend to be, particularly the second, an abstract of the brief chronicle of
the future fortunes of all Europe. But an abstract, no doubt, may be incorrect;
and a chronicle can be conceived totally wanting in authenticity. To fix these
imputations on the present work, nothing more is necessary than to adopt the
pithy decision of the spouting club, that Richard Brothers must be either
impostor or madman. To support the first proposition, we must necessarily
discover some private interest, some personal gratification, some premeditated
deception, lurking under the plausible pretensions of philanthropy and piety:
the second can only be fully made out by some proof of glaring inconsistency in
his professions: and in both these particulars I hold him infinitely superior
to all imputation. Uprightness of intention, and candor of soul, breathe
through every line of his composition. But in vouching for his honesty, I do
not, a priori, conclude his infallibility. I can only say, that if it were
possible he should deceive others, I am morally certain, from the internal
evidence of his whole work, that he is himself the first victim of the
deception. On what criterion then shall we decide his merits? to what authority
shall we appeal? His own answer is, Search the Scriptures yourselves. As
Christians, You must acknowledge them to be the perfect sources of all
veracity, and let them be the touchstone of my assertions.

Here let us pause for a moment, and reflect, that if we take him at his word,
we are once more consigned to the mysterious depths of Daniel, Esdras, and of
the Revelations, where so many ingenious interpreters, and athletic
commentators, have been already shipwrecked. How shall we escape a similar
calamity? If it be possible on this sea ever to make a safe harbor, we must
certainly strike out some new course, and take for our compass the following
considerations on the nature and properties of prophetic writing.

All prophecies are neither more nor less than true genuine aenigmas, in which
the meaning is so nicely and artificially enveloped by ambiguity of sense and
of expression, that until we be furnished by the inventor himself with the
proper clue to unravel them, they are calculated to appear as a tissue of the
most incongruent absurdities. Of these prophetical compositions, some are
compact and close, like the greater part of the Pagan oracles, and others more
copious and diffuse. In the former case, every word, I had almost said every
letter, comes in for its share of meaning; and the key that does not precisely
fit every one of them is good for nothing. No allowance is to be admitted for
any thing superabundant or extraneous. In the longer compositions a greater
latitude prevails: among several sentences, or distinct members of one
sentence, the meaning is all contained in a single phrase only, which is to be
construed with all the minute precision and undeviating consistency required in
the former case, while the other parts are only thrown in to mislead the
observer. Just as if the real objects to be represented in a picture were
softened down, melted away, and obscured in the distances of the back ground,
while the prominent features of the design, that occupy the front of the
canvas, should be formed of adventitious or frivolous representations, of no
consequence or necessity to the piece. Instances of both kinds will occur as we
proceed; and frequent specimens of each may be found in the different
prophecies of the Old Testament, which are acknowledged by all sound critics
and expositors to allude to the coming and sufferings of the Messiah.

In this place it may not be superfluous to mention, that in the occupation of
decyphering mysterious and allegorical modes of composition, I am far from
being undisciplined. If I have been rather negligent of our own sacred
writings, I have at least been in the habit of bestowing unwearied attention on
those of the old Hindus; writings not widely dissimilar in style and manner
from the prophetical treatises in our own Bible. Nor have my researches been
altogether fruitless, since I have been fortunate enough to discover the true
meaning couched under the Hindu triad of Energies or powers, called Brahma,
Vishnu, and Shiva, which I affirm to be nothing more than poetical
personifications of matter, space, and time, and I say, that by the proper
application of these three terms, all the surviving remains of genuine
Brachmanical mythology may be truly elucidated.

Fortified therefore with this pre-acquired aptitude for such studies, I sat
down with pleasure to the task recommended by Mr. Brothers, namely, to read the
modern history of Europe in the prophetic records of the Old and New Testament.

For this purpose, nothing was requisite, but to examine, by the test of human
sagacity, whether the clue furnished by him were in gross and in all its parts
perfectly commensurate to the whole tenor and purport of the mysteries to be
unraveled; for if it failed in any one particular, or were found too long or
too short in its application to any one instance -- actum esset de toto -- The
works of God are all without flaw; and for this clue to possess that degree of
perfection, it must necessarily have proceeded from God himself, who
constructed the visions of the prophecies at first, to the very intent that
they never should become intelligible, until, at the time destined by his holy
will and pleasure, the true mot de l'aenigme should be revealed to his
creatures; and when once this clue should come to be known, any man whatever,
with a competent share of learning and industry, might comprehend and expound
all the secrets to which it applies, as well as the very man to whom it was
originally imparted.

To make this point more intelligible, I shall observe, that with respect to
the four beasts in the vision of Daniel (and the same in any other case) it
might happen, and probably has happened, that some man or other should form a
very probable guess as to the meaning of a single beast, or even two. But what
has never been done, and what never could have been done, but by direct
revelation from God, is to find a key, one and indivisible, that should apply
perfectly and equally well to all the four: so that taking each of them
severally, or the whole in a mass, the true meaning should be no less
perspicuous aad palpable in their union than in their separation. And so with
regard to the Babylon mentioned in the Revelations. The Portrait of Rome is so
evident in that part where Rome is really meant, that not a single commentator
of the hundreds who have handled the passage has ever once mistaken it. But
they have all erred in supposing that Babylon universally, and in all cases,
signified the same Rome: and I have no doubt, but that very clear and
intelligible description of Rome in one place, was expressly inserted for the
sole purpose of misguiding, and putting to fault, their conjectures on other
parts of the prophecy, where a different city is alluded to under the same
title. And this is agreeable to the ordinary conduct of God's providence
toward mankind. He has not totally denied them light; but the ray which he has
graciously imparted to them, only serves to lead them astray, if they for a
moment give loose to the wanderings of their own imaginations.

This then is the question: -- Has Richard Brothers possession of this clue,
and has he declared it in his book? I answer, Yes; because I am sure I found it
there. But at the same time, I affirm, he makes very little use of it, because
he comes at his knowledge a shorter way.

He indeed pretends to an immediate and direct inspiration from God. And I take
upon myself to prove, by the ordinary exertion of human sagacity, that he is
really inspired. And I shall prove it in this manner.

He tells us in a dry, concise, unqualified assertion, that such a thing is so
and so -- as he has it from God; but he gives us no reason why it should be so;
and we see at once that he repeats his lesson by hearsay. I will take his
clue, and lead you on step by step through the different degrees of analysis,
till you come at the very conclusion with which he sets out: -- showing you by
scientifical process, and almost ocular demonstration, all the predicaments
which he has totally omitted: -- and so connect my arguments with his
affirmations, that they shall mutually support, corroborate, and confirm each
other. The analysis, on my part, shall give evidence to the authenticity of his
inspiration; and the assertion, on his part, shall e converso bear witness to
the fidelity of my exposition.

And now, to give some previous testimonial of my own pretensions in this mode
of investigation, conformable indeed to the general line of Mr. Brothers's
declarations, but not explicitly mentioned in any part of them -- I affirm from
my own discoveries, that the prophet Daniel positively and particularly
denounces annihilation to the British navy in this war. And on proof of this
proposition, in the course of my Essay I am content to rest my whole
pretensions to penetration.

If we consult the map of Europe, it will be found to comprehend little more
than the dominions of the following sovereigns --

The Emperor of Germany, and the Princes of the Empire.

The Empress of Russia.

The Pope.

The Kings of England, France, Spain, Prussia, and Sardinia.

To every one of these has Mr. Brothers prognosticated a fatal catastrophe; and
I assert that of myself, without any assistance from him, (for, when I called
upon him expressly to beg explanation and satisfaction, he had no other answer
for me, than that I must examine the scriptures) I have discovered the fate of
every one of these to be unequivocally announced in the prophecies of Daniel
and Esdras. If I succeed in fully establishing these points only, and I shall
do more, there is an end of altercation: we very fairly may, nay, we ought, and
by the most rigid rules of sound criticism and logic we must, give him credit
for all the rest of his predictions -- ex pede Herculem.

Now for the discussion. It must necessarily be dry; and what it wants in
entertainment must be made up, if possible, by conciseness on my part, taking
care at the same time to omit nothing of importance.

Daniel, in one of his visions, tells us that he saw four beasts And four great
beasts came from the sea, different from one another.

The first was like a lion, and it had eagle's wings; I beheld till the wings
were plucked, when it was lifted up on the earth, and made stand no the earth
as a man: and a man's heart was given to it.


; these were interpreted to him to be four kings. All the commentators on this
chapter have sought these kings in four successive monarchies, and they have
all labored in vain to fix any one of them with accuracy and precision.

Mr. Brothers gives us the clue to the whole mystery in a single word -- he
says, "they are four kings now."

For very obvious reasons, I omit to speak of the first beast, which we are
told means the king of England; and shall use so much the less ceremony with
the second.

"And behold another beast, a second like to a bear: and it raised up itself on
one side; and it had three ribs in the mouth of it, between the teeth of it:
and they said thus unto it: "Arise, devour much flesh."

Mr. Brothers with most laconic precision says This verse means the present
Empress of Russia.

Now for the proof. It will hardly be contended me, that the bear is not a
just, apt, and congenial symbol for the Russian territory and empire; for, as
we say the Roman eagle, the British lion, or the Chinese dragon, so we say the
"Russian bear." In the famous little treatise of John Bull's Lawsuit, England
is called John Bull, France Lewis Baboon, Holland Nic Frog, and Russia Peter
Bear. Nor is it possible that any other monarchy in Europe should be typified
by this animal. Besides, as, in a complete well-written prophecy, every part
must mutually bear upon and support all the rest, to make one compact whole, we
must presently see, by the remainder of the context, than this bear can be no
other than the present Empress of Russia. It raised up itself on one side; that
is, it extended its dominion, it exalted its power all on one side. And how
could Russia do otherwise? What is there worthy of her ambition to the west?
and to the east and north all is already her own! all her exertions must
necessarily be, as we all know they have been, directed toward the south, and
aiming pointedly at Constantinople. "And it had three ribs in the mouth of it
between the teeth of it." This is the true crux criticorum. If I can surmount
this obstacle, all other impediments will dwindle to nothing. First, then, let
us consider the position of these ribs: they are in the mouth, but not within
the teeth, for they are between them; therefore they are exactly in the place,
and performing the functions of files or whetstones, to sharpen the teeth: and
indeed the words they utter, figuratively mark out their office, saying,
"Arise, devour much flesh." What then is it that we can properly denominote a
file or whetstone for the teeth? Appetite: appetite, and nothing else. And
where is appetite or hunger properly situated? What is its local habitation? --
The stomach: -- and the stomach is enclosed within the ribs. Now we must all
agree, that the stomach could not be visibly represented in a vision as lying
between the teeth; but that the ribs (the case of the stomach) having a form
not very unlike that of the hone to file, may be put instead of the stomach, in
the office of giving an edge to the teeth, to mark the voracity of appetite.
But why then three ribs? -- Here we come to the grand decisive master-stroke of
the character of the present Empress? because her appetites are three, and they
are all insatiable to devour human flesh: insatiable lust, insatiable ambition,
and insatiable cruelty. Now for the precise time, I had almost said the very
day and hour, to which the Prophet alludes. And they said thus unto it: Arise,
devour much flesh. -- Arise? So then the teeth were dormant, quiescent,
immovable: they required a stimulus, a whetting, a prey suited to their taste,
to rouse them, and set them to work. I now ask the whole country, and more
particularly his Majesty's Ministers, whether we have not been employed for
above these two years in endeavoring to whet, stir up, and animate the great
Catherine, who is one of the high contracting parties, and a principal in this
most destructive war, without being able to move her one inch: nor have we yet
obtained from her a single ship, or even a single man, to aid in the overthrow
of this enormous Republic of France. But when her own predominating passions
get between her teeth, and sharpen her appetite; then she can arise fast
enough, and devour the flesh of thirty or forty miserable Poles in a fortnight,
and almost in cold blood, just as she had before served the same number of
Turks at Ismael.

And now, if I have not triumphantly proved this bear to be the present Empress
of Russia, as Mr. Brothers says she is, then there is neither meaning in
language, nor conclusion in logic.

Let us next try if we can equally well tame and familiarise the third beast:

After this I beheld, and lo! another like a leopard, which had upon the back
of it four wings of a fowl. The beast had four heads, and dominion was given to
it.

Mr. Brothers informs us, this means Louis XVI. the late King of France.

Now of all the beasts of the earth, Why is the king or nation of France most
like a leopard?

Naturalists have observed the leopard to have all the malicious playfulness of
the cat or monkey united with all the ferocity of the tiger; and Voltaire's
description of his own countrymen exactly tallies with this idea; for he says
they are a compound of the monkey and tiger. Nor is this all: for the delicate
variegation of the leopard's spots, and the beautiful sleekness of his fur,
exactly mark out the Parisian petit-maitre. I might have added, that, as the
leopard's spots are sprinkled in regular confusion, and of nearly equal size,
over his whole body, so were the royal robes of the kings of France sprinkled
all over with fleurs-de-lis of gold. But this leopard of Daniel's had four
heads; and one of these, which St. John in the Revelations (though omitted by
Daniel) says he saw cut off, and afterward healed, Mr. Brothers tells us,
means the death of Charles I. of England, and the restoration of monarchy in
the person of his son Charles II. This very circumstance, which seems at first
to throw an inexplicable difficulty in the way of interpreting the whole beast
as representative of the king of France, is the very clue which must lead us to
the just and infallible sense of the aenigma; and is of itself quite sufficient
to evince that the explication comes from a power more than human.

Every body knows that our Charles I. was betrothed to the Infanta of Spain;
but that on going incognito to Madrid to see her, he broke off the match, and
returned home through Paris, where he fell in love with Henrietta of France; to
his marriage with whom all his subsequent misfortunes and premature death are
to be attributed. His two sons Charles and James, who both reigned in England,
were avowed or concealed pensioners of the court of France, and the latter died
in that country, a refugee, and wretched dependant on the ostentatious
hospitality of Lewis XIV. It is impossible then to deny for a moment, that the
Stuart family were a supernumery head on the body of the French monarchy; but
dying before it. Louis XVI. is the second head; and he perished, like the
first, by decollation, some time subsequent to the loss of his throne. The
third head is the present king of Spain, a lineal descendant of Lewis XIV. of
France, who placed the Spanish crown on his grandson's head: but a deciduous
crown it is, and sure to fall; for, as the main head and heart of the beast are
gone with Louis XVI. it is certain that none of its members, much less any one
of its heads, can long survive the catastrophe. Consanguineal and political
alliances cooperate to point out the king of Sardinia as the fourth head, whose
dominions we have guarantied to him. He has two daughters married to the two
brothers of Lewis XVI. and Mr. Brothers is thus perfectly warranted by Daniel
in saying, that it is not all the navy of England nor the armies of Europe
united, can prevent the king of Sardinia from being dethroned.

Now we see to demonstration how well the four heads of this leopard tally with
the actual state of Europe. -- Had the prophet meant to describe four
successive sovereigns of the same kingdom, or four separate kingdoms united
under the same sovereign, the beast in prophetic language could not possibly
have had more than one body, and one head. But as he alluded to four distinct
and nearly independent monarchs, bound together by the closest ties of alliance
and interest, he beautifully represented one body as the common center of union
to four distinct heads.

I had almost forgotten that this French leopard had four wings of a fowl. --
Well, these wings are nothing but sails: they both belong to the same element.
Who does not know that sail and wing are, in all languages, convertible terms?
And when Daedalus is said to have made wings for himself and his son Icarus to
fly from Crete, does any man doubt that they sailed away in ships? The wings
are the fleets of France, and their number is four, because those fleets
pervade all the quarters of the globe. But why then the wings of a fowl? Here I
must necessarily let out the discovery, to which I have already appealed as the
test of my own individual skill in prophetic phrase. Though fowls may traverse
the atmosphere on their wings, from one end of the world to the other, the
eagle alone is queen of the air; and to her all the feathered creation must
necessarily strike sail. Now Daniel has expressly said that the eagle's wings
were attached to the body of the British lion (the first beast); and he adds,
alas! I beheld, until the wings thereof were plucked.

The final dissolution of these three first beasts is thus summarily set forth
by the Prophet:

As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away, yet
their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

That is, in plain English, they must all lose their crowns, as Lewis XVI. did,
(who was one of three,) about two years previous to the loss of their lives.
Now I do positively affirm, that in these instances, as far as they go, we must
either reject the prophecies of Daniel as absurd, aprocryphal, forged, and
false, or admit that Mr. Brothers, who has so completely unlocked their
mysterious allusions, has received directly from God himself the key for that
purpose.

Our Author has entered much more into detail respecting the fourth beast, than
any of the former, for which reason I shall take so much the less notice of
him. But it is impossible not to feel the full force of his application of the
prophecy to the King of Prussia, in that little horn that grew up after the
former, "in which were eyes as the eyes of a man," viz. perpetually on the
watch, and looking sharp out after every prospect of additional territory, or
immediate profit, without regard to the means: -- whether in France, or in
England, or in Poland, or any other where else -- neither an acre nor a dollar
comes amiss to him. "And I beheld!" says Daniel, "because of the great words
which the horn spoke." -- The prophet himself seems here to sympathise with the
astonishment of all Europe, at the monstrous atrocities and intolerable
blasphemies of the Duke of Brunswick's famous manifesto, which I am sorry I
have not here by me, to insert as a comment on the divine text. The ruin and
death of this detestable horn I shall presently show from Esdras: Daniel gives
it us in the 26th verse: But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away
his dominion, to consume and to destroy it, unto the end: -- as well as in the
lump with that of the beast.

I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame.

Mr. Brothers most truly interprets this passage, as relating to the death of
the Emperor of Germany, (p. 33) "It is," says he, "certain, and all the armies
in Europe cannot save him. The judgment of God is also, that he shall suffer
the punishment of everlasting fire." He enters minutely into particulars in
another part of his book, where he tells us, the Imperial family will all be
cut off, and no successor will for ever after arise. And again, This is Francis
II. the present Emperor of Germany. To be related to him now, will be
considered hereafter as a capital crime. -- To come at this most tremendous
curse, and also to find the particular designation of the death of the King of
Prussia, and the utter downfall of the Popedom, we must have recourse to the 2d
Book of Esdras. -- Now this 2d Book of Esdras has hitherto been esteemed an
apocryphal composition of the lowest order, and so it is termed in our church
Bibles; where it is said to have been written about the time of Domitian by
some learned Hebrew, to be extant only in the Latin, and to be stuffed full of
Jewish fables and Rabbinical rhapsodies. But I have always considered this same
book of Esdras as one of the most sublime, the most comprehensive, and the most
explicit of all the ancient prophecies. And when we shall have heard his
beautiful allegory of the whole Roman empire, from its first republican form to
its actual state at this moment, I am sure we shall agree that, whether Esdras
lived in the time of Domitian, in that of Daniel, or in that of Adam, there
never was a more truly wonderful and super-human epitome of a long and eventful
history revealed from the pen of man. It is in the xith chapter.

Then I saw a dream, and behold there came up from the sea an eagle, which had
twelve feathered wings, and three heads. And I saw, and behold she spread her
wings over all the earth, and all the winds of the air blew on her and were
gathered together. And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew other
contrary feathers, and they became little feathers, and small. But her heads
"were at rest: the head in the midst was greater than the other, yet rested it
with the residue. Moreover, I beheld, and lo! the eagle flew with her feathers,
and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt therein. And I saw that all
things under heaven were subject unto her, and no man spoke against her, no,
not one creature upon earth. And I beheld, and lo! the eagle rose upon her
talons, and spoke to her feathers, saying, Watch not all at once; sleep every
one in his own place, and watch by course. But let the heads be preserved unto
the last. And I beheld, and lo! the voice went not out of her heads, but from
the midst of her body.

Here in these first ten verses we have an Iliad, and more than an Iliad, in a
nutshell. -- The eagle is the type of Rome. In this at least I shall not be in
danger of contradiction.

But what is the meaning, in this and several other passages of the Prophet, of
the word sea? -- It cannot be taken literally; for Rome is an inland city. --
It must therefore be observed, as a general rule, that in allegorical writings,
every word is a portion of the allegory; and thus if the eagle be allegorical,
the sea from whence it arises is allegorical also. We have the direct
explanation of it in the Revelations, where mention is made of the great Whore
that sits upon many waters. -- And in the 15th verse of the same chapter,
the angel says, The waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are
peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. This eagle, therefore,
coming up from the sea, is the city of Rome gradually rising among the nations
of Italy.

The Prophet first is made to behold all the successive vicissitudes of her
fate, wrought up into one compact assemblage. Her extent of dominion is marked
by her wings over the whole earth. Her twelve feathered wings are the twelve
Caesar's, and her three heads are, the Pope, the Emperor of Germany, and King of
Prussia. Well indeed might it be said, that the heads rested; for as yet they
were nothing but embryos in the womb of futurity. "And I beheld," says the
Prophet, "and lo! the voice went not out of her heads, but from the midst of
her body." -- This is the true spirit of prophetic lore, this is the genuine
spark of Promethean fire! How was it possible in such few words, and yet with
such astonishing accuracy, to delineate the focus from whence emanate all the
rays of republican authority?

Ver. 12. And I looked, and behold! on the right side there arose one feather,
and reigned over all the earth: and so it was, that when it reigned, the end of
it came, and the place thereof appeared no more.

The feather that now rose up on the right side was Julius Caesar; and the
Prophet's expression is very remarkable -- And so it was, that when it reigned,
the end of it came, and the place thereof appeared no more. -- We see clearly
that this reign expired suddenly, almost at its very commencement, and was
followed by a certain period of interregnum.

So the next following stood up, and reigned, and had a great time; and it
happened, that when it reigned the end of it came also, like as the first, so
that it appeared no more. Then there came a voice unto it, and said: Hear thou,
that have borne rule over the earth so long: this I say unto thee, before thou
beginnest to appear no more, There shall none after thee attain unto thy time,
neither unto the half thereof.

The next feather after this interval is Augustus. To put the matter out of all
doubt, the inspired writer takes particular care to inform us of the great
length of his reign: a circumstance remarkable enough of it itself, but
rendered much more so, by his being so minutely accurate as to state with
precision, that the reign of no other prince who should ever after govern that
country should attain even to half the duration of that of Augustus. And
therefore it is impossible this verse should be interpreted of any other
emperor but him.

I shall not here follow the Prophet through the next ten verses from the 17th
to the 27th -- (They describe the rest of the Caesar's, and the subsequent
commotions in the state) -- but shall go on to the 28th verse.

And I beheld, and lo! the two that remained thought also in themselves to
reign: and when they so thought, behold! there awaked one of the heads that
were at rest, namely, it that was in the midst for that was, greater than the
two other heads, and then I saw that the two other heads were joined with it.
And behold! the head was turned with them that were with it, and did eat up the
two feathers under the wing that would have reigned. But this head put the
whole earth in fear, and bear rule in it over all those that dwelt upon the
earth, with much oppression; and it had the governance of the world more than
all the wings that had been.

Now we come to the Papacy, to that great head in the midst, to which were
joined the two other heads; namely, the States which were thereafter to form
the dominions of the Empire and the King of Prussia. The gradual encroachments
of that spiritual predominance over all the temporal authorities of the time
are admirably described by the head eating up the two feathers that would have
reigned. And this head put the whole earth in fear. How? By launching its most
blasphemous thunders in interdictions, excommunications, and every species of
ecclesiastical artillery, with much, very much oppression, as says the Prophet.
Now for the close of the prophetical drama:

And after this, I beheld, and lo! the head that was in the midst suddenly
appeared no more, like as the wings; but there remained the two heads, which
also in like sort ruled upon the earth, and over those that dwelt therein.

The reformation, and revolt of so many nations from the Pope's power, both
temporal and spiritual, are described in these verses; and his downfall is
expressly mentioned to precede that of the other two heads, namely, the Emperor
and the King of Prussia, who continue to reign now, in like sort as the wings
(or twelve feathers) formerly did.

And I beheld, and lo! the head upon the right side devoured it that was on the
left side.

Words cannot more expressly pronounce that the King of Prussia is destined to
fall principally by the means of the Emperor of Germany. I say principally,
because Mr. Brothers mentions that the Empress of Russia will assist in his
destruction. But, from this verse, I have not a particle of doubt, but that she
will in this case act only as an auxiliary in the Emperor's quarrel, even
though she may contribute more than an equal share to his victory.

After this comes the great cataclysm, the most dreadful tremendous judgment
upon the Emperor:

Verse 36. -- Then I heard a voice which said unto me, Look before thee, and
consider the thing that thou see. And I beheld, and lo! as it were, a roaring
lion chased out of the wood; and I saw that he sent out a man's voice unto the
eagle, and said, Hear thou; I will talk with thee; and the Highest shall say
unto thee, Art not thou it that remainest of the four beasts whom I made to
reign in my world?

Before we go any farther, it may be necessary to remark, that the Prophet,
without any one circumstance alluding to the connection between him and Daniel,
comes here all at once into the history of the four beasts, and expressly
declares that his eagle is the very same with that fourth beast which Daniel
saw, but did not delineate; only we are certain that it could not much have
resembled an eagle, from the partial account he has given of him. If, however,
Daniel's fourth beast be the Emperor of Germany, this must also be the same
Emperor. And vice versa; if this be the Emperor, as the whole preceding
narrative does not leave the smallest possibility of a doubt, Daniel's beast
must be the Emperor also. I shall omit the preliminary articles of accusation
against his conduct, and come at once to the judgment pronounced upon him, and
all the members of his family, by God, in the 45th verse:

And therefore appear no more, thou eagle, nor thy horrible wings, nor thy
wicked feathers, nor thy malicious heads, nor thy hurtful claws, nor all thy
vain body.

Every member, limb, joint, and articulation of the whole eagle, is here put in
requisition, and separately enumerated, to take in every scion and branch of
that devoted generation. Mr. Brothers might therefore well say, That to be
related to the Emperor now, would hereafter be deemed a capital crime.

The same catastrophe of the Papacy, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor, is
also clearly pointed out in the next chapter of Esdras, which contains an
interpretation, after the prophetic mode, of the vision which I have just gone
through. I shall only here make use of the 26th, 27th, and 28th verses of that
xiith chapter, which run thus:

And whereas thou saw that the great head appeared no more, it signifies
that one of them shall die upon his bed, and yet with pain.

This is incontrovertibly the Papacy, as I have before explained it. We have
long seen it wasting with a grievous sickness, and it is now on its deathbed
expiring in great agony. Mr. Brothers tells us in his book, that the Emperor
will soon give it the coup de grace.

For the two that remain shall be slain with the sword.

The Emperor's authority, and that of the King of Prussia, are now in apparent
health: their downfall, therefore, being destined to be sudden, will have no
appearance of a natural decay, but may be likened to a violent death by a sword.

For the sword of the one shall devour the other; but at last shall he fall
through the sword himself.

When these two great potentates shall quarrel, we cannot possibly doubt but
that the Emperor will presently demolish his Prussian Majesty; and therefore we
are at no loss to ascertain their different persons in this place. And now,
having seen all these heroes fairly brought to the grave, I shall here take my
leave of them, and proceed to a new subject; for which purpose we must open the
Revelations.

Mr. Brothers tells us, that the Babylon mentioned in the xviiith chapter
Apocalypse, does not mean Rome, but London -- contrary to the express sentiment
of all former expositors; and he proves his position in a very satisfactory
manner, by showing, that the various and multiplied allusions to navigation and
commerce, in the description of this Babylon, cannot possibly be strained, with
any propriety, to indicate an inland city, totally incapable of shipping, and
remarkably destitute of trade. His remarks are perfectly just and apposite; all
I have therefore to do, is, to corroborate and confirm his proofs, by others
drawn from the nature of the articles of merchandise said to have been dealt in
there. Verses 11, 12, 13.

And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man
buyeth her merchandise any more: the merchandise of gold, and of silver, and
precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and
scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner of vessels of ivory, and all
manner of vessels of precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble, and
cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and
fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and
slaves, and souls of men.

Here we have an instance of the prophetic art I formerly mentioned, by which
the prominent features of the representation or vision are such as are put on
purpose to mislead the observer; and the key to the mystery lies quite in the
shade and obscurity of the back ground. For all this long and tedious
enumeration of wares and commodities is really nothing at all to the business
of the prophecy, whose real explication lies wholly in the last five words,
"slaves and souls of men." What nation is notorious for its extensive and
abominable traffic in slaves? Surely no part of Italy. I would ask an honorable
gentleman, whose unparalleled exertions and perseverance in the cause of his
oppressed fellow creatures do him so much honor in the sight of God and man,
whether he cannot in an instant put his finger on the city rendered
particularly infamous by dealing in human flesh! We all know it is the Assiento
wholesale trader; it is the City of London. -- But souls of men are also sold
there -- Souls of men? And where can souls of men be properly deemed an article
of trade? Certainly not in Rome, where ignorance and priestcraft bind up the
souls of all their deluded subjects in chains of everlasting adamant. Still
less in the ci-devant Paris, or Vienna, or Madrid, or any other city under a
despotic government, where tyranny, whose essence it is to extinguish and
utterly annihilate the human mind itself, leaves not a single man who can truly
and properly call his soul his own. It is here, in England, it is in this and
of liberty, where every man has a soul which he can keep or sell as he pleases,
that this article can alone be called a merchandise; and Parliament is the
grand emporium for the commodity.

Must I speak out? Must I produce an instance? Well, then, I have an instance:
I myself am that instance, and the Speaker is a living witness to the truth of
my assertion. There as he sat in his chair, day after day, for three years
together, beholding me crouched behind the Treasury Bench, with my soul in my
hand, like a country girl in the market with her butter and eggs before her,
anxiously waiting for the lucky moment when the Tellers would come and rid me
of my burden, that I might run home and hide myself. And while I did sell my
soul, it was all in the true spirit of commercial credit that so peculiarly
distinguishes this country: I sold it purely upon trust: I never have received
one shilling; and now I am taught by experience to apprehend that the purchaser
will never pay me one farthing for it. But though I sold my soul, I could never
sell my tongue. While the one loitered an abandoned prostitute in the market,
the other remained sullenly immovable at home. The emancipation of the former
would have opened the prison doors of the latter -- could I have caught the
Speaker's eye. But it is of no consequence now -- Liberavi animam meam -- and
both my soul and tongue are from henceforrh at liberty.

London, as Mr. Brothers says, is known also in the Revelations by the name of
Sodom: for which he quotes this passage of the xith chapter:

And their dead bodies" (viz. those of the two witnesses) "shall lie in the
great city, which spiritually is called Sodom in Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified.

And in what city can our Lord be said to have been crucified except at
Jerusalem, which surely was not in Egypt? -- Why there, and there only, where
the blessed sacrament of redemption is prostituted to the purposes of venality
and ambition: where the benefits of salvation are bartered for filthy lucre:
where the holy commemoration of Christ's death is degraded to a test and
qualification for holding civil employments: and consequently, where the two
witnesses of the Gospel are trampled under foot by authority of the State? --
In no nation under heaven but in England, in no church in the world but that by
law established here, does such a profanation exist: in that very church too
which expressly says in one part of her own ritual, that taking the sacrament
unworthily is crucifying Christ's body afresh, and eating and drinking our own
damnation. Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee -- thou wicked church! --
Here then we have in St. John both Babylon and Sodom to signify one and the
same city, just as we have the two cities of London and Westminster within the
same boundary; but which of the two be Sodom, and which Babylon, I leave to be
decided by that sagacious assembly which has no doubt most oracularly
pronounced whether Richard Brothers be an impostor or a madman.

And here let me ask, whether I have not, in the most clear and satisfactory
manner, and upon full proof, established every one of those positions which I
at first pledged myself to maintain: as well in support of Mr. Brothers's
well-founded pretensions to divine inspiration, as of my own qualifications and
abilities for executing the task I had undertaken? And I hope those persons of
the better conditions of life, whom I know to have said that this book was
calculated to make an impression on none but the most illiterate vulgar, will
be now inclined to admit that it may have weight even with a man not much less
instructed or experienced than themselves, nor very greatly their inferior in
understanding, literature, or situation. Most of all, I hope that every one
will at least think it worth while to examine the Scriptures calmly and
attentively, to compare them with Mr. Brothers's assertions, and then judge for
himself; for I can assure my readers, that I could never obtain the smallest
explanation of any part of his book from Mr. Brothers, whom I called upon
expressly for that purpose. He drily referred me to my Bible, observing that he
could neither subtract from, nor add a single word to, what God had expressly
dictated to him. The field is still open for fresh laborers; I have occupied
but a small part of it; as well because it is fit this work should be comprised
within moderate limits, as because I am satisfied that I have heaped proof upon
proof beyond all reasonable necessity for full conviction. And here I shall
close the subject as far as relates to politics, and employ a few words with
regard to Mr. Brothers himself.

He says he is come to recall the Jews to their native country; and for the
proof of his divine mission he refers us to the miraculous discoveries
contained in his books, from a persuasion that, if we admit the prophecy, we
cannot reject the prophet. Now that all Scripture as well as all Tradition
bears testimony to the certainty of the recall of the Jews in the latter ages
of the world, no man who has but a smattering of acquaintance with either can
for a moment pretend to deny. The main design of Mr. Brothers, as far as he is
personally concerned, is to show us that the life and conduct of the first
Moses was a sort of type or predetermined pattern for that of the second; and
for this purpose he quotes a text of Scripture, which can neither be eluded nor
explained away, that the man destined to lead the Jews a second time to
Palestine should be like to Moses himself. The Parallel between the two
personages Mr. Brothers states to have tallied hitherto, and he asserts that it
will continue to do so; for, as Moses ascended from the ark of bull-rushes, so
did Mr. Brothers rise from a ship, having been bred to the navy. This
coincidence of characters might be evident at first sight, Mr. Brothers
asserts, that by the command of God himself, he cut a wand in 1792, which is to
perform precisely the same miracle with the former wand of Moses. Nor need we
now be astonished or scandalized, when we hear Mr. Brothers affirm that God
speaks to him in plain direct words, as one man would speak to another, since
we kwow that in this respect Moses was favored with a communication exactly
similar. Moses, born in Egypt, led the Israelites from Egypt through the Red
Sea into Palestine. The birthplace therefore of the second Moses, and the
country from whence he is to summon the modern Hebrews, must spiritually at
least have at one time or other been also denominated Egypt, to make the
parallel between two events move an all fours: and I have already proved, from
St. John in the Revelations, that the great city (viz. London) was spiritually
called Sodom in Egypt.

In the spirit of this parallel Mr. Brothers remarks in his second book --
Pharaoh is appointed to die, and his government to be destroyed the priests and
all the abominable idolatries of Egypt shall perish, never to be found any more.

I shall now slightly mention a few expressions to be found in Mr. Brothers's
books, which have operated as stumbling blocks to weak minds. And first, for
the phrase which has caused so much offense, where he calls himself God
Almighty's Nephew. I sincerely hope there is no man in this country who will
openly deny that Jesus Christ is God Almighty. If there be, I speak not to him:
I am sure no member of the established Trinitarian church can safely say
otherwise. Now if Jesus Christ had brothers and sisters, as is expressly proved
from the Gospel, the son of any one of those must necessarily have been his
nephew. Extend the line of filiation as far as we please, through 50, 100, or
1000 descents, the last is still a nephew, lineally descended from the first,
in the same manner as every Jew to this day is a son of Abraham, and as we are
all of us beyond all doubt sons of Adam.

Next, Mr. Brothers says, he was in a vision taken up to heaven, where he saw
the Holy Ghost under the figure of a silver-coloured dove. As a spirit truly
the Holy Ghost may have no shape; but that he actually appeared as a dove when
Jesus Christ was baptized by John in Jordan, I presume no believer in the
Gospel will think fit to contest with me. Again, Mr. Brothers saw Satan
entering London in a human shape. Why what shape should he be in? Perhaps,
indeed, if he had represented him with saucer eyes, cloven hoofs, and a tail a
fathom and a half long, all the old women of both sexes in this great city
would have been mightily tempted to believe him. But after all, what other
shape can we more consistently suppose him to have worn in his triumphal entry
into a city inhabited by men? I am only sorry, that, described as he is in
robes of white and scarlet, he must have been hardly distinguishable at first
sight from any of the Peers of Great Britain, whom I have seen in the same
dress come into and go out of Westminster Hall at the diabolical Impeachment.

Objections, but those perfectly groundless, and founded in gross ignorance of
the general course of God's judgments, have been started against Mr. Brothers's
assertion in his first book, that God would have destroyed the city of London
in 1791 -- but for his intercessions.

To show that this doctrine is not unprecedented we might instance Abraham's
repeated solicitations for the preservation of Sodom, and God's answers in the
xviiith chapter of Genesis: as well as several other similiar circumstances in
Scripture. But there is a passage in Ezekiel which comes, if possible, still
more exactly to the point; it is in the xxiid chapter, the title of which runs
thus -- V. 1. A catalogue of sins in Jerusalem. -- 17. God will burn them as
dross in his furnace. -- 23. The general corruption of prophets, priests,
princes and people. --

Now let us attend to the 30th and 31st verses. It is God that speaks.

And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in
the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it; but I found none.
Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them, etc.

Words cannot be found more incontestably applicable to Mr. Brothers's
description of himself standing in the gap before the Lord for the city, that
he should not destroy it. To controvert this principal, is not to want
conviction, but to repel it.

Now to conclude: If any man, calmly attending to what I have adduced, can
still consider Mr. Brothers as an impostor or a madman, I wish him little joy
of his feelings or his prospects. But whatever judgment be pronounced on him,
let it at least be after a fair trial and sufficient hearing. Let us first
reflect, whether it be possible that a madam should so ably and consistently
press into his service the whole body of prophecy both in the Old and New
Testament, all tending to one and the same distinct end; or whether an impostor
should so honestly and disinterestedly entreat us only to take serious care of
ourselves and our own most important concerns, leaving himself and all possible
personal advantage totally out of the question. And what then is the point he
so arduously labors? Nothing more than that we would, before it be utterly too
late, relinquish this just and necessary war; just, only because it justifies
God's vengeance -- and necessary only because necessary for our punishment. And
I doubt not but it is his opinion, as it is most assuredly mine, and my advice
also, that the Fast which is appointed for the 25th of Feb. to implore success
on our arms, should be converted, by Address to his Majesty, from both Houses
of Parliament to that effect, to the purpose of a solemn and sincere
humiliation for our crimes, and a most earnest supplication to God for the
restoration of peace; and that we may take warning by the fate of our abandoned
and subjugated ally, not to postpone our offers for a negotiation to the very
last moment, when the sword shall already be at our throats, and all hopes of
obtaining moderate terms must be totally relinqushed. Let us, while it is yet
possible, adopt that most divine sentence of the Gospel, "on earth peace, good
will toward men."

Nathaniel Brassey Halhed.
PALL MALL, 29th January, 1795.

