ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS. VOL. I.

THINGS AS THEY ARE: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS. BY WILLIAM GODWIN.
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

Amidst the woods the leopard knows his kind;
The tiger preys not on the tiger brood:
Man only is the common foe of man.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR H. AND P. RICE, NO. 50, MARKET-STREET, AND SOLD BY
J. RICE AND CO. BALTIMORE. 1795.

THE ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS.
CHAP. I.
MY life has for several years been a theater of calamity. I have been a mark
for the vigilance of tyranny, and I could not escape. My fairest prospects have
been blasted. My enemy has shown himself inaccessible to entreaties and untired
in persecution. My fame, as well as my happiness, has become his victim. Every
one, as far as my story has been known, has refused to assist me in my
distress, and has execrated my name. I have not deserved this treatment. My own
conscience witnesses in behalf of that innocence my pretensions to which are
regarded in the world as incredible. There is now however little hope that I
shall escape from the toils that universally beset me. I am incited to the
penning of these memoirs, only by a desire to divert my mind from the
deplorableness of my situation, and a faint idea that posterity may by their
means be induced to render me a justice which my contemporaries refuse. My
story will at least appear to have that consistency, which is seldom attendant
but upon truth.

I was born of humble parents in a remote county of England. Their occupations
were such as usually fall to the lot of peasants, and they had no portion to
give me but an education free from the usual sources of depravity, and the
inheritance, long since lost by their unfortunate progeny! of an honest fame. I
was taught the rudiments of no science, except reading, writing and arithmetic.
But I had an inquisitive mind, and neglected no means of information from
conversation or books. My improvement was greater than my condition in life
afforded room to expect.

Our residence was within the manor of Ferdinando Falkland, a country squire of
considerable opulence. At an early age I attracted the favorable notice of Mr.
Collins, this gentleman's steward, who used to call in occasionally at my
father's. He observed the particulars of my progress with approbation, and made
a favorable report to his master of my industry and genius.

In the summer of the year (...) Mr. Falkland visited his estate in our county
after an absence of several months. This was a period of misfortune to me. I
was then eighteen years of age. My father lay dead in our cottage. I had lost
my mother some years before. In this forlorn situation I was surprised with a
message from the squire, ordering me to repair to the mansion house the morning
after my father's funeral.

Though I was not a stranger to books, I had no practical acquaintance with
men. I had never had occasion to address a person of this elevated rank, and I
felt no small uneasiness and awe on the present occasion. I found Mr Falkland a
man of small stature, with an extreme (...) of form and appearance. In place of
the hard-favoured and inflexible visages I had been accustomed to observe,
every muscle and petty line of his countenance seemed to be in an inconceivable
degree pregnant with meaning. His manner was kind, attentive and humane. His
eye was full of animation, but there was a grave and sad solemnity in his air,
which for want of experience I imagined was the inheritance of the great, and
the instrument by which the distance between them and their inferiors was
maintained. His look bespoke the unquietness of his mind, and frequently
wandered with an expression of disconsolateness and anxiety.

My reception was as gracious and encouraging as I could possibly desire. Mr.
Falkland questioned me respecting my learning, and my conceptions of men and
things, and listened to my answers with condescension and approbation. This
kindness soon restored to me a considerable part of myself-possession, though I
still felt restrained by the graceful, but unaltered dignity of his carriage. I
have already said that I was not unacquainted with books. I had not failed to
derive advantage from the opportunities which offered themselves, and some of
those opportunities were of very fortunate occurrence. But it is not my purpose
to draw out this narrative by unnecessary detail; I leave the reader to collect
what my acquisitions had been from the incidents which followed. When Mr.
Falkland had sufficiently satisfied his curiosity, he proceeded to inform me
that he was in want of a secretary, that I appeared to him sufficiently
qualified for that office, and that, if in my present change of situation
occasioned by the death of my father I approved of the employment, he would
take me into his family.

I felt highly flattered by the proposal, and was warm in the expression of my
acknowledgements. I set eagerly about the disposal of the little property my
father had left, in which I was assisted by Mr. Collins. I had not now a
relation, upon whose kindness and interposition I had any direct claim, in the
world. But far from regarding this deserted situation with terror, I formed
golden visions of the station I was about to occupy. I little suspected that
the gaiety and lightness of heart I had hitherto enjoyed were upon the point of
leaving me for ever, and that the rest of my days were devoted to misery and
alarm.

My employment was easy and agreeable. It consisted partly of the transcribing
and arranging certain papers, and partly of writing from my master's dictation
letters of business, as well as sketches of literary composition. Many of these
latter consisted of an analytical survey of the plans of different authors, and
conjectural speculations upon hints they afforded, tending either to the
detection of their errors or the carrying forward their discoveries. All of
them bore powerful marks of a profound and elegant understanding, well stored
with literature, and possessed of an uncommon share of activity and
discrimination.

My station was in that part of the house which was appropriated for the
reception of books, it being my duty to perform the functions of librarian as
well as secretary. Here my hours would have glided in tranquillity and peace,
had not my situation included in it circumstances totally different from those
which attended me in my father's cottage. In early life my mind had been almost
wholly engrossed by reading and reflection. My intercourses with my fellow
mortals were occasional and short. But in my new residence I was excited by
every motive of interest and curiosity to study my master's character, and I
found in it an ample field for speculation and conjecture.

His mode of living was in the utmost degree recluse and solitary. He had no
inclination to scenes of revelry and mirth. He avoided the busy haunts of men;
nor did he seem desirous to compensate for this privation by the confidence of
friendship. He appeared a total stranger to every thing which usually bears the
appellation of pleasure. His features were scarcely ever relaxed into a smile,
nor did that air which bespoke the unhappiness of his mind, at any time forsake
them. Yet his manners were by no means such as denoted moroseness and
misanthropy. He was compassionate and considerate for others, though the
stateliness of his carriage and the reserve of his temper were at no time
interrupted. His appearance and general behavior might have strongly
interested all persons in his favor; but the coldness of his address and the
impenetrableness of his sentiments seemed to forbid those demonstrations of
kindness to which one might otherwise have been prompted.

Such was the general appearance of Mr. Falkland; but his temper was extremely
unequal. The distemper which afflicted him with incessant gloom, had its
paroxysms. Sometimes he was hasty, peevish and tyrannical; but this proceeded
rather from the torment of his mind than an unfeeling disposition, and, when
reflection recurred, he appeared willing that the weight of his misfortune
should fall wholly upon himself. Sometimes he entirely lost his self
possession, and his behavior was changed into frenzy. He would strike his
forehead, his brows became knit, his features distorted, and his teeth ground
one against the other. When he felt the approach of these symptoms, he would
suddenly rise, and, leaving the occupation whatever it was in which he was
engaged, hasten into a solitude upon which no person dared to intrude.

It must not be supposed that the whole of what I am describing was visible to
the persons about him; nor indeed was I acquainted with it in the extent here
stated, but after a considerable time, and in gradual succession. With respect
to the domestics in general, they saw but little of their master. None of them,
except myself from the nature of my functions, and Mr. Collins from the
antiquity of his service and the respectableness of his character, approached
Mr. Falkland, but at stated seasons and for a very short interval. They knew
him only by the benevolence of his actions and the principles of inflexible
integrity by which he was ordinarily guided; and, though they would sometimes
indulge their conjectures respecting his singularities, regarded him upon the
whole with veneration as a being of a superior order.

One day when I had been about three months in the service of my patron, I went
into a closet or small apartment which was separated from the library by a
narrow gallery that was lighted by a small window near the roof. I had
conceived that there was no person in the room, and went only to put any thing
in order that I might find out of its place. As I opened the door, I heard at
the same instant a deep groan expressive of intolerable anguish. The sound of
the door in opening seemed to alarm the person within; I heard the lid of a
chest hastily shut, and the noise as of fastening a lock. I immediately
conceived that Mr. Falkland was there, and was going hastily to retire; but at
that moment a voice that seemed supernaturally tremendous exclaimed, Who is
there? The voice was Mr. Falkland's. The sound of it thrilled my very vitals. I
endeavored to answer, but my speech failed, and being incapable of any other
reply, I instinctively advanced within the door into the room. Mr. Falkland was
just risen from the floor upon which he had been sitting or kneeling. His
countenance betrayed strong symptoms of confusion. With a violent effort
however these symptoms suddenly vanished, and instantaneously gave place to a
countenance sparkling with rage. Villain, cried he, what has brought you here?
I hesitated a confused and irresolute answer. Wretch, interrupted Mr. Falkland
with uncontrolable impatience, you want to ruin me. You set yourself as a spy
upon my actions. But bitterly shall you repent your insolence. Do you think you
shall watch my privacies with impunity? I attempted to defend myself. Begone,
devil! rejoined he. Quit the room, or I will trample you into atoms. Saying
this, he advanced toward me. But I was already sufficiently terrified, and
vanished in a moment. I heard the door shut after me with violence, and thus
ended this extraordinary scene.

I saw him again in the evening, and he was then tolerably composed. His
behavior, which was always kind, was now doubly attentive and soothing. He
seemed to have something of which he wished to disburthen his mind, but to want
words in which to convey it. I looked at him with anxiety and affection. He
made two unsuccessful efforts, shook his head, and then, putting five guineas
into my hand, pressed it in a manner that I could feel proceeded from a mind
pregnant with various emotions, though I could not interpret them. Having done
this, he seemed immediately to recollect himself, and to take refuge in the
usual distance and solemnity of his manner.

I easily understood that secrecy was one of the things expected from me, and
indeed my mind was too much disposed to meditate upon what I had heard and
seen, to make it a topic of indiscriminate communication. Mr. Collins however
and myself happened to sup together that evening, which was but seldom the
case, his avocations obliging him to be much abroad. He could not help
observing an uncommon dejection and anxiety in my countenance, and
affectionately enquired into the reason. I endeavored to evade his questions,
but my youth and ignorance of the world gave me but little advantage for that
purpose. Beside this, I had been accustomed to view Mr. Collins with
considerable attachment, and I conceived from the nature of his situation that
there could be but small impropriety in making him my confident in the present
instance. I repeated to him minutely every thing that had passed, and concluded
with a solemn declaration that, though treated with caprice, I was not anxious
for myself: no inconvenience or danger to myself should ever lead me to a
pusillanimous behavior; and I felt only for my master, who, with every
advantage for happiness, and being in the highest degree worthy of it, seemed
fated to undergo unmerited distress.

In answer to my communication Mr. Collins informed me that some incidents of a
nature similar to that which I related had fallen under his own knowledge, and
that from the whole he could not help concluding that our unfortunate patron
was at times disordered in his intellects. Alas, continued he, it was not
always thus! Ferdinando Falkland was once the gayest of the gay. Not indeed of
that frothy sort, who excite contempt instead of admiration, and whose levity
argues thoughtlessness rather than felicity. His gaiety was always accompanied
with dignity. It was chastened with reflection and sensibility, and never lost
sight either of good taste or humanity. Such as it was however, it denoted a
genuine hilarity of heart, gave an inconceivable brilliancy to his company and
conversation, and rendered him the perpetual delight of the diversified circles
he then willingly frequented. You see nothing of him, my dear Williams, but the
ruin of that Falkland, who was courted by sages, and adored by the fair. His
youth, distinguished in its outset by the most generous promise, is tarnished.
His sensibility is shrunk up and withered by events the most disgustful to his
feelings. His mind was fraught with all the rhapsodies of visionary honor; and
in his sense nothing but the gro^^er part, the mere shell of Falkland, was
capable to survive the wound that his pride has sustained.

These reflections of my friend Collins strongly tended to inflame my curiosity,
and I requested him to enter into a more copious explanation. With this request
he readily complied; as conceiving that whatever delicacy it became him to
exercise in ordinary cases, it would be out of place in my situation, and
thinking it not improbable that Mr. Falkland, but for the disturbance and
inflammation of his mind, would be disposed to a similar communication. I shall
join to Mr. Collins's story various information which I afterward received
from other quarters, that I may give all possible perspicuity to the series of
events. To the reader it may appear at first sight as if this detail of the
preceding life of Mr. Falkland were foreign to my history. Alas, I know from
bitter experience that it is otherwise. My heart bleeds at the recollection of
his misfortunes as if they were my own. How can it fail to do so? To his story
the whole fortune of my life was linked; because he was miserable, my
happiness, my name, and my existence have been irretrievably blasted.

CHAP. II.
AMONG the favorite authors of his early years were the heroic poets of Italy.
From them he imbibed the love of chivalry and romance. He had too much good
sense to regret the times of Charlemagne and Arthur. But, while his imagination
was purged by a certain infusion of philosophy, he conceived that there was in
the manners depicted by these celebrated poets, something to imitate, as well
as something to avoid. He believed that nothing was so well calculated to make
men delicate, gallant and humane, as a temper perpetually alive to the
sentiments of birth and honor. The opinions he entertained upon those topics
were illustrated in his conduct, which was assiduously conformed to the model
of heroism that his fancy suggested.

With these sentiments he set out upon his travels at the age at which the
grand tour is usually made, and they were rather confirmed than shaken by the
adventures that be^el him. By inclination he was led to make his longest stay
in Italy, and here he fell into company with several young noblemen whose
studies and principles were congenial to his own. By them he was assiduously
courted and treated with the most distinguished applause. They were delighted
to meet with a foreigner who had imbibed all the peculiarities of the most
liberal and honorable among themselves. Nor was he less favored and admired
by the softer sex. Though his stature were small, his person had an air of
uncommon dignity. His dignity was then heightened by certain additions which
were afterward obliterated, an expression of frankness, ingenuity and
unreserve, and a spirit of the most ardent enthusiasm. Perhaps no Englishman
was ever in an equal degree idolized by the inhabitants of Italy.

It was not possible for him to have drank so deeply of the fountain of
chivalry without being engaged occasionally in affairs of honor, all of which
were terminated in a manner that would not have disgraced the chevalier Bayard
himself. In Italy the young men of rank divide themselves into two classes,
those who adhere to the pure principles of ancient gallantry, and those who,
being actuated by the same acute sense of injury and insult, accustom
themselves to the employment of hired bravoes as their instruments of
vengeance. The whole difference indeed consists in the precarious application
of a generally received distinction. The most generous Italian still conceives
that there are certain persons whom it would be contamination to call into the
open field. He nevertheless believes that an indignity cannot be expiated but
with blood, and is persuaded that the life of a fellow creature is a very
trifling consideration in comparison with the indemnification to be made to his
injured honor. There is therefore scarcely any Italian that would upon some
occasions scruple assassination. Men of spirit among them, notwithstanding the
prejudices of their education, cannot fail to have a secret conviction of its
baseness, and will be desirous of extending as far as possible the cartel of
honor. Real or affected arrogance teaches others to regard almost the whole
human species as their inferiors, and of consequence incites them to gratify
their vengeance without danger to their persons. Mr. Falkland fell in with some
of these. But his undaunted spirit and resolute temper gave him a decisive
advantage even in such perilous rencounters. One instance among many of his
manner of conducting himself among this proud and high-spirited people, it may
be proper to relate. Mr. Falkland is the principal agent in my history; and Mr.
Falkland, in the autumn and decay of his vigor such as I found him, cannot be
completely understood without a knowledge of his previous character as it was
in all the gloss of youth, yet unassailed by adversity, and unbroken in upon by
anguish or remorse.

At Rome he was received with particular distinction at the house of marquis
Pisani, who had an only daughter, the heir of his immense fortune, and the
admiration of all the young nobility of that metropolis. Lady Lucretia Pisani
was tall, of a dignified form and uncommonly beautiful. She was not deficient
in amiable qualities, but her ^oul was haughty, and her carriage not
unfrequently contemptuous. Her pride was nourished by the consciousness of her
charms, by her elevated rank and the universal adoration she was accustomed to
receive.

Among her numerous lovers count Malvesi was the individual most favored by
her father, nor did his addresses seem indifferent to her. The count was a man
of considerable accomplishments, and of great integrity and benevolence of
disposition. But he was too ardent a lover to be able always to preserve the
affability of his temper. The admirers, whose addresses were a source of
gratification to his mistress, were a perpetual torment to him. Placing his
whole happiness in the possession of this imperious beauty, the most trifling
circumstances were capable of alarming him for the security of his pretensions.
But most of all he was jealous of the English cavalier. The marquis Pisani, who
had spent many years in France, was by no means partial to the suspicious
precautions of Italian fathers, and indulged his daughter in considerable
freedoms. His house and his daughter, within certain judicious restraints, were
open to the resort of male visitants. But above all Mr. Falkland, as a
foreigner, and a person little likely to form pretensions to the hand of
Lucretia, was received upon a footing of great familiarity. The lady herself,
conscious of her innocence, entertained no scruple about trifles, and acted
with the confidence and frankness of one who is superior to suspicion.

Mr. Falkland, after a residence of several weeks at Rome, proceeded to Naples.
Mean while certain incidents occurred that delayed the intended nuptials of the
heiress of Pisani. When he returned to Rome count Malvesi was absent. Lady
Lucretia, who had been considerably amused before with the conversation of Mr.
Falkland, and who had an active and enquiring mind, had conceived in the
interval between his first and second residence at Rome a passion for learning
the English language, inspired by the lively and ardent encomiums of our best
authors that she had heard from their countryman. She had provided herself with
the usual implements for that purpose, and made some progress during his
absence. But upon his return she was desirous of making use of the opportunity
which, if missed, might never occur again with equal advantages, of reading
select passages of our poets in company with an Englishman of uncommon taste
and capacity.

This proposal necessarily led to a more frequent intercourse. When count
Malvesi returned, he found Mr. Falkland established almost as an inmate of the
Pisani palace. His mind could not fail to be struck with the criticalness of
the situation. He was perhaps secretly conscious that the qualifications of the
Englishman were superior to his own, and he trembled for the progress that each
of them might have made in the affection of the other, even before they were
aware of the danger. He believed that the match was in every respect such as to
flatter the ambition of Mr. Falkland, and he was stung even to madness by the
idea of being deprived of the object dearest to his heart by this insolent
upstart.

He had however a sufficient share of discretion to go first to demand an
explanation of lady Lucretia. She in the gaiety of her heart trifled with his
anxiety. His patience was already exhausted, and he proceeded in his
expostulation in language that it was by no means possible for her to endure
with apathy. Lady Lucretia had always been accustomed to deference and
submission; and having got over something like terror that was first inspired
by the imperious manner in which he was now catechized, her next feeling was
that of the warmest resentment. She disdained to satisfy so insolent a
questioner, and even indulged herself in some oblique hints calculated to
strengthen his suspicions. For some time she described his folly and
presumption in terms of the most ludicrous sarcasm, and then suddenly changing
her style, bid him never let her see him more except upon a footing of the most
distance acquaintance, as she was determined never again to subject herself to
so unworthy and inexcusable a treatment. She was happy that he had at length
disclosed to her his true character, and would well know how to profit of her
present experience to avoid a repetition of the same danger. All this passed in
the full career of the passions on both sides, and lady Lucretia had no time to
reflect what might be the consequence of having thus exasperated her lover.

Count Malvesi left her in all the torments of hell. He believed that this was
a premeditated scene to find a pretense for breaking off an engagement that was
already all but concluded; or rather his mind was racked with a thousand
conjectures, he alternately thought that the injustice might be hers or his
own, and he quarrelled with lady Lucretia, himself and all the world. In this
temper of mind he hastened to the hotel of the English cavalier. The moment of
expostulation was now over, and he found himself irresistibly impelled to
justify his precipitate conduct with the lady, by taking for granted that the
prosperous amors of Falkland were beyond the reach of doubt.

Mr. Falkland was at home. The first words of the count were an abrupt
accusation of duplicity in the affair of lady Lucretia, and a challenge. The
Englishman had an unaffected esteem for Malvesi, who was in reality a man of
considerable merit, and who had been one of Mr. Falkland's earliest Italian
acquaintance, they having originally met at Milan. But more than this, the
possible consequences of a duel in the present instance burst upon his mind. He
had the warmest admiration for lady Lucretia, though his feelings were not
those of a lover: and he knew that, however her haughtiness might endeavor to
disguise it, she was impressed with a tender regard for count Malvesi. He could
not bear to think that any misconduct of his should interrupt the prospects of
so deserving a pair. Guided by these sentiments he endeavored to expostulate
with the Italian. But all his attempts in this respect were ineffectual. His
antagonist was drunk with choler, and would not listen to a word that tended to
check the impetuosity of his thoughts. He traversed the room with perturbed
steps, and even foamed with anguish and fury. Mr. Falkland, finding that every
thing else was to no purpose, told the count that, if he would return tomorrow
at the same hour, he would attend him to any scene of action he would think
proper to select.

From count Malvesi Mr. Falkland immediately proceeded to the palace of Pisani.
Here ^e found a considerable difficulty in appeasing the indignation of lady
Lucretia. Honor forbad him to disclose the cartel he had received, though he
was secretly determined never to draw his sword in the present quarrel;
otherwise that disclosure would immediately have operated as the strongest
motive with this disdainful beauty. But, though she feared a similar defiance,
yet the vague apprehension was not strong enough to induce her without
qualification to surrender all the stateliness of her resentment. Mr. Falkland
however drew ^o interesting a picture of the disturbance of count Malvesi's
mind, and accounted in so flattering a manner for the abruptness of his
conduct, that this, together with the arguments he adduced, completed the
conquest of lady Lucretia's resentment. Having thus far accomplished his
purpose, he proceeded to disclose to her every thing that had passed.

The next day count Malvesi appeared, punctual to his appointment, at Mr.
Falkland's hotel. Mr. Falkland came to the door to receive him, but requested
him to enter the house for a moment, as he had still an affair of three minutes
to dispatch. They proceeded to a parlour. Here Mr. Falkland left him, and
presently returned leading in lady Lucretia herself adorned in all her charms,
and those charms heightened upon the present occasion with a consciousness of
the spirited and generous condescension she now exerted. Mr. Falkland led her
up to the astonished count; and she, gently laying her hand upon the arm of her
lover, exclaimed with the most attractive grace, Will you allow me to retract
the precipitate haughtiness into which I was betrayed? The enraptured count,
scarcely able to believe his senses, threw himself upon his knees before her,
and stammered out a reply, signifying that the precipitation had been all his
own, that he only had any forgiveness to demand, and, though they might pardon,
he could never pardon himself for the sacrilege he had committed against her
and this god-like Englishman. As soon as the first tumults of his joy were
subsided, Mr. Falkland addressed him thus:

"Count Malvesi, I feel the utmost pleasure in having thus by peaceful means
disarmed your resentment, and effected your happiness. But I must confess you
put me to a severe trial. My temper is not less impetuous and fiery than your
own, and it is not at all times that I should have been thus able to subdue it.
But I considered that in reality the original blame was mine. Though your
suspicion was groundless, it was not absurd. We have been trifling too much in
the face of danger. I ought not, under the present weakness of our nature and
forms of society, to have been so assiduous in my attendance upon this
enchanting woman. It would have been little wonder, if, having so many
opportunities, and playing the preceptor with her as I have done, I had been
entangled before I was aware, and harbored a wish which I might not afterward
have had the courage to subdue. I owed you an atonement for this imprudence.

"But the laws of honor are in the utmost degree rigid, and there was reason
to fear that, however anxious I were to be your friend, I might be obliged to
be your murderer. Fortunately the reputation of my courage is sufficiently
established, not to expose it to any impeachment by my declining your present
defiance. It was lucky however that in our interview of yesterday you found me
alone, and that accident by that means threw the management of the affair
entirely into my disposal. If the transaction should become known, the
conclusion would now become known along with the provocation, and I am
satisfied. But, if the challenge had been public, the proofs I had formerly
given of my courage would not have excused my present moderation; and though
desirous to have avoided the combat, it would not have been in my power. Let us
hence each of us learn to avoid haste and indiscretion, the consequences of
which may be inexpiable but with blood; and may heaven bless you in a consort
of whom I deem you every way worthy!"

I have already said that this was by no means the only instance in the course
of his travels in which Mr. Falkland acquitted himself in the most brilliant
manner as a man of gallantry and virtue. He continued abroad during several
years, every one of which brought some fresh accession to the estimation in
which he was held, as well as to his own impatience of stain or dishonor. At
length he thought proper to return to England, with the intention of spending
the rest of his days at the residence of his ancestors.

CHAP. III.
FROM the moment of his taking a step like this, dictated as it probably was by
an unaffected principle of duty, his misfortunes took their commencement. All I
have farther to state of his history is one uninterrupted persecution of a
malignant destiny, a series of adventures which seemed to take their rise in
various accidents, but pointing to one termination. Him they overwhelmed with
an anguish he was of all others least qualified to bear; and these waters of
bitterness, extending beyond him, powered their deadly venom upon others, I
myself being the most unfortunate of their victims.

The person in whom these calamities principally originated, was Mr. Falkland's
nearest neighbor, a man of estate equal to his own, by name, Barnabas Tyrrel.
This man one might at first have supposed of all others least qualified from
instruction, or inclined by the habits of his life, to interfere with and
disturb the enjoyments of a mind so richly endowed as that of Mr. Falkland. Mr.
Tyrrel might have passed for a true model of the English squire. He was very
early left under the tuition of his mother, a woman of very narrow capacity,
and who had no other child. This mother seemed to think that there was nothing
in the world so precious as her hopeful Barnabas. Every thing must give way to
his accommodation and advantage; every one must yield the most servile
obedience to his commands. He must not be teased or restricted by any forms of
instruction; and of consequence his proficiency even in the arts of writing and
reading was extremely slender. From his birth he was muscular and sturdy; and,
confined to the ruelle of his mother, he made much such a figure as the
whelp-lion that a barbarian might have given for a lap-dog to his mistress. But
he soon broke loose from these trammels, and formed an acquaintance with the
groom and the game-keeper. Under their instruction he proved as ready a scholar
as he had been indocile and restive to the pedant who held the office of his
tutor. It was now evident that his small proficiency in literature was by no
means to be ascribed to want of capacity. He discovered no contemptible
sagacity and quick-wittedness in the science of horseflesh, and was eminently
expert in the arts of shooting, fishing and hunting. Nor did he confine himself
to these, but added the theory and practice of boxing, cudgel-play and
quarter-staff. These exercises added tenfold robustness and vigor to his
former qualifications. His stature, when grown, was somewhat more than six
feet, and his form might have been selected by a painter as a model for that
hero of antiquity, whose prowess consisted in felling an ox with his fist, and
then devouring him at a meal. Conscious of his advantage in this respect, he
was insupportably arrogant, tyrannical to his inferiors, and insolent to his
equals. The activity of his mind, being diverted from the genuine field of
utility and distinction, showed itself in the rude tricks of an overgrown
lubber. Here, as in all other qualifications, he rose above his competitors;
and, if it had been possible to overlook the callous and unrelenting
disposition in which they were generated, you would not have denied your
applause to the invention these freaks displayed, and the rough, sarcastic wit
with which they were accompanied.

Mr. Tyrrel was by no means inclined to permit these extraordinary merits to
rest in oblivion. There was a weekly assembly at the nearest market town, the
resort of all the rural gentry. Here he had hitherto figured to the greatest
advantage, as grand master of the coterie, no one among them having an equal
share of opulence, and the majority, though still pretending to the rank of
gentry, greatly his inferiors in this essential article. The young men in this
circle looked up to this insolent bashaw with timid respect, conscious of the
comparative eminence that unquestionably belonged to the powers of his mind;
and he well knew how to maintain his rank with an inflexible hand. Frequently
indeed he relaxed his features, and assumed a temporary appearance of
affableness and familiarity; but they found by experience, that, if any one,
encouraged by his condescension, forgot the deference which Mr. Tyrrel
considered as his due, he was soon taught to repent his presumption. It was a
tiger that, thought proper to toy with a mouse, the little animal every moment
in danger of being crushed by the fangs of his ferocious associate. As Mr.
Tyrrel had a considerable copiousness of speech and a rich but undisciplined
imagination, he was always sure of an audience. His neighbors crowded round,
and joined in the ready laugh, partly from obsequiousness, and partly from
unfeigned admiration. It frequently happened however that in the midst of his
good humor a characteristic refinement of tyranny would suggest itself to his
mind. When his subjects, encouraged by his familiarity, had discarded their
precaution, the wayward fit would seize him, a sudden cloud overspread his
brow, his voice transform from the pleasant to the terrible, and a quarrel of a
straw immediately ensue with the first man whose face he did not like. The
pleasure that resulted to others from the exuberant sallies of his imagination
was therefore not unalloyed with sudden qualms of apprehension and terror. It
may be believed that this despotism did not gain its final ascendancy without
being contested in the outset. But all opposition had been quelled with a high
hand by this rural Antaeus. By the ascendancy of his fortune, and his character
among his neighbors, he always reduced his adversary to the necessity of
encountering him at his own weapons, and did not dismiss him without making him
feel his presumption through every joint in his frame. The tyranny of Mr.
Tyrrel would not have been so patiently endured, had not his colloquial
accomplishments perpetually come in aid of that authority which his rank and
prowess originally obtained.

The situation of our squire with the fair was still more enviable than that
which he maintained among persons of his own sex. Every mother taught her
daughter to consider the hand of Mr. Tyrrel as the highest object of her
ambition. Every daughter regarded his athletic form and his acknowledged
prowess with a favorable eye. As no man was adventurous enough to contest his
superiority, so hardly any woman in this provincial circle would have scrupled
to prefer his addresses to those of any other admirer. His boisterous wit had
peculiar charms for them; and there was no spectacle more flattering to their
vanity than the seeing this Hercules exchange his club for a distaff. It was
pleasing to them to consider that the fangs of this wild beast, the very idea
of which inspired trepidation into the boldest hearts, might be played with by
them with the utmost security.

The arrival of Mr. Falkland gave a dreadful shock to the authority of Mr.
Tyrrel. The disposition of the former by no means inclined him to withhold
himself from scenes of fashionable resort; and he and his competitor were like
two stars fated never to appear at once above the horizon. The advantages that
Mr. Falkland possessed in the comparison are palpable; and, had it been
otherwise, the subjects of his rustic neighbor were sufficiently disposed to
revolt against his merciless dominion. They had hitherto submitted not from
love, but fear; and, if they had not actually rebelled, it was only for want of
a leader. Even the ladies regarded Mr. Falkland with particular complacence.
His polished manners were admirably in unison with feminine delicacy. The
sallies of his wit were far beyond those of Mr. Tyrrel in variety and vigor;
in addition to which they had the advantage of having their spontaneous
exuberance guided and restrained by the sagacity of a cultivated mind. The
graces of his person were enhanced by the elegance of his deportment; and the
benevolence and liberality of his temper were upon all occasions conspicuous.
It was common indeed to Mr. Tyrrel together with Mr. Falkland to be little
accessible to sentiments of awkwardness and confusion. But for this Mr. Tyrrell
was indebted to a self-satisfied effrontery and a boisterous and over-bearing
elocution by which he was accustomed to discomfit his assailants; while Mr.
Falkland, with great ingenuity and candor of mind, was enabled, by his
extensive knowledge of the world and acquaintance with his own resources, to
perceive almost instantaneously the proceeding it most became him to adopt.

Mr. Tyrrel contemplated the progress of his rival with uneasiness and
aversion. He often commented upon it to his particular confidents as a thing
altogether inconceivable. Mr. Falkland he described as an animal that was
beneath contempt. Diminutive and dwarfish in his form, he wanted to set up a
new standard of human nature adapted to his own miserable condition. He wished
to persuade people that the human species were made to be nailed to a chair and
to pore over books. He would have them exchange those robust exercises which
made us joyous in the performance and vigorous in the consequences, for the
wise labor of scratching our heads for a rhyme and counting our fingers for a
verse. Monkeys were as good men as these. A nation of such animals would have
no chance with a single regiment of the old English votaries of beef and
pudding. For his own part he never saw any thing come of learning but to make
people foppish and impertinent; and a sensible man would not wish any worse
calamity to the enemies of his nation than to see them run mad after such
pernicious absurdities. It was impossible that people could seriously feel any
liking for such a ridiculous piece of goods as this outlandish, foreign-made
Englishman. But he knew very well how it was; it was all a miserable piece of
mummery that was played only in spite to him. But G -- for ever blast his soul,
if he were not bitterly revenged upon them all!

If such were the sentiments of Mr. Tyrrel, his patience found ample exercise
in the language which was held by the rest of his neighbors on the same
subject. While he saw nothing in Mr. Falkland but matter for contempt, they
appeared to be never weary of recounting his praises. Such dignity, such
affability, so perpetual an attention to the happiness of others, such delicacy
of sentiment and expression! Learned without ostentation, refined without
foppery, elegant without effeminacy! Perpetually anxious to prevent his
superiority either in wealth or accomplishments from being painfully felt, it
was felt so much the more certainly, and excited congratulation instead of envy
in the spectator. It is hardly necessary to remark that the revolution in this
case belongs to one of the most obvious features of the human mind. The rudest
exhibition of art is at first admired; till a nobler is presented, and we are
taught to wonder at the facility with which before we had been satisfied. Mr.
Tyrrel thought there would be no end to the commendation; and expected when
their common acquaintance would fall down and adore him. The most inadvertent
expression of applause toward his rival inflicted upon him the torment of
demons. He writhed with agony, his features became distorted, and his looks
inspired terror. Such suffering would probably have soured the kindest temper;
what must have been its effect upon Mr. Tyrrel's, always fierce, unrelenting
and abrupt?

The advantages of Mr. Falkland seemed by no means to diminish with their
novelty. Every new sufferer from Mr. Tyrrel's tyranny immediately went over to
the standard of his adversary. The ladies, though treated by their rustic swain
with more gentleness than the men, were occasionally exposed to his
capriciousness and insolence. They could not help remarking the contrast
between these two leaders in the fields of Venus, the one of whom paid no
attention to any one's pleasure but his own, while the other seemed all good
humor and benevolence. It was in vain that Mr. Tyrrel endeavored to restrain
the ruggedness of his character. His motive was impatience, his thoughts were
gloomy, and his courtship was like the pawings of an elephant. It appeared as
if his temper were more human while he had indulged it in its free bent, than
now that he sullenly endeavored to put fetters upon its excesses.

Among the ladies of the village assembly already mentioned there was none that
seemed to engage more of the kindness of Mr. Tyrrel than Miss Hardingham. She
was also one of the few that had not yet gone over to the enemy, either because
she really preferred the gentleman who was her oldest acquaintance, or
conceiving from calculation that this conduct would best insure success to her
object in a husband. One day however she thought proper, probably only by way
of temporary experiment, to show Mr. Tyrrel that she could engage in
hostilities, if he should at any time give her sufficient provocation. She
accordingly so adjusted her maneuvers as to be engaged by Mr. Falkland as his
partner for the dance of the evening, though without the smallest intention on
the part of that gentleman of giving offense to his country neighbor.

A short time before the dances began, Mr. Tyrrel went up to his fair
inamorata, and entered into some trifling conversation with her to fill up the
time, as intending in a few minutes to lead her forward to the field. He had
accustomed himself to neglect the ceremony of soliciting beforehand a promise
in his favor, as not supposing it possible that any one should dare to dispute
his behests; and, had it been otherwise, he would have thought the formality
unnecessary in this case, his general preference to Miss Hardingham being
sufficiently notorious.

While he was thus engaged, Mr. Falkland came up. Mr. Tyrrel always regarded
him with aversion and loathing. Mr. Falkland however ^lided in a graceful and
unaffected manner into the conversation that was already begun, and the
well-meaning ingenuousness of his manner was such, as might for the time have
disarmed the devil of his malice. Mr. Tyrrel probably conceived that his
accosting Miss Hardingham might be only an accidental piece of general
ceremony, and expected every moment when he would withdraw to another part of
the room. Still he staid, as if determined to tire out the patience of the
rustic.

The company now began to be in motion for the dance, and Mr. Falkland informed
Miss Hardingham that it was time to advance. -- Sir, interrupted Mr. Tyrrel
abruptly, that lady is my partner. -- I think not, sir: I apprehend the lady
has done me that favor, and I am very sure she has not promised herself to
both. -- I tell you, sir, she is mine: I pretend to think that I have some
interest in that lady's affections; and I will suffer no man to intrude upon my
claims. -- The lady's affections are not the subject of the present question.
-- And pray, what is the subject? Observe, sir, I will not recede. -- Mr.
Tyrrel, there is no need of altercation in the present business: the master of
the ceremonies is the proper person to decide; and, as neither of us can intend
to disturb the good humor of the assembly, or exhibit our valor before the
ladies, we shall either of us cheerfully submit to his verdict. -- Damn me,
sir, if I understand -- Softly, Mr. Tyrrel. It really is not worth the while of
either of us to quarrel about a question that the forms of good company have
long ago decided. I intended you no offense. But, sir, I shall be absolute in
asserting that to which I have once acquired a claim. And you will please to
observe that it is not my custom to submit to any unbecoming liberties.

Mr. Falkland uttered these words with the most even temper in the world. There
was not in his manner the slightest appearance of defiance. The words,
delivered with a certain tone, might have had the appearance of an a^^ront. But
they were uttered with the tone of a remonstrance, calm, unassuming, and
benevolent, without being contemptuous. Miss Hardingham had begun to repent of
her experiment, but her alarm was suddenly quieted by the irresistible
composure of her new partner. Mr. Tyrrel walked away without answering a word.
He muttered curses as he went, which the laws of honor did not oblige Mr.
Falkland to overhear, and which indeed it would have been no easy task to have
overheard with accuracy. Mr. Tyrrel would not perhaps have so easily given up
his point, had not his own good sense presently taught him that, however eager
he might be for revenge, this was not the ground he should desire to occupy.
Add to this, that unaccustomed as he was to strenuous opposition, he was less
prepared instantaneously to encounter it; and indeed there was something in Mr.
Falkland's manner that extorted assent for the present, however prejudice might
reassume its dominion. But, though Mr. Tyrrel could not openly resent this
rebellion against his authority, he brooded over it in the recesses of a
malignant mind; and it was evident enough that he was accumulating materials
for a bitter account, to which he trusted that his adversary should one day be
brought.

CHAP. IV.
THIS was only one out of innumerable instances that every day seemed to
enlarge, of petty mortifications which Mr. Tyrrel was destined to endure on the
part of Mr. Falkland. In every one of them Mr. Falkland conducted himself with
such propriety and unaffected mildness, as perpetually to make some addition to
the stock of his reputation. The more Mr. Tyrrel struggled with his misfortune,
the more conspicuous and inveterate it became. A thousand times he cursed his
stars, which took, as he apprehended, a malicious pleasure in making Mr.
Falkland at every turn the instrument of his humiliation. Smarting as he was
under a succession of untoward events, he appeared to feel in the most
exquisite manner the distinctions paid to his adversary, even in those
particulars to which he had not the slightest pretensions. An instance of this
speedily occurred.

Mr. Clare, a poet whose works have done immortal honor to the country that
produced him, had lately retired, after a life spent in the sublimest e^^orts
of genius, to enjoy the produce of his economy and the reputation he had
acquired, in this very neighborhood. Such an inmate was looked up to by the
country gentlemen with a degree of adoration. They felt a conscious pride in
recollecting that the boast of England was a native of their vicinity, and they
were by no means deficient in gratitude to him, when they saw him who had left
them an adventurer, return into the midst of them in the close of his days
crowned with honors and opulence. The reader is acquainted with his works; he
has probably dwelt upon them with transport: and I need not remind him of their
excellence. But he is perhaps a stranger to his personal qualifications. He
does not know that his productions were scarcely more admirable than his
conversation. In company he seemed to be the only person ignorant of the
greatness of his fame. To the world his writings will long remain a kind of
specimen of what the human mind is capable of performing; but no man perceived
their defects so acutely as he, or saw so distinctly how much yet remained to
be effected. He alone appeared to look upon his works with superiority and
indifference. One of the features that most eminently distinguished him was a
perpetual suavity of manners, a comprehensiveness of mind, that regarded the
errors of others without a particle of resentment, and made it impossible for
any one to be his enemy. He pointed out to men their mistakes with frankness
and unreserve: his remonstrances produced astonishment and conviction, but
without uneasiness to the party to whom they were addressed: they felt the
instrument that was employed to correct their irregularities, but it never
mangled what it was intended to heal. Such were the moral qualities that
distinguished him among his acquaintance. The intellectual accomplishments he
exhibited were principally a tranquil and mild enthusiasm, and a richness of
conception that dictated spontaneously to his tongue, and flowed with so much
ease, that it was only by retrospect you could be made aware of the amazing
variety of ideas that had been presented.

Mr. Clare certainly found few men in this remote situation that were capable
of participating in his ideas and amusements. It has not seldom been the
weakness of great men to fly to solitude, and converse with woods and groves,
rather than with a circle of strong and comprehensive minds like their own.
From the moment of Mr. Falkland's arrival in the neighborhood Mr. Clare
distinguished him in the most flattering manner. To so penetrating a genius
there was no need of long experience and patient observation to discover the
merits and defects of any character that presented itself. The foundations of
his judgment had long since been accumulated, and at the close of so
illustrious a life he might almost be said to see through nature at a glance.
What wonder that he took some interest in a mind in a certain degree congenial
with his own? But to Mr. Tyrrel's diseased imagination every distinction
bestowed on another seemed to be expressly intended as an insult to him. On the
other hand Mr. Clare, though gentle and benevolent in his remonstrances to a
degree that made the taking of offense impossible, was by no means parsimonious
of praise, or slow to make use of the deference that was paid him, for the
purpose of doing justice to merit. The pain which Mr. Tyrrel endured from this
circumstance in the present instance was extreme.

It happened at one of those public meetings at which Mr. Falkland and Mr.
Tyrrel were present, that the conversation, in one of the most numerous knots
into which the company was broken, turned upon the poetical talents of the
former. A lady, who was present, and was distinguished for the acuteness of her
understanding, said, she had been favored with the sight of a poem he had just
written, entitled, an Ode to the Genius of Chivalry, which appeared to her of
exquisite merit. The curiosity of the company was immediately excited, and the
lady added, she had a copy in her pocket, which would be very much at their
service, provided its being thus produced would not be disagreeable to the
author. The whole circle immediately entreated Mr. Falkland to comply with
their wishes, and Mr. Clare, who was one of the company, enforced their
petition. Nothing gave this gentleman so much pleasure as to have an
opportunity of witnessing and doing justice to the exhibition of intellectual
excellence. Mr. Falkland had no false modesty or affectation, and therefore
readily yielded his consent. If their kindness led them to expect too much, the
loss, he said, was theirs. What he ought most to desire was to be set right,
and he hoped he had fortitude enough tranquilly to abide the verdict of justice.

Mr. Tyrrel accidentally sat at the extremity of this circle. It cannot be
supposed that the turn the conversation had taken was by any means agreeable to
him. He seemed to wish to withdraw himself, but there was some unknown power
that as it were by enchantment retained him in his place, and made him consent
to drink to the dregs the bitter potion which envy had prepared from him.

The poem was read to the rest of the company by Mr. Clare, whose elocution was
scarcely inferior to his other accomplishments. Simplicity, discrimination and
energy constantly attended him in the act of reading, and it is not easy to
conceive a more refined delight than fell to the lot of those who had the good
fortune to be his auditors. The beauties of Mr. Falkland's poem were
accordingly exhibited with every advantage. The successive passions of the
author were communicated to the reader. Every word was impressed with its true
value, and none was brought forward with disproportioned and elaborate
emphasis. The pictures conjured up by the creative ^ancy of the poet were
placed full to view, at one time overwhelming the soul with superstitious awe,
at another transporting it with luxuriant beauty.

The character of the hearers upon this occasion has already been described.
They were for the most part plain, unlettered, and of little refinement. Poetry
in general they read, when read at all, from the mere force of imitation and
with few sensations of pleasure; but this poem had a peculiar vein of glowing
inspiration. This very poem would probably have been seen by many of them with
little effect; but the rhetoric of Mr. Clare carried it home to the heart. He
ended; and, as the countenances of his auditors had before gone along with the
passions of the composition, so now they emulated each other in giving language
to their approbation. They were surprised into a sort of applause to which they
were little accustomed. One spoke and another followed by a sort of
uncontrollable impulse; and the rude and broken manner of their commendations
rendered them the more singular and remarkable. But what was least to be
endured was the behavior of Mr. Clare. He returned the manuscript to the lady
from whom he had received it, and then turning to Mr. Falkland said with
emphasis and animation: Why, this is well, sir. It is of the right stamp; none
of your hard essays strained from the ninefold labor of a pedant, or of your
pastoral ditties most dismally distressed in search of a meaning. We want such
people as you. But remember, young man, the muse was not given to add new
refinements to idleness, but for the deliverance of the world.

A moment after Mr. Clare had thus expressed himself, he quitted his seat, and
with Mr. Falkland and two or three more withdrew. As soon as they were gone,
Mr. Tyrrel edged farther into the circle. He had sat silent so long that he
seemed ready to burst with gall and indignation. Mighty pretty verses, said he,
half talking to himself, and not addressing any particular person: why, aye,
the verses were well enough. Damnation! I should like to know what a ship-load
of such stuff is good for.

Why, surely, said the lady who had introduced Mr. Falkland's ode on the
present occasion, you must allow that poetry is a very agreeable and elegant
amusement.

Elegant, quotha! -- Why, look at this Falkland! A puny bit of a thing! In the
devil's name, madam, do you think he would write poetry if he could do any
thing better?

The conversation did not stop here. The lady expostulated. Several other
persons, fresh from the sensation they had felt, put in their share. Mr. Tyrrel
grew more violent in his invectives, and found ease in uttering them. The
persons who were able in any degree to check his vehemence were withdrawn. One
speaker after another shrunk back into silence, too timid to oppose, or too
indolent to contend with the fierceness of his passion. He found the appearance
of his old ascendancy; but he felt its deceitfulness and uncertainty, and was
gloomily dissatisfied.

In his return from this assembly he was accompanied by a young man whom
similitude of manners had rendered one of his principal confidents, and whose
road home was in part the same as his own. One would have thought that Mr.
Tyrrel had sufficiently vented his spleen in the dialogue he had just been
holding with the lady and her associates. But he was unable to dismiss from his
recollection the anguish he had endured. Damn Falkland! said he. What a pitiful
scoundrel is here to make all this bustle about! But women and fools always
will be fools; there is no help for that! Those that set them on have most to
answer for; and most of all Mr. Clare. He is a man that ought to know something
of the world, and past being duped by gewgaws and tinsel. He seemed too to have
some sense of justice: I should not have suspected him of hallooing to a cry of
mongrels without honesty or reason. But the world is all alike. Those that seem
better than their neighbors are only more artful. They mean the same thing,
though they take a different road. He deceived me for a while, but it is all
out now. They are the makers of all the mischief. Fools might blunder, but they
would not persist, if people that ought to set them right, did not encourage
them to go wrong.

A few days after this adventure Mr. Tyrrel was surprised to receive a visit
from Mr. Falkland. It was the first that had ever passed, they having never
before seen each other but at a third place. Mr. Falkland proceeded without
ceremony to explain the motive of his coming.

Mr. Tyrrel, said he, I am come to have an amicable explanation with you.

Explanation! What is my offense?

None in the world, sir; and for that reason I conceive this the fittest time
for us to come to a right understanding.

You are in the devil of a hurry, sir. Are you clear that this haste will not
mar, instead of make an understanding?

I think I am, sir. I have great faith in the purity of my intentions, and I
will not doubt that, when you perceive the view with which I come, you will
willingly cooperate with it.

Mayhap, Mr. Falkland, we may not agree about that. One man thinks one way, and
another man thinks another. Mayhap I do not think I have any great reason to be
pleased with you already.

It may be so. I cannot however charge myself with having giving you reason to
be displeased.

Mr. Tyrrel, proceeded Mr. Falkland, you will readily imagine that the cause
that brought me hither was not a slight one. I would not have troubled you with
a visit but for important reasons. My coming is a pledge how deeply I am myself
impressed with what I have to communicate.

We are in a critical situation. We are upon the brink of a whirlpool which, if
once it get hold of us, will render all farther deliberation impotent. Shall we
be enemies? What benefit will be derived from that? Who ever found in gall,
malice, suspicion and hatred the materials of happiness? No; to the breast
where they enter, happiness is for ever a stranger. They haunt our relaxations,
they poison our pleasures, they hardly allow us a moment of unmixed
satisfaction. A brow of care, a cankered heart, a bosom bursting with rage,
these are their retinue. -- If we be enemies, who shall tell where our enmity
shall stop? Every new event will feed it; it will swell beyond imagination or
limit; ever seeming enlarged to its utmost size, it will still become more
monstrous, more intolerable!

Upon my soul, you are an extraordinary man, -- an impertinent man! Why intrude
upon me your prophecies and forebodings?

Because it is necessary to your happiness. Because it becomes me to tell you
of our danger now, rather than wait till my character will permit me to be
silent no longer.

Sir, I mean to take care of my own happiness. I do not thank you for your
interference. Damn me, if I think this is any thing else but a trick to put a
new feather in your cap at your neighbor's expense.

Mr. Tyrrel, it is to provide against such misconstructions on either part that
I have sought you. I know the infirmity of my temper, but at least upon this
occasion I am determined not to take any thing ill. If my intention had been to
outshine you, should I have come alone?

Well, sir, you have no right to put me out of humor with myself. If you come
to play upon me, and try what sort of a fellow you shall have to deal with,
damn me, if you shall have any reason to hug yourself upon the experiment.

Mr. Tyrrel, nothing is more easy for us than to quarrel. If you desire that,
there is no fear that you will find opportunities.

Damn me, sir, if I do not believe you are come to bully me.

Good God, Mr. Tyrrel, be less unjust! My character is too well known to allow
it to be supposed that I fear any man, and I do not in the least suspect you of
a weakness in that respect to which I am myself a stranger.

Well, sir, that is thereafter as it may be.

By quarrelling we shall but imitate the great mass of mankind who could easily
quarrel in our place. Let us do better. Let us show that we have the wisdom to
avoid vulgar errors, and the magnanimity to condemn petty misunderstandings. We
are formed in different habits; why should we interfere? The world is wide
enough for both. By thus judging we shall do ourselves most substantial honor.
By a contrary conduct we shall be ourselves the sufferers, and merely present a
comedy for the amusement of our acquaintance.

Do you think so? There may be something in that. Damn me, if I consent to be
the jest of any man living.

You are right, Mr. Tyrrel. Let us each act in the manner best calculated to
excite respect. We neither of us wish to change roads with the other; let us
each suffer the other to pursue his own track unmolested. Be this our compact;
and by mutual forbearance let us preserve mutual peace.

Saying this, Mr. Falkland put out his hand in token of fellowship. But the
gesture was too significant. The wayward Tyrrel, who seemed to have been
somewhat impressed by what had preceded, taken as he was now by surprise,
shrunk back.

All this is very unaccountable, cried he. What the devil can have made you so
forward, if you had not some ^ly purpose to answer by which I am to be
overreached?

My purpose, replied Mr. Falkland, is a manly and an honest purpose. Why should
you refuse a proposition dictated by reason, and an equal regard to the
interest of each? -- Mr. Tyrrel had had an opportunity for pause, and fell back
into his habitual character.

Well, sir, in all this I must own there is some frankness. Now I will return
you like for like. It is no matter how I came by it, my temper is rough, and
will not be controuled. Mayhap you may think it a weakness, but I do not desire
to see it altered. Till you came, I found myself very well: I liked my
neighbors, and my neighbors humoured me. But now the case is entirely
altered; and, as long as I cannot stir abroad without meeting with some
mortification in which you are directly or remotely concerned, I am determined
to hate you. Now, sir, if you will only go out of the county or the kingdom, to
the devil if you please, so as I may never hear of you any more, I will promise
never to quarrel with you as long as I live. Your poetry and your delicacy,
your quirks and your conundrums may then be the very paragon of excellence for
what I care.

Mr. Tyrrel, attend to reason. I might as well desire you to leave the county,
as you desire me. I came here to you, not as to a master, but an equal. In the
society of men we must have something to bear, as well as to perform. No man
must think that the world was made for him alone. Let us then take things as we
find them; and accommodate ourselves with prudence to unavoidable circumstances.

True, sir, all that is very fine talking. But I return to my text; we are as
God made us. I am neither a philosopher nor a poet, to set out upon a
wild-goose chase of making myself a different man from what you find me. As for
consequences, what must be must be. As we brew, we must bake. And so, do you
see, I shall not trouble myself about what is to be, but stand up to it with a
stout heart when it comes. Only this I can tell you, that, as long as I find
you thrust into my dish every day, I shall hate you as bad as senna and
valerian. And damn me, if I do not think I hate you the more for coming today
in this pragmatical way when nobody sent for you, on purpose to show how much
wiser you are than all the world besides.

Mr. Tyrrel, I have done. I foresaw consequences, and came as a friend to
advise you. I did hope that by mutual explanation we should each of us have
improved in the good opinion of the other. I am partly disappointed; but I
still believe that when you coolly reflect on what has passed, you will give me
credit for the honesty of my intentions, and be disposed to think of me with
the same consideration and liberality as I am determined to exercise toward
you.

Having said this, Mr. Falkland departed; and Mr. Tyrrel had recourse to his
old friend, to whom he unburthened the tumult of his thoughts. This, cried he,
is a new artifice of the fellow to prove his imagined superiority. We know very
well that he has the gift of the gab. To be sure, if the world were to be
governed by words, he would be in the right box. Oh, yes, he had it all hollow
before him! But what signifies prating? Business must be done in an other-guess
way than that. I wonder what possessed me that I did not kick him! But that is
all to come. This is only a new debt added to the score which he shall one day
richly pay. This Falkland haunts me like a demon. I cannot wake, but I think of
him. I cannot sleep, but I see him. He poisons all my pleasures. I should be
glad to see him torn with tenter-hooks, and to grind his heart strings with my
teeth. I shall know no joy, till I see him ruined. There may be some things
right about him; but he is my perpetual torment. The thought of him presses
like a dead weight upon my heart, and I have a right to throw it off. Does he
think I will feel all that I endure for nothing?

In spite of the acerbity of Mr. Tyrrel's feelings, it is probable however he
did some justice to his rival. Upon ordinary occasions at least he seemed
disposed to treat him with an involuntary deference. He was no longer equally
voluble in mixed companies in his abuse of him; a part of the topics of his
invective seemed to be gone. He was no longer eager to treat him with random
hostility; if he regarded him with equal dislike, he at least appeared to
regard him as a formidable foe. He avoided his encounter; he forbore to
contradict his opinions; he seemed to lie in wait for his victim, and to
collect his venom for a mortal assault.

CHAP. V.
IT was not long after that a malignant contagious distemper broke out in the
neighbour^ood, which proved fatal to many of the inhabitants, and was of
unexampled rapidity in its effects. One of the first persons that was seized
with it was Mr. Clare. It may be believed that this incident spread grief and
alarm through the vicinity. Mr. Clare was considered by them as something more
than a mortal. The equanimity of his behavior, his unassuming carriage, his
exuberant benevolence and goodness of heart, joined with his talents, his
inoffensive wit, and the comprehensiveness of his intelligence made him the
idol of all that knew him. In the scene of his rural retreat at least he had
not an enemy. All mourned the danger that now threatened him. He appeared to
have the prospect of long life, and of going down to his grave full of years
and of honor. Perhaps these appearances were deceitful. Perhaps the
intellectual efforts he had exerted, which were occasionally more sudden,
violent and unintermitted than a strict regard to health would have dictated,
had laid the seeds of future disease. But a sanguine observer would infallibly
have predicted, that his good sense, presence of mind and unaltered
cheerfulness would be able even to keep death at bay for a time and baffle the
attacks of distemper, provided this universal foe did not take him by surprise.
The general affliction therefore was doubly pungent upon the present occasion.

But no one was so much affected as Mr. Falkland. Perhaps no man living so well
understood the value of the life that was now at stake. He immediately hastened
to the spot; but he found some difficulty in gaining admission. Mr. Clare,
aware of the infectious nature of his disease, had given directions that as few
people as possible should approach him. Mr. Falkland sent up his name. He was
told that he was included in the general orders. He was not however of a temper
to be easily repulsed; he persisted with obstinacy, and at length carried his
point, being only reminded in the first instance to employ those precautions
which experience has approved as most effectual for counteracting infection.

He found Mr. Clare in his bedchamber, but not in bed. He was sitting in his
nightgown at a bureau near the window. His appearance was composed and
cheerful, but death was in his countenance. I had a great inclination, Mr.
Falkland, said he, not to have suffered you to come in; and yet there is not a
person in the world it could give me more pleasure to see. But upon second
thoughts I believe there are few people that could run into a danger of this
kind with a better prospect of escaping. In your case, at least the garrison
will not be taken through the treachery of the commander. I cannot tell how it
is that I, who can preach wisdom to you, have myself been caught. But do not be
discouraged by my example. I had no notice of my danger, or I would have
acquitted myself better. These strange seeds of distemper seem to float in the
air, and to fasten upon the frame without its being possible for us to tell
what was the method of their approach.

Mr. Falkland, having once established himself in the apartment of his friend,
would upon no terms consent to retire. Mr. Clare considered that there was
perhaps less danger in this choice than in a frequent change from the extremes
of a pure to a tainted air, and desisted from his expostulation. Falkland, said
he, when you came in, I had just finished making my will. I was not pleased
with what I had formerly drawn up upon that subject, and I did not choose in my
present situation to call in an attorney. In fact it would be strange if a man
of sense with pure and direct intentions should not be able to perform such a
function for himself.

Mr. Clare continued to act in the same easy and disengaged manner as in
perfect health. To judge from the cheerfulness of his tone and the firmness of
his manner, the thought would never once have occurred to you that he was
dying. He walked, he reasoned, he jested, in a way that argued the most perfect
self-possession. But his appearance changed perceptibly for the worse every
quarter of an hour. Mr. Falkland kept his eye perpetually fixed upon him with
mingled sentiments of anxiety and admiration.

Falkland, said he, after having appeared for a short period absorbed in
thought, I feel that I am dying. This is a strange distemper of mine. Yesterday
I seemed in perfect health, and tomorrow I shall be an insensible corpse. How
curious is the line that separates life and death to mortal men! To be at one
moment active, gay, penetrating, with immense stores of knowledge at one's
command, capable of delighting, instructing and animating mankind, and the
next, lifeless and loathsome, an encumbrance upon the face of the earth. Such
is the history of many men, and such will be mine.

I feel as if I had yet much to do in the world; but it will not be. I must be
contented with what is past. It is in vain that I muster all my spirits to my
heart. The enemy is too mighty and too merciless for me; he will not give me
time so much as to breathe. These things are not yet in our power. They are
parts of a great series that is perpetually flowing. The general welfare, the
great business of the universe, will go on, though I bear no farther share in
promoting it. That task is reserved for younger strengths, for you, Falkland,
and such as you. We should be contemptible indeed, if the prospect of human
improvement did not yield us a pure and perfect delight, independently of the
question of our existing to partake of it. Mankind would have little to envy to
future ages, if they had all enjoyed a serenity as perfect as mine.

Mr. Clare sat up through the whole day, indulging himself in easy and cheerful
exertions, which were perhaps better calculated to refresh and invigorate the
frame, than if he had sought repose in its direct form. Now and then he was
visited with a sudden pang; but it was no sooner felt, than he seemed to rise
above it, and smiled at the impotence of the attack. Three or four times he was
bedewed with profuse sweats, and these again were succeeded by an extreme
dryness and burning heat of the skin. He was next covered with small livid
spots. Symptoms of shivering followed, but these he drove away with a
determined resolution. He then became tranquil and composed, and after some
time determined to go to bed, it being already night. Falkland, said he,
pressing his hand, the task of dying is not so difficult, as some people
imagine. When one looks back from the brink of it, one wonders that so total a
subversion can take place at so easy a rate.

He had now been some time in bed, and, as every thing was still, Mr. Falkland
hoped that he slept. But in that he was mistaken. Presently Mr. Clare threw
back the curtain, and looked in the countenance of his friend. I cannot sleep,
said he. No, if I could sleep, it would be the same thing as to recover; and I
am fated to have the worst in this battle.

Falkland, I have been thinking about you. I do not know any one whose future
usefulness I contemplate with greater hope. Take care of yourself. Do not let
the world be defrauded of the benefit of your virtues. I am well acquainted
with your weakness as well as your strength. You have an impetuosity and an
impatience of imagined dishonor, that, if once set wrong, may make you as
eminently mischievous, as you will otherwise be useful. Would to God you would
think seriously of exterminating this error!

But, if I cannot, in the brief expostulation my present situation will allow,
work this desirable change in you, there is at least one thing I can do. I can
put you upon your guard against a mischief I foresee to be imminent. Beware of
Mr. Tyrrel. Do not commit the mistake of despising him as an unequal opponent.
Petty causes may produce great mischiefs. Mr. Tyrrel is boisterous, rugged and
unfeeling; and you are too passionate, too acutely sensible of injury. It would
be truly to be lamented, if a man so inferior, so utterly unworthy to be
compared with you, should be capable of changing your whole history into misery
and guilt. Think of this. I exact no promise from you. I would not shackle you
with the fetters of superstition; I would have you be governed by reason and
justice.

Mr. Falkland was deeply affected with this expostulation. His sense of the
generous attention of Mr. Clare at such a moment as this, was so great as
almost to deprive him of utterance. He spoke in short sentences and with
visible effort. I will behave better, replied he. Never fear me! Your kind
admonitions shall not be thrown away upon me.

Mr. Clare adverted to another subject. I have made you my executor; you will
not refuse me this last office of friendship. It is but a short time that I
have had the happiness of knowing you; but in that short time I have examined
you well, and seen you thoroughly. Do not disappoint the sanguine hope I have
entertained!

I have left some legacies. My former connections, while I lived amidst the
busy haunts of men, as many of them as were intimate, are all of them dear to
me. I have not had time to summon them about me upon the present occasion, nor
did I desire it. The remembrances of me will, I hope, answer a better purpose
than such as are usually thought of on similar occasions.

Mr. Clare, having thus unburthened his mind, spoke no more for several hours.
Toward morning Mr. Falkland quietly withdrew the curtain, and looked at the
dying man. His eyes were open, and were now gently turned toward his young
friend. His countenance was sunk, and of a deathlike appearance. I hope you are
better, said Falkland in a half-whisper, as if afraid of disturbing him. Mr.
Clare drew his hand from the bedclothes, and stretched it forward; Mr. Falkland
advanced, and took hold of it (...) Much better, said Mr. Clare in a voice,
inward and hardly articulate: the struggle is now over; I have finished my
part: farewell; remember! These were his last words. He lived still a few hours;
his lips were sometimes seen to move; he expired without a groan

Mr. Falkland had witnessed the scene with much anxiety. His hopes of a
favorable crisis, and his fear of disturbing the last moments of his friend,
had held him dumb. For the last half hour he had stood up with his eyes
intently fixed upon Mr. Clare. He witnessed the last gasp, the last little
convulsive motion of the frame. He continued to look; he seemed sometimes to
imagine that he saw life renewed. At length he could deceive himself no longer,
and exclaimed with a distracted accent, And is this all? He would have thrown
himself upon the body of his friend; the attendants withheld, and would have
forced him into another apartment. But he struggled from them, and hung fondly
over the bed. Is this the end of genius, virtue and excellence? Is the luminary
of the world thus for ever gone? Oh, yesterday! yesterday! Clare, why could not
I have died in your stead? Dreadful moment! Irreparable loss! Lost in the very
maturity and vigor of his mind! Cut off from a usefulness ten thousand times
greater than any he had already exhibited! Oh, his was a mind to have
instructed sages, and guided the moral world! This is all we have left of him!
The eloquence of those lips is gone! The incessant activity of that heart is
still! The best and wisest of men is gone, and the world is insensible of its
loss!

Mr. Tyrrel heard the intelligence of Mr. Clare's death with emotion, but of a
very different kind. He avowed that he had not forgiven him his partial
attachment to Falkland, and therefore could not recall his remembrance with
kindness. But, if he could have overlooked his past injustice, sufficient care
was taken to employ means to keep alive his resentment. Falkland forsooth
attended him on his deathbed, as if nobody else was worthy to partake of his
confidential communications. But what was worst of all was this executorship.
In every thing this pragmatical rascal throws me behind. Contemptible wretch,
that has nothing of the man about him! Must he perpetually trample on his
betters? Is every body incapable of reason, and making a right estimate of the
merits of men? caught with mere outside? choosing the flimsy before the
substantial? And upon his deathbed too! [Mr. Tyrrel with his uncultivated
brutality mixed, as usually happens, certain rude notions of religion.] Sure
the sense of his situation might have shamed him. Poor wretch! his soul has a
great deal to answer for. He has made my pillow uneasy; and whatever may be the
consequences, it is him we have to thank for them.

The death of Mr. Clare removed the person who could most effectually have
moderated the animosities of the contending parties, and took away the great
operative check upon the excesses of Mr. Tyrrel. This rustic tyrant had been
held in involuntary restraint by the intellectual ascendancy of his celebrated
neighbor; and, notwithstanding the general ferocity of his temper, did not
appear till lately to have entertained a hatred against him. In the short time
that had elapsed from the period in which Mr. Clare had fixed his residence in
the neighborhood to that of the arrival of Mr. Falkland from the Continent,
the conduct of Mr. Tyrrel had even shown certain tokens of improvement. Such
was the felicity of Mr. Clare's manners that, even while he corrected, he
conciliated, and excited no angry emotions in those whose actions were most
curbed by the apprehension of his displeasure. The effects of his suavity
however, so far as related to Mr. Tyrrel, had been in a certain degree
suspended by considerations of rivalship between this gentleman and Mr.
Falkland. And, now that the influence of Mr. Clare's presence and virtues were
entirely removed, Mr. Tyrrel's temper broke out into more criminal excesses
than at any former period, having the additional stimulus of mortified pride
and disappointed ambition.

CHAP. VI.
THE consequences of all this speedily manifested themselves. The very next
incident in the story was in some degree decisive of the catastrophe. Hitherto
I have spoken only of preliminary matters, seemingly unconnected with each
other, though leading to that state of mind in both parties, which had such
fatal effects. But all that remains is rapid and tremendous. The death-dealing
mischief advances with an accelerated motion, appearing to defy human wisdom
and human strength to obstruct its operation.

There was a tenant of Mr. Tyrrel, one Hawkins; -- I cannot mention his name
without recollecting the painful tragedies that are annexed to it! This Hawkins
had originally been taken up by Mr. Tyrrel with a view of protecting him from
the arbitrary proceedings of a neighboring squire, though he had now in his
turn become an object of persecution to Mr. Tyrrel himself. The first ground of
their connection was this. Hawkins, beside a farm which he rented under the
abovementioned squire, had a small freehold estate that he inherited from his
father. This of course entitled him to a vote in the county elections; and, a
warmly contested election having occurred, he was required by his landlord to
vote for the candidate in whose favor he had himself engaged. Hawkins refused
to obey the mandate, and soon after received notice to quit the farm he at that
time rented.

It happened that Mr. Tyrrel had interested himself strongly in behalf of the
opposite candidate; and, as Mr. Tyrrel's estate bordered upon the seat of
Hawkins's residence, the ejected countryman could think of no better expedient
than that of riding over to this gentleman's mansion, and relating the case to
him. Mr. Tyrrel heard him through with attention. Well, friend, said he, it is
very true that I wished Mr. Jackman to carry his election; but you know it is
usual in these cases for tenants to vote just as their landlords please. I do
not think proper to encourage rebellion. -- All that is very right, and please
you, replied Hawkins; and I would have voted at my landlord's bidding for any
other man in the three kingdoms but squire Marlow. You must know one day his
huntsman rode over my fence, and so through my best field of standing corn. It
was not above a dozen yards about, if he had kept the cart-road. The fellow had
served me the same sauce, an it please your honor, three or four times before.
So I only asked him, What he did that for, and whether he had not more
conscience than to spoil people's crops a' that fashion? Presently the squire
came up. He is but a poor, weazen-face chicken of a gentleman, saving your
honor's reverence. And so he flew into a woundy passion, and threatened to
horsewhip me. I will do as much in reason to pleasure my landlord as arr a
tenant he has; but I will not give my vote to a man that threatens to horsewhip
me. And so, your honor, I and my wife and three children are to be turned out
of house and home, and what I am to do to maintain them God knows. I have been
a hard-working man, and have always lived very well, and I do think the case is
main hard. Squire Underwood turns me out of my farm; and, if your honor do not
take me in, I know none of the neighboring gentry will, for fear as they say
of encouraging their own tenants to run rusty too.

This representation was not without its effect upon Mr. Tyrrel. Well, well,
man, replied he, we will see what can be done. Order and subordination are very
good things; but people should know how much to require. As you tell the story,
I cannot see that you are greatly to blame. Marlow is a coxcombical prig, that
is the truth on it; and, if a man will expose himself, why, he must even take
what follows. I do hate a Frenchified fop with all my soul; and I cannot say
that I am much pleased with Mr. Underwood for taking the part of such a rascal.
Hawkins, I think is your name? You may call on Barnes, my steward, tomorrow,
and he shall speak to you.

While Mr. Tyrrel was speaking, he recollected that he had a farm vacant of
nearly the same value as that which Hawkins at present rented under Mr.
Underwood. He immediately consulted his steward, and, finding the thing
suitable in every respect, Hawkins was admitted out of hand into the catalogue
of Mr. Tyrrel's tenants. Mr. Underwood extremely resented this proceeding,
which indeed, as being contrary to the understood conventions of the country
gentlemen, few people but Mr. Tyrrel would have ventured upon. He said that
there was an end to all regulation, if tenants were to be encouraged in such
inexcusable disobedience. It was not a question of this or that candidate,
seeing that any gentleman, who was a true friend to his country, would rather
lose his election, than do a thing which if once established into a practice,
would deprive them for ever of the power of managing any election. The
laboring people were sturdy and resolute enough of their own accord; it became
every day mo^^ difficult to keep them under any subordinations and, if the
gentlemen were so ill-advised as to neglect the public good, and encourage them
in their insolence, there was no foreseeing where it would end.

Mr. Tyrrel was not of a stamp to be influenced by these remonstrances. Their
general spirit was sufficiently conformable to the sentiments he himself
entertained; but he was of too vehement a temper to maintain the character of a
consistent politician; and, however wrong his conduct might be, he would by no
means admit of its being set right by the suggestions of others. The more his
patronage of Hawkins was criticized, the more inflexibly he adhered to it; and
he was at no loss in clubs and other assemblies to overbear and silence, if not
to confute his censurers. Beside which, Hawkins had certain accomplishments
which qualified him to be a favorite with Mr. Tyrrel. The bluntness of his
manner and the ruggedness of his temper gave him some resemblance to his
landlord; and, as these qualities were likely to be more frequently exercised
on such persons as had incurred Mr. Tyrrel's displeasure than upon Mr. Tyrrel
himself, they were not observed without some degree of complacency. In a word,
he every day received new marks of distinction from his patron, and after some
time was appointed coadjutor to Mr. Barnes in the capacity of bailiff. It was
about the same period that he obtained a lease of the ^arm of which he was
tenant.

Mr. Tyrrel was determined, as occasion offered, to promote every part of the
family of this favored dependent. Hawkins had a son, a lad of seventeen, of a
very agreeable person, a ruddy complexion, and of quick and lively parts. This
lad was in an uncommon degree the favorite of his father, who seemed to have
nothing so much at heart as the future welfare of his son. Mr. Tyrrel had
noticed him two or three times with approbation; and the boy, being fond of the
sports of the field, had occasionally followed the hounds, and displayed
various instances both of agility and sagacity in presence of the squire. One
day in particular he exhibited himself with uncommon advantage; and Mr. Tyrrel
without farther delay proposed to his father to take him into his family, and
make him whipper-in to his hounds, till he could provide him with some more
lucrative appointment in his service.

This proposal was received by Hawkins with various marks of mortification. He
excused himself with hesitation for not accepting the offered favor; said the
lad was in many ways useful to him; and hoped his honor would not insist upon
depriving him of his assistance. This apology might perhaps have been
sufficient with any other man than Mr. Tyrrel; but it was frequently observed
of this gentleman that, when he had once formed a determination however slight
in favor of any measure, he was never afterward known to give it up, and that
the only effect of opposition was to make him eager and inflexible in pursuit
of that to which he had before been nearly indifferent. At first he seemed to
receive the apology of Hawkins with good humor, and to see nothing in it but
what was reasonable; but afterward every time he saw the boy his desire of
retaining him in his service was increased, and he more than once repeated to
his father the good disposition in which he felt himself toward him. At length
he observed that the lad was no more to be seen mingling in his favorite
sports, and he began to suspect that this originated in a determination to
thwart him in his projects.

Roused by this suspicion, which was not of a nature with Mr. Tyrrel to brook a
delay, he sent for Hawkins to confer with him. Hawkins, said he, in a tone of
displeasure, I am not satisfied with you. I have spoken to you two or three
times about this lad of yours, whom I am desirous of taking into favor. What
is the reason, sir, that you seem unthankful and averse to my kindness? You
ought to know that I am not to be trifled with. I shall not be contented, when
I offer my favors to have them rejected by such fellows as you. I made you
what you are; and, if I please, can make you more helpless and miserable than
you were when I found you. Have a care!

An it please your honor, said Hawkins, you have been a very good master to
me, and I will tell you the whole truth. I hope you will na be angry. This lad
is my favorite, my comfort and the stay of my age.

Well, and what then? Is that a reason you should hinder his preferment?

Nay, pray your honor, hear me. I may be very weak for aught I know in this
case, but I cannot help it. My father was a clergyman. We have all of us lived
in a creditable way; and I cannot bear to think that this poor lad of mine
should go to service. For my part, I do not see any good that comes of
servants. God forgive me, if I am unjust! But this is a very dear case, and I
cannot bear to risk my poor boy's welfare, when I can so easily, if you please,
keep him out of harm's way. At present he is sober and industrious, and,
without being conceited or surly, knows what is due to him. I know, your
honor, that it is main foolish of me to talk to you thus; but your honor has
been a good master to me, and I cannot bear to tell you a lie.

Mr. Tyrrel had heard the whole of this harangue in silence, because he was too
much astonished to open his mouth. If a thunderbolt had fallen unexpectedly at
his feet, he could not have testified greater surprise. He had thought that
Hawkins was so foolishly fond of his son that he could not bear to trust him
out of his presence, but had never in the slightest degree suspected what he
now found to be the truth.

Oh, oh, you are a gentleman, are you? A pretty gentleman truly! Your father
was a clergyman! Your family is too good to enter into my service! Why, you
impudent rascal! was it for this that I took you up, when Mr. Underwood
dismissed you for your insolence to him? Have I been nursing a viper in my
bosom? Pretty master's manners will be contaminated truly! He will not know
what is due to him, but will be accustomed to obey orders! You insufferable
villain! Get out of my sight! Depend upon it, I will have no gentlemen on my
estate! I will off with them, root and branch, bag and baggage! So, do you
hear, sir? come to me tomorrow morning, bring your son, and ask my pardon; or
take my word for it, I will make you so miserable, you shall wish you had never
been born

This treatment was too much for Hawkins's patience. There is no need, your
honor, that I should come to you again about this affair. I have taken up my
determination, and no accident or time can make any change in it. I am main
sorry to displease your worship, and I know very well that you can do me a
great deal of mischief. But I hope you will not be so hard hearted, as to ruin
a father only for being fond of his child, even if so be that his fondness
should make him do a foolish thing. But I cannot help it, your honor: you must
do as you please. The poorest slave in the world has some point that he does
not part with. I will lose all that I have, and go to day-labour, and my son
too, if needs must; but I will not make a gentleman's servant of him.

Very well, friend; very well! replied Tyrrel, foaming with rage. Depend upon
it, I will remember you! Your pride shall have a downfall! G -- damn it! is it
come to this? Shall a lousy rascal, that farms his forty acres, pretend to
beard the lord of the manor? I will tread you into paste! Let me advise you,
scoundrel, to shut up your house, and quit my estate, and fly as if the devil
was behind you! You may think yourself happy, if I be not too quick for you
yet, if you escape in a whole skin! I would not suffer such a villain to remain
upon my land a day longer, if I could gain the Indies by it!

Not so fast, your honor, answered Hawkins sturdily. I hope you will think
better of it, and see that I have not been to blame. But, if you should not,
there is some harm that you can do me, and some harm that you cannot. Though I
am a plain working man, your honor, do you see? yet I am a man still. No; I
have got a lease of my farm, and I shall not quit it o'thaten. I hope there is
some law for poor folk, as well as for rich ones.

Mr. Tyrrel, unused to contradiction, was provoked beyond bearing at the
courage and independent spirit of his retainer. There was not a tenant upon his
estate, or at least not one of Hawkins's mediocrity of fortune, whom the
general policy of land-owners, and still more the arbitrary and uncontrollable
temper of Mr. Tyrrel, did not effectually restrain from acts of open defiance.

Excellent, upon my soul! G -- damn my blood! but you are a rare fellow. You
have a lease, have you? You will not quit, not you! A pretty pass things are
come to, if a lease can protect such fellows as you against the lord of a
manor! But you are for a trial of skill, are you? Oh, very well, friend, very
well! With all my soul! Since it is come to that, we will show you some pretty
sport before we have done! But get you out of my sight, you rascal! I have not
another word to say to you! Never darken my doors again!

Hawkins, to borrow the language of the world, was guilty in this affair of a
double imprudence. He talked to his landlord in a more peremptory manner than
the constitution and practices of this country allow a dependent to assume. But
above all, having been thus hurried away by his resentment, he ought to have
foreseen the consequences. It was mere madness in him to think of contesting
with a man of Mr. Tyrrel's eminence and fortune. It was a fawn contending with
a lion. Nothing could have been more easy to predict, than that it was of no
avail for him to have right on his side, when his adversary had influence and
wealth, and therefore could so victoriously justify any extravagancies that he
might think proper to commit. This maxim was completely illustrated in the
sequel. Wealth and despotism easily know how to engage those laws, which were
perhaps at first intended [witless and miserable precaution!] for the
safeguards of the poor, as the coadjutors of their oppression.

From this moment Mr. Tyrrel was bent upon Hawkins's destruction; and he left
no means unemployed that could either harass or injure the object of his
persecution. He deprived him of his appointment of bailiff, and directed Barnes
and his other dependents to do him ill offices upon all occasions. Mr. Tyrrel
by the tenure of his manor was impropriator of the great tithes, and this
circumstance afforded him frequent opportunities of petty altercation. The land
of one part of Hawkins's farm, though covered with corn, was lower than the
rest; and consequently exposed to occasional inundations from a river by which
it was bounded. Mr. Tyrrel had a dam belonging to this river privately cut
about a fortnight before the season of harvest, and laid the whole under water.
He ordered his servants to pull away the fences of the higher ground during the
night, and to turn in his cattle to the utter destruction of the crop. These
expedients however applied to only one part of the property of this unfortunate
man. But Mr. Tyrrel did not stop here. A sudden mortality took place among
Hawkins's live stock, attended with very suspicious circumstances. Hawkins's
vigilance was strongly excited by this event, and he at length succeeded in
tracing the matter so accurately that he conceived he could bring it home to
Mr. Tyrrel himself.

Hawkins had hitherto carefully avoided, notwithstanding the injuries he had
suffered, attempting to right himself by a legal process, being of opinion that
law was better adapted for a weapon of tyranny in the hands of the rich, than
for a shield to protect the humbler part of the community against their
usurpations. In this last instance however he conceived that the offense was so
atrocious as to make it impossible that any rank could protect the culprit
against the severity of justice. In the sequel he saw reason to applaud himself
for his former inactivity in this respect, and to repent that any motive had
been strong enough to persuade him into a contrary system.

This was the very point to which Mr. Tyrrel wanted to bring him, and he could
scarcely credit his good fortune, when he was told that Hawkins had entered an
action. His congratulation upon this occasion was immoderate, as he now
conceived that the ruin of his late favorite was irretrievable. He consulted
his attorney, and urged him by every motive he could devise to employ the whole
series of his subterfuges in the present affair. The direct repelling of the
charge exhibited against him was the least part of his care; the business was,
by affidavits, motions, pleas, demurrers, flaws and appeals, to protract the
question from term to term and from court to court. It would, as Mr. Tyrrel
argued, be the disgrace of a civilized country, if a gentleman, when insolently
attacked in law by the scum of the earth, could not convert the cause into a
question of the longest purse, and stick in the skirts of his adversary till he
had reduced him to beggary.

Mr. Tyrrel however was by no means so far engrossed by his lawsuit, as to
neglect other methods of proceeding offensively against his tenant. Among the
various expedients that suggested themselves there was one, which, though it
tended rather to torment than irreparably injure the sufferer, was not
rejected. This was derived from the particular situation of Hawkins's house,
barns, stacks and outhouses. These were placed at the extremity of a strip of
land connecting them with the rest of the farm, and were surrounded on three
sides by fields in the occupation of one of Mr Tyrrel's tenants most devoted to
the pleasures of the landlord. The road to the market town ran at the bottom of
the largest of these fields, and was directly in view of the front of the
house. No inconvenience had yet arisen from that circumstance, as there had
been a broad path time out of mind, that intersected this field, and led
directly from Hawkins's house to the road. This path, or private road, was now
by concert of Mr. Tyrrel and his obliging tenant shut up, so as to make Hawkins
a sort of prisoner in his own domains, and oblige him to go near a mile about
for the purposes of his traffic.

Young Hawkins, the lad who had been the original subject of dispute between
his father and the squire, had much of his father's spirit, and felt an
uncontrollable indignation against the successive acts of despotism of which he
was a witness. His resentment of them was the greater, because the sufferings
to which his parent was exposed, all of them, flowed from affection to him, at
the same time that he could not propose removing the ground of dispute, as by
so doing he would seem to fly in the face of his father's paternal kindness.
Upon the present occasion, without asking any counsel but of his own impatient
resentment, he went in the middle of the night and removed all the obstructions
that had been placed in the way of the old path, broke the padlocks that had
been fixed, and threw open the gates. In these operations he did not proceed
unobserved, and the next day a warrant was issued for apprehending him. He was
accordingly carried before a bench of justices, and by them committed to the
county jail, to take his trial for the burglary at the next assizes.

This was the finishing stroke to Hawkins's miseries: as he was not deficient
in courage, he had stood up against his other persecutions without flinching.
He was not unaware of the advantages which our laws and customs give to the
rich over the poor in contentions of this kind. But, being once involved, there
was a stubbornness in his nature that would not allow him to retract, and he
suffered himself to hope rather than expect a favorable issue. But in this
last event he was wounded in the point that was nearest his heart. He had
feared to have his son contaminated and debased by a servile station, and he
now saw him transferred to the seminary of a jail. He was even uncertain as to
the issue of his imprisonment, and trembled to think what the tyranny of wealth
might effect to blast his hopes for ever.

From this moment his heart died within him. He had trusted to persevering
industry and skill to save the wreck of his little property from the vulgar
spite of his landlord. But he had now no longer any spirit to exert those
efforts which his situation more than ever required. Mr. Tyrrel proceeded
without remission in his machinations; Hawkins's affairs every day grew more
desperate; and the squire, watching the occasion, took the earliest opportunity
of seizing upon his remaining property in the mode of a distress for rent.

It was precisely in this stage of the affair that Mr. Falkland and Mr. Tyrrel
accidentally met in a private road near the habitation of the latter. They were
on horseback, and Mr. Falkland was going to the house of the unfortunate tenant
who seemed upon the point of perishing under his landlord's malice. He had been
just made acquainted with the tale of this persecution. It had indeed been an
additional aggravation of Hawkins's calamity that Mr. Falkland, whose
interference might otherwise have saved him, had been absent from the
neighborhood for a considerable time. He had been three months in London, and
from thence had gone to visit his estates in another part of the island. The
proud and self-confident spirit of this poor fellow always disposed him to
depend as long as possible upon his own exertions. He had avoided applying to
Mr. Falkland, or indeed indulging himself in any manner in communicating and
bewailing his hard hap, in the beginning of the contention; and, when the
extremity grew more urgent, and he would have been willing to recede in some
degree from the stubbornness of his measures, he found it no longer in his
power. After an absence of considerable duration Mr. Falkland at length
returned somewhat unexpectedly; and, having learned among the first articles of
country intelligence the distresses of this unfortunate yeoman, ^e resolved to
ride over to his house the next morning, and surprise him with all the relief
it was in his power to bestow.

At sight of Mr. Tyrrel in this unexpected rencounter, his face reddened with
indignation. His first feeling, as he afterward said, was to avoid him; but,
finding that he must pass him, he conceived that it would be a want of spirit
and desertion of duty not to acquaint him with his feelings on the present
occasion.

Mr. Tyrrel, said he somewhat abruptly, I am sorry for a piece of news which it
has just been my fortune to hear.

Well, sir, and what is that? What have I to do with your sorrow?

A great deal, sir. It is caused by the distresses of a poor tenant of yours,
Hawkins. If your steward have proceeded without your authority, I think it
right to inform you of what he has done; and, if he has had your authority, I
would gladly persuade you to think better of it.

Mr. Falkland, it would be quite as well if you would mind your own business,
and leave me to mind mine. I want no monitor, and I will have none.

You mistake, Mr. Tyrrel; I am minding my own business. If I see you fall into
a pit, it is my business to draw you out, and save your life. If I see you
pursuing a wrong line of conduct, it is my business to set you right and save
your honor.

Zounds, sir, do not think to put any of your conundrums upon me! Is not the
man my tenant? Is not my estate my own? What signifies calling it mine, if I am
not to have the direction of it? Sir, I pay for what I have; I owe no man a
penny; and I will not put my estate to nurse to you, nor the best he that wears
a head.

Mr. Tyrrel, I do not dispute your authority; I do not desire to dictate to
you; I simply wish to do you a good office.

Do not desire to dictate! no, nor you shall not, sir. How dare you attempt to
stop me upon the king's highway!

Sir, I know that you bear me no good will. I am but an ill mediator in this
case, and should not have sought you. But, thus thrust by accident in your way,
I must have leave to tell you my thoughts.

True, sir, I hate you. And what I hate you most for is this damned
impertinence of pretending to be wiser than every body else. Is not this a free
country, and may not every body do as he likes?

Mr. Tyrrel, I know your humor, and will bear as much as I can. What do you
mean, sir, by a free country? I put no compulsion upon you. There is room
enough; ride by me, if you please! Sir, I defy you not to hear me, while I tell
you coolly and firmly, you are greatly to blame, and must change your mode of
proceeding!

This is very extraordinary usage! Sir, I am not to blame. You know nothing
about the matter. Do you think I will let a paltry fellow like this Hawkins
insult me for nothing? Damn my soul, if I will not have the heart's blood of
him!

It is very true, Mr. Tyrrel, that there is a distinction of ranks. I believe
that distinction to be a good thing. But, however necessary it may be, we must
acknowledge that it puts some hardships upon the lower orders of society. It
makes one's heart ache to think that one man is born to the inheritance of
every superfluity, while the whole share of another, without any demerit of
his, is drudgery and starving; and that all this is indispensable. We that are
rich, Mr. Tyrrel, must do every thing in our power to lighten the yoke of these
unfortunate people. We must not use the advantage that accident has given us,
with an unmerciful hand. Poor wretches! they are pressed almost beyond bearing
as it is; and if we unfeelingly give another turn to the machine, they will be
crushed into atoms.

This picture was not without its effect even upon the obdurate mind of Mr.
Tyrrel. -- Well, sir, I am no tyrant. I know very well that tyranny is a bad
thing. But you do not infer from thence that these people are to do as they
please, and never to meet with their deserts?

Mr. Tyrrel, I see that you are shaken in your animosity. Suffer me to hail the
newborn benevolence of your nature. Go with me to Hawkins. Do not let us talk
of his deserts! poor fellow! he has suffered almost all that human nature can
endure. Let your forgiveness upon this occasion be the earnest of good
neighborhood and friendship between you and me.

No, sir, I will not go. I own there is something in what you say. I always
knew you had the wit to make good your own story, and tell a plausible tale.
But I will not be come over thus. It has always been my character, when I had
once conceived a scheme of vengeance never to forego it; and I will not change
that character. I took up Hawkins when every body forsook him, and made a man
of him; and the ungrateful rascal has only insulted me for my pains. Curse me,
if ever I forgive him! It would be a good jest indeed, if I were to forgive the
insolence of my own creature, at the desire of a man like you that has been my
perpetual plague.

For God's sake, Mr. Tyrrel, have some reason in your resentment! Let us
suppose that Hawkins has behaved unjustifiably, and insulted you. Is that an
offense that can never be expiated? Must the father be ruined, and the son
hanged, to glut your resentment?

Damn me, sir, but you may talk your heart out; you shall get nothing of me. I
shall never forgive myself for having listened to you for a moment. I will
suffer nobody to stop the stream of my resentment; if I ever were to forgive
him, it should be at nobody's entreaty but my own. But, sir, I never will. If
he and all his family were at my feet, I would order them all to be hanged the
next minute, if my power were as good as my will.

Very well, sir, I have done. I have only to tell you beforehand that such
tyranny as yours will make you the universal abhorrence of mankind. You may
hug yourself in your wealth and impunity, but be sure the genuine sense of the
world will pierce through all your intrenchments, and fully avenge those for
whose blood you so cruelly thirst. Good day to you.

Such was the conference of Mr. Falkland and Mr. Tyrrel respecting this odious
transaction. In one part it seemed to promise a more favorable issue. But the
rooted depravity of the one, and perhaps the haughty impatience of the other,
soon put an end to this agreeable prospect. For Mr. Tyrrel, the aversion he
entertained for his accomplished neighbor hourly increased. It seemed as if,
the more incontestibly his excellencies displayed themselves, the more bitter
and inexpiable was the abhorrence he conceived for him. Having set out with
contempt, and persuaded himself of the unpardonable injustice of those by whom
Mr. Falkland was esteemed, he was probably anxious to exclude the evidence of
his worth; and, as that evidence went on to increase, the struggle became more
painful, and the situation more excruciating. In this respect the state of Mr.
Tyrrel's mind was perhaps peculiarly critical; and, if we should allow
ourselves to judge from the appearances exhibited in the present case, we
should be apt to lay it down as a sort of general maxim, that the greatest
criminal, when he perpetrates the most atrocious act, is upon the very eve of
yielding to the energy of truth, and relinquishing for ever his odious designs.

Mr. Falkland departed from this conference with a confirmed disapprobation of
the conduct of his neighbor, and an unalterable resolution to do every thing
in his power to relieve the distresses of Hawkins. But he was too late. When he
arrived, he found the house already evacuated by its master. The family was
removed nobody knew whither; Hawkins was absconded; and, what was still more
extraordinary, the boy Hawkins had escaped on the very same day from the county
jail. The enquiries Mr. Falkland set on foot after them were fruitless; no
traces could be found of the catastrophe of these unhappy people. That
catastrophe I shall have occasion shortly to relate; and it will be found
pregnant with horror, beyond what the blackest misanthropy could readily have
suggested.

I go on with my tale. I go on to relate those incidents in which my own fate
was so mysteriously involved. The temper of Mr. Tyrrel, soured with perpetual
disappointment, became every day more peevish, arrogant and morose. The reader
has seen what it was in the commencement. But every thing has its limits beyond
which it can augment no farther. I lift the curtain, and bring forward the last
act of the tragedy.

CHAP. VII.
THE vices of Mr. Tyrrel, in their present state of augmentation, were
peculiarly exercised upon his domestics and dependents. But the principal
sufferer was Miss Emily Melvile, the orphan daughter of his father's sister.
Miss Melvile's mother had married unfortunately, or rather imprudently, against
the consent of her relations, all of whom had agreed to withdraw their
countenance from her in consequence of that precipitate step. Her husband had
turned out to be no better than an adventurer; had spent her fortune, which in
consequence of the irreconcilableness of her family was less than he expected,
and broken her heart. Her infant daughter was left without any resource upon
the wide world. In this situation the representations of the people with whom
she happened to be placed prevailed upon Mrs. Tyrrel, the mother of the squire,
to receive her into her family. In equity perhaps she was entitled to that
portion of fortune which her mother had for^eited by her imprudence, and which
had gone to swell the property of the male representative. But this idea had
never entered into the conceptions of either mother or son. Mrs. Tyrrel
conceived that she performed an act of the most exalted benevolence in
admitting Miss Emily into a sort of amphibious situation, which was neither
precisely that of a domestic, nor yet marked with the treatment that might seem
due to one of the family.

She had not however at first been sensible of all the mortifications that
might have been expected from her condition. Mrs. Tyrrel, though proud and
imperious, was not ill-natured. The female, who lived in the family in the
capacity of housekeeper, was a person who had seen better days, and whose
disposition was extremely upright and amiable. She early contracted a
friendship for the little Emily, who was indeed for the most part committed to
her care. Emily on her side fully repaid the affection of her instructress, and
learned with great docility the little accomplishments Mrs. Jakeman was able to
communicate. But most of all she imbibed her cheerful and artless temper, that
extracted the agreeable and encouraging from all events, and prompted her to
communicate her sentiments, which were never of the cynical cast, without
modification or disguise. Beside the advantages Emily derived from Mrs.
Jakeman, she was permitted to take lessons from the masters who came to Tyrrel
Place for the instruction of her cousin; and, indeed, as the young gentleman
was most frequently indisposed to attend to them, they would commonly have had
nothing to do, had it not been for the fortunate presence of Miss Melvile. Mrs.
Tyrrel therefore encouraged the studies of Emily on that score; in addition to
which she imagined that this living exhibition of instruction might operate as
an indirect allurement to her darling Barnabas, the only species of motive she
would suffer to be presented.

Emily, as she grew up, displayed an uncommon degree of sensibility, which
under her circumstances would have been a source of perpetual dissatisfaction,
had it not been qualified with an extreme sweetness and easiness of temper. She
was far from being entitled to the appellation of a beauty. Her person was
petite and trivial; her complexion favored of the brunette; and her face was
marked with the small pox, sufficiently to destroy its evenness and polish,
though not enough to annihilate its expression. But, though her appearance was
not beautiful, it did not fail to be in a high degree engaging. Her complexion
was at once healthful and delicate; her long dark eyebrows adapted themselves
with facility to the various conceptions of her mind; and her looks bore the
united impression of an active discernment and a good-humoured frankness. The
instruction she had received, as it was entirely of a casual nature, exempted
her from the evils of untutored ignorance, but not from a sort of native
wildness, arguing a mind incapable of guile itself, or of suspecting it in
others. She amused, without seeming conscious of the refined sense which her
observations contained: or rather having never been debauched with applause,
she set light by her own qualifications; and talked from the pure gaiety of a
youthful heart acting upon the stores of a just understanding, and not with any
expectation of being distinguished and admired.

The death of her aunt made very little change in her situation. This prudent
lady, who would have thought it little less than sacrilege to have considered
miss Melvile as a branch of the stock of the Tyrrels, took no other notice of
her in her will, than barely putting her down for a hundred pounds in a
catalogue of legacies to her servants. She had never been admitted into the
intimacy and confidence of Mrs. Tyrrel; and the young squire, now that she was
left under his sole protection, seemed inclined to treat her with even more
liberality than his mother had done. He had seen her grow up under his eye, and
therefore, though there were but six years difference between their ages, he
felt a kind of paternal interest in her welfare. Habit had rendered her in a
manner necessary to him, and in every recess from the occupations of the field
and the pleasures of the table, he found himself solitary and forlorn without
the society of miss Melvile. Nearness of kindred and Emily's want of personal
beauty prevented him from ever looking on her with the eyes of desire. Her
accomplishments were chiefly of the customary and superficial kind, dancing and
music. Her skill in the first led him sometimes to indulge her with a vacant
corner in his carriage when he went to the neighboring assembly; and, in
whatever light he might himself think proper to regard her, he would have
imagined his chambermaid, introduced by him, entitled to an undoubted place in
the most splendid circle. Her musical talents were frequently employed for his
amusement. She had the honor occasionally of playing him to sleep after the
fatigues of the chase; and as he had some relish for harmonious sounds, she was
frequently able to soothe him by their means from the perturbations of which
his gloomy disposition was so eminently a slave. Upon the whole she might be
considered as in some sort his favorite. She was the mediator to whom his
tenants and domestics, when they had incurred his displeasure, were accustomed
to apply; the privileged companion that could handle this lion with impunity in
the midst of his roarings. She spoke to him without fear; her solicitations
were always good-natured and disinterested; and when he repulsed her, he
disarmed himself of half his terrors, and was contented to smile at her
presumption.

Such had been for some years the situation of Miss Melvile. Its precariousness
had been beguiled, by the cheerfulness of her own temper, and the uncommon
forbearance with which she was treated by her savage protector. But his
disposition, always brutal, had acquired a new degree of ferocity since the
settlement of Mr. Falkland in his neighborhood. He occasionally forgot the
gentleness with which he had been accustomed to treat his good-natured cousin.
Her little playful arts were not always successful in softening his rage; and
he would sometimes turn upon her blandishment with an impatient sternness that
made her tremble. The careless ease of her disposition however soon effaced
these impressions, and she fell without variation into her old habits.

A circumstance occurred about this time which put an end to the felicity, that
miss Melvile in spite of the frowns of fortune had hitherto enjoyed. Emily was
exactly seventeen when Mr. Falkland returned from the Continent. At this age
she was peculiarly susceptible of the charms of beauty, grace and moral
excellence, when united in a person of the other sex. She was imprudent,
precisely because her own heart was incapable of guile. She had never yet felt
the sting of the poverty to which she was condemned, and had not reflected on
the insuperable distance that fortune has placed between the opulent and the
poorer classes of the community. She beheld Mr. Falkland, whenever he was
thrown in her way at any of the public meetings with admiration; and, without
having precisely explained to herself the sentiments she indulged, her eyes
followed him through all the changes of the scene with eagerness and
impatience. She did not see him, as the rest of the assembly did, born to one
of the amplest estates in the county, and qualified to assert his title to the
richest heiress. She thought only of Falkland, with those advantages which were
most intimately his own, and of which no persecution of adverse fortune had the
ability to deprive him. In a word she was transported when he was present; he
was the perpetual subject of her reveries and her dreams; but his image excited
no sentiment in her mind beyond that of the immediate pleasure annexed to the
idea.

The notice Mr. Falkland had taken of her in return appeared sufficiently
encouraging to a mind so full of prepossession as that of Emily. There was a
particular complacency in his looks when directed toward her. He had said in a
company, of which one of the persons present repeated his remarks to Miss
Melvile, that she appeared to him amiable and interesting, that he felt for her
unprovided and destitute situation, and that he should have been glad to be
more particular in his notice of her, had he not been apprehensive of doing her
a prejudice in the suspicious mind of Mr. Tyrrel. All this she treated as the
ravishing condescension of a superior nature; for, if she did not recollect
with sufficient assiduity his gifts of fortune, she was on the other hand
filled with reverence for his unrivalled accomplishments. But, while she thus
seemingly disclaimed all comparison between Mr. Falkland and herself, she
probably cherished a confused idea that some event was yet in the womb of fate
which might reconcile things apparently the most incompatible. Fraught with
these prepossessions, the civilities that had once or twice occurred in the
bustle of a public circle, the restoring her fan which she had dropped, or the
discommoding her of an empty tea-cup, made her heart palpitate, and gave birth
to the wildest chimeras in her deluded imagination.

About this time an event happened that helped to give a precise determination
to the fluctuations of Miss Melvile's mind. One evening, a short time after the
death of Mr. Clare, Mr. Falkland had been to the house of his deceased friend
in his quality of executor, and by some accidents of little intrinsic
importance had been detained three or four hours later than he intended. He did
not set out upon his return till two o'clock in the morning. At this time, in a
situation so remote from the metropolis, every thing is as silent as it would
be in a region wholly uninhabited. The moon shone bright, and the objects
around, being marked with strong variations of light and shade at the same time
that they were not distinctly seen, gave a kind of sacred solemnity to the
scene. Mr. Falkland had taken Collins with him, the business to be settled at
Mr. Clare's being in some respects similar to that to which this faithful
domestic had been accustomed in the routine of his ordinary service. They had
entered into some conversation, for Mr. Falkland was not then in the habit of
obliging the persons about him by formality and reserve to recollect who he
was. The attractions of the scene made them break off the talk somewhat
abruptly, that they might enjoy it without interruption. They had not rode far,
before a hollow wind seemed to rise at a distance, and they could hear the
hoarse roarings of the sea. Presently the sky on one side assumed the
appearance of a reddish brown, and a sudden angle in the road placed this
phenomenon directly before them. As they proceeded it became more distinct, and
it was at length sufficiently visible that it was occasioned by a fire. Mr.
Falkland put spurs to his horse; and, as they approached, the object presented
every instant a more tremendous appearance. The flames ascended with
fierceness; they embraced a large portion of the horizon; and, as they carried
up along with them numerous little fragments of the materials that fed them,
impregnated with fire, and of an extremely bright and luminous color, they
presented no inadequate image of the eruption of a volcano.

The flames proceeded from a village directly in their road. There were eight
or ten houses already on fire, and the whole seemed to be threatened with
immediate destruction. The inhabitants were in the utmost consternation, having
had no previous experience of a similar calamity. They conveyed with haste
their movables and furniture into the adjoining fields, the whole surface of
which was heated to an uncommon degree. When any of them had effected this as
far as it could be attempted with safety, they were unable to conceive any
farther remedy, but stood wringing their hands and contemplating the ravages of
the fire in an agony of powerless despair. The water that could be procured in
any mode practiced in that place, was but as a drop contending with a whole
element in arms. The wind in the mean time was rising, and the flames spread
with more and more rapidity.

Mr. Falkland contemplated this scene for a few minutes, as if ruminating with
himself as to what could be done. He then directed some of the country people
about him to pull down a house, next to one that was wholly on fire, but which
itself was not yet touched. They seemed astonished at a direction which implied
a voluntary destruction of property, and considered the task as too much in the
heart of the danger to be undertaken. Observing that they were motionless, he
dismounted from his horse, and called upon them in an authoritative voice to
follow him. He ascended the house in an instant, and presently appeared upon
the top of it as if in the midst of the flames. Having, with the assistance of
two or three of the persons that followed him most closely, and who by this
time had supplied themselves with whatever tools came next to hand, loosened
the support of a stack of chimnies, he pushed them headlong into the midst of
the fire. He passed and repassed along the roof; and, having set people to work
on all parts, descended in order to see what could be done in any other quarter.

At this moment an elderly woman burst from the midst of a house in flames. The
utmost consternation was painted in her looks; and, as soon as she could
recollect herself enough to have a proper idea of her situation, the subject of
her anxiety seemed in an instant to be totally changed. Where is my child?
cried she, and cast an anxious and piercing look among the surrounding crowd.
Oh, she is lost! she is in the midst of the flames! Save her! save her! my
child! She filled the air with heart-rending shrieks. She turned toward the
house. The people that were near endeavored to prevent her, but she shook them
off in a moment. She entered the passage; viewed the hideous ruin; and was then
going to plunge into the blazing staircase. Mr. Falkland seized her arm; it was
Mrs. Jakeman. Stop! he cried, with a voice that seemed more than human. Stay
you here! I will seek, I will save her! He charged the attendants to detain
Mrs. Jakeman; he enquired which was the apartment of Emily. Mrs. Jakeman was
upon a visit to a sister who lived in the village, and had brought Emily along
with her. Mr. Falkland ascended a neighboring house; entered that in which
Emily was, by a window in the roof; and in two minutes re-appeared with his
lovely burden in his arms. Having restored her to her affectionate protector
snatched from the immediate grasp of death, from which, if he had not, none
would have delivered her, he returned to his former task. By his presence of
mind, by his indefatigable humanity and incessant exertions, he saved
three-fourths of the village from destruction. The conflagration being at
length abated, he sought again Mrs. Jakeman and Emily. He displayed the
tenderest solicitude for the young lady's safety, and directed Collins to go
with as much speed as he could, and send his chariot to attend her. More than
an hour elapsed in this interval. Miss Melvile had never seen so much of Mr.
Falkland upon any former occasion, and the spectacle of such humanity,
delicacy, firmness and justice in the form of man, as he crowded into this
small space, was both altogether new to her, and in the highest degree
fascinating.

Emily no sooner arrived at the family mansion, than Mr. Tyrrel ran out to
receive her. He had just heard of the melancholy accident that had taken place
at the village, and was terrified for the safety of his good-humoured cousin.
He displayed those unpremeditated emotions which are common to almost every
individual of the human race. He was greatly shocked at the suspicion that
Emily might possibly have become the victim of a catastrophe which had thus
broken out in the very dead of night. His sensations were of the most pleasing
sort, when he folded her in his arms, and fearful apprehension was
instantaneously converted into joyous certainty. Emily no sooner entered the
well-known roof, than she forgot all she had suffered; her spirits were brisk,
and her tongue incessant in describing her danger and her deliverance. Mr.
Tyrrel had formerly been tortured with the innocent eulogiums she pronounced of
Mr. Falkland. But these were tameness itself, compared with the rich and
various eloquence that now flowed from her lips. She described his activity and
his resources, the promptitude with which every thing was conceived, and the
cautious, but daring wisdom with which it was executed. All was fairy-land and
enchantment in the tenor of her artless tale; you saw a beneficent genius
surveying and controuling the whole, but could have no notion of any human
means by which his purposes were effected.

Mr. Tyrrel listened for a while to these innocent effusions with patience; he
could even bear to hear the man applauded by whom he had just obtained so
considerable a benefit. But the theme by amplification became nauseous, and he
was at length obliged with some roughness to put an end to the tale. Probably
upon recollection it appeared still more insolent and intolerable than while it
was passing; the sensation of gratitude wore off, but the hyperbolical praise
that had been bestowed still haunted his memory, and sounded in his ear: Emily
seemed to have entered into the confederacy that disturbed his repose. As for
the young lady herself, she was wholly unconscious of the offense that had been
given, and upon every occasion quoted Mr. Falkland as the model of elegant
manners and true wisdom. She was a total stranger to dissimulation; and she
could not conceive that any body beheld the object of her admiration with less
partiality than her inexperienced heart had entertained. Meanwhile her artless
love became more fervent than ever. She flattered herself that nothing less
than a reciprocal passion could have prompted Mr. Falkland to the desperate
attempt of saving her from the flames; and she trusted that this passion would
speedily burst the barriers of silence, as well as induce the object of her
affection to overlook her comparative unworthiness.

Mr. Tyrrel endeavored at first to check Miss Melvile in her applauses, and to
convince her by various tokens that the subject was disagreeable to him. Emily
was accustomed to yield implicit and unreluctant obedience, and therefore it
was not difficult to restrain her; but upon the very next occasion her
favorite topic would force its way to her lips. Her obedience was the
acquiescence of a frank and benevolent heart; but it was the most difficult
thing in the world to inspire her with fear. Conscious herself that she would
not hurt a worm, she could not conceive that any one would harbor cruelty and
rancour against her. Her temper preserved her from obstinate contention with
the persons under whose protection she was placed; and, as her compliance was
unhesitating, she had had no experience of a severe and rigorous treatment. As
Mr. Tyrrel's objection to the very name of Falkland became more palpable and
uniform, Miss Melvile increased in her precaution. She would stop herself in
the half-pronounced sentences that were meant to his praise. This circumstance
had necessarily an ungracious effect; it was a cutting satire upon the
imbecility of her kinsman. Upon these occasions she would sometimes venture
upon a good-humoured expostulation: Dear sir! well, I wonder how you can be so
ill-natured! I am sure Mr. Falkland would do you any good office in the world:
till she was checked by some gesture of impatience and fierceness.

At length she wholly conquered her heedlessness and inattention. But it was
now too late. Mr. Tyrrel already suspected the existence of that passion which
she had thoughtlessly imbibed. His imagination, ingenious in torment, suggested
to him all the different openings in conversation in which she would have
introduced the praise of Mr. Falkland, had she not been placed under this
unnatural restraint. Her present reserve upon the subject was more insufferable
than even her former loquacity. All his kindness for this unhappy orphan
gradually subsided. Her partiality for the man who of all others was most the
object of his hatred, appeared to him as the last persecution of a malicious
destiny. He figured himself as about to be deserted by every creature in human
form, all men under the influence of a fatal enchantment approving only what
was sophisticated and artificial, and holding the rude and genuine offspring of
nature in mortal antipathy. Impressed with these gloomy presages, he saw miss
Melvile with no sentiments but those of rancorous abhorrence; and, accustomed
as he was to the uncontrouled indulgence of all his propensities, determined to
wreak upon her a signal revenge.

CHAP. VIII.
MR. TYRREL consulted his old confident respecting the plan he should pursue,
who on his part felt no compunction upon the subject, nor had any idea that an
insignificant girl, without either wealth or beauty, ought to be allowed for a
moment to stand in the way of the gratifications of a man of Mr. Tyrrel's
importance. The first idea of her now-unrelenting kinsman was to thrust her
from his doors, and leave her to seek her bread in the wide world. But he was
conscious that this proceeding would involve him in considerable obloquy; and
he at length fixed upon a scheme which, at the same time that he believed it
would sufficiently shelter his reputation, would much more certainly secure her
mortification and punishment.

For this purpose he fixed upon a young man of twenty, the son of one Grimes,
who occupied a small farm the property of his confident. This fellow he
resolved to impose as a husband on Miss Melvile, who he shrewdly suspected,
guided by the tender sentiments she had unfortunately conceived for Mr.
Falkland, would listen with reluctance to any matrimonial proposal. Grimes he
selected as being in all respects the diametrical reverse of Mr. Falkland. He
was not precisely a lad of vicious propensities, but in an inconceivable degree
boorish and uncouth. His complexion was scarcely human; his features were
coarse, and strangely discordant and disjointed from each other. His lips were
thick, and the tone of his voice broad and unmodulated. His legs were of equal
size from one end to the other, and his feet misshapen and clumsy. He had
nothing spiteful or malicious in his disposition, but he was a total stranger
to tenderness; he could not feel for those refinements in others, of which he
had no experience in himself. He was an expert boxer; his inclination led him
to such amusements as were most boisterous; and he delighted in a sort of
manual sarcasm, which he could not conceive to be very injurious, as it left no
traces behind it. His general manners were noisy and obstreperous; inattentive
to others; and obstinate and unyielding, not from any cruelty and ruggedness of
temper, but from an incapacity to conceive those finer feelings that make so
large a part of the history of persons who are cast in a gentler mould.

Such was the uncouth and half-civilised animal which the industrious malice of
Mr. Tyrrel fixed upon as most happily adapted to his purpose. Emily had
hitherto been in an unusual degree exempted from the oppression of despotism.
Her happy insignificance had served her as a protection. No one thought it
worth his while to fetter her with those numerous petty restrictions, with
which the daughters of opulence are commonly tormented. She had the wildness as
well as the delicate frame of the bird that warbles unmolested in its native
groves.

When therefore she heard from her kinsman the proposal of Mr. Grimes for a
husband, she was for a moment silent with astonishment at so unexpected a
suggestion. But, as soon as she recovered her speech, she replied: No, sir, I
thank you. Bless me! I do not want a husband: I am but a child.

You are a woman! Are not you always hankering after the men? It is high time
you should be settled.

Mr. Grimes is such a strange man. Why, I do not know what he is like! He is
like for all the world a great huge porpuss. No, I thank you! when I do have a
husband, it shall not be such a man as Grimes neither.

Be silent! How dare you give your tongue such unaccountable liberties?

Well, I wonder what I should do with him. Why, it is like as if you should
give me your great rough water-dog, and bid me make him a silk cushion to lie
on in my dressing room. Beside, sir, Grimes is a common laboring man, and I am
sure I have always heard my aunt say that ours is a very great family.

It is a lie. Our family! Have you the impudence to think yourself one of our
family?

Lord, sir! was not your grandpapa my grandpapa? And how then can we be of a
different family?

For a damned strong reason. You are the daughter of a rascally Scotchman, who
spent every shilling of my aunt Hannah's fortune, and left you a beggar. You
have got a hundred pounds, and Grimes's father promises to give him as much.
How dare you look down upon your equals?

Nay, now, sir, I am sure I am not proud. But indeed and indeed, sir, I can
never love Mr. Grimes. Dear, dear! he is more like a cart-horse than a husband.
I am very happy as I am. I love you, and I love Mrs. Jakeman: why should I be
married?

Cease your prating! Grimes will be here this afternoon. Look that you behave
well to him. If you do not, he will remember and repay when you least like it.

Now, I am sure, sir, you -- you are not in earnest?

Not in earnest! Damn me but we will see that. I can tell what you would be at.
You had rather be Mr. Falkland's miss, than the wife of a plain downright
yeoman. But I shall take care of you. -- Aye, this comes of indulgence. You
must be taken down, miss. You must be taught the difference between high-flown
notions and realities. Mayhap you may take it a little in dudgeon or so. But
never mind that. Pride always wants a little smarting. If you should be brought
to shame, it is I that shall bear all the blame of it.

The tone in which Mr. Tyrrel spoke was so different from any thing to which
Miss Melvile had been accustomed, that she felt herself wholly unable to
determine what construction to put upon it. Sometimes she thought he had really
formed a plan for imposing upon her a condition, that she could not bear so
much as to think of. But presently she rejected this idea as an unworthy
imputation upon her kinsman, and concluded that it was only his way, and that
all he meant was to try her. To be resolved however she determined to consult
her constant adviser, Mrs. Jakeman, and accordingly repeated to her what had
passed. Mrs. Jakeman saw the whole in a very different light from that in which
Emily had conceived it, and trembled for the future peace of her beloved ward.

Lord bless me, my dear mamma! cried Emily, (this was the appellation she
delighted to bestow upon the good housekeeper) sure you cannot think so. But I
do not care. I will never marry Grimes let them do as they will.

But how will you help yourself? My master will oblige you.

Nay, now you think you are talking to a child indeed. It is I am to have the
man, not Mr. Tyrrel. Do you think I will let any body else choose a husband for
me? I am not such a fool as that neither.

Ah, Emily! you little know the disadvantages of your situation. Your cousin is
a violent man, and perhaps will turn you out of doors, if you oppose him.

Oh, mamma, it is very wicked of you to say so. I am sure Mr. Tyrrel is a very
good man, though he be a little cross now and then. He knows very well that I
am right to have a will of my own in such a thing as this, and nobody is
punished for doing what is right.

Nobody ought, my dear child. But there are very wicked and tyrannical men in
the world.

Well, well, I will never believe that my cousin is one of those.

I hope he is not.

And, if he were, what then? To be sure I should be very sorry to make him
angry.

What then? Why then my poor, dear Emily would be a beggar. Do you think I
could bear to see that?

No, no. Mr. Tyrrel has just told me that I have a hundred pounds. But, if I
had no fortune at all, is not that the case with a thousand other folks? Why
should I grieve, for what they ^ear and are merry? Do not make yourself uneasy,
mamma. I am determined that I will do any thing rather than marry Grimes
however; that is what I will.

Mrs. Jakeman could not bear the uneasy state of suspense in which this
conversation left her mind, and went immediately to the squire to have her
doubts resolved. The manner in which she proposed the question sufficiently
indicated the judgment she had formed of the match in question.

That is true, said Mr. Tyrrel, I wanted to speak to you about this affair. The
girl has got unaccountable notions in her head, that will be the ruin of her.
You perhaps can tell where she had them. But, be that as it may, it is high
time something should be done. The shortest way is the best, and to keep things
well while they are well. In short, I am determined she shall marry this lad:
you do not know any harm of him, do you? You have a good deal of influence with
her, and I desire, do you see! that you will employ it to lead her to her good:
you had best, I can tell you. She is a pert vixen! By and by she would be a
whore, and at last no better than a common trull, and rot upon a dunghill, if I
were not at all these pains to save her from destruction. I would make her an
honest farmer's wife, and my pretty miss cannot bear the thoughts of it!

In the afternoon Grimes came according to appointment, and was left alone with
the young lady. Well, miss, said he, it seems the squire has a mind to make us
man and wife. For my part, I cannot say I should have thought of it. But, being
as how the squire has broke the ice, if so be as you like of the match, why I
am your man. Say the word; a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse; and
then, do you see, why there is no more to be said.

Emily was already sufficiently mortified at the unexpected proposal of Mr.
Tyrrel. She was confounded at the novelty of the situation, and still more at
the uncultivated rudeness of her lover, which even exceeded her expectation.
This confusion was interpreted by Grimes into diffidence.

Come, come, never be cast down. Put a good face upon it. What though? My first
sweetheart was Bet Butterfield, but what of that? What must be must be; grief
will never fill the belly. She was a ^ine strapping wench, that is the truth of
it! Five foot ten inches, and as stout as a trooper. Oh, she would do a power
of work! Up early and down late; milked ten cows with her own hands; on with
her cardinal, rode to market between her panniers, fair weather and foul, hail,
blow or snow. It would have done your heart good to have seen her frost-bitten
cheeks, as red as a beefen from her own orchard! Ah, she was a maid of mettle;
would romp with the harvest men, slap one upon the back, wrestle with another,
and had a rogue's trick and a joke for all round. Poor girl! she broke her neck
down stairs at a christening. To be sure I shall never meet with her fellow!
But never you mind that! I do not doubt that I shall find more in you upon
farther acquaintance. As coy and bashful as you seem, I dare say you are rogue
enough at bottom. When I have touzled and rumpled you a little, we shall see. I
am no chicken, miss, whatever you may think me. I know what is what, and can
see as far into a millstone as another. Ay* ay; you will come to. The fish will
snap at the bait, never doubt it. Yes, yes, we shall rub on main well together.

Emily by this time had in some degree mustered up her spirits, and began,
though with hesitation, to thank Mr. Grimes for his good opinion, but to
confess that she could never be brought to favor his addresses. She therefore
entreated him to desist from all farther application. This remonstrance on her
part would have become more intelligible, had (...) not been for his boisterous
manners and extravagant cheerfulness, which indisposed him (...) made him
suppose that at half a word he had a sufficient intimation of another's
meaning. Mr. Tyrrel (...) the mean time took care to interrupt the scene before
they could have time to proceed far in explanation, and was studious in the
sequel to prevent the young folks from being too intimately acquainted with
each other's inclinations. Grimes of consequence attributed all the reluctance
of miss Melvile to maiden coyness, and the skittish shyness of an unbroken
colt. Indeed had it been otherwise, it is not probable that it would have made
any effectual impression upon him; as he was always accustomed to talk of women
as made for the recreation of the men, and to exclaim against the ill-judged
weakness of people who taught them to imagine that they were entitled to judge
for themselves.

As the suit proceeded and miss Melvile saw more of her new admirer, her
antipathy increased. But, though her character was unspoiled by those false
wants which frequently make people of family miserable while they have every
thing that nature requires within their reach, yet she had been little used to
opposition, and was really terrified by the growing sternness of her kinsman.
Sometimes she thought of flying from a house which was now become her dungeon;
but the habits of her youth, and her ignorance of the world made her shrink
from this project when she contemplated it more nearly. Mrs. Jakeman indeed
could not think with patience of young Grimes as a husband for her darling
Emily, but her prudence determined her to resist with all her might the idea on
the part of the young lady of proceeding to extremities. She could not believe
that Mr. Tyrrel would persist in such an unaccountable persecution, and she
exhorted miss Melvile to forget for a moment the unaffected independence of her
character, and pathetically to deprecate Mr. Tyrrel's obstinacy. She had great
confidence in the ingenuous eloquence of her ward. Mrs. Jakeman did not know
what was passing in the mind of the tyrant.

Miss Melvile complied with the suggestion of her mamma. One morning
immediately after breakfast she went to the harpsichord, and played one after
another several of those airs that were most the favorites of Mr. Tyrrel. Mrs.
Jakeman was retired; the servants were gone to their respective employments.
Mr. Tyrrel would have gone also; his mind was untuned, and he did not take the
pleasure he had been accustomed to take in the musical performances of Emily.
But her finger was now more tasteful than common. Her mind was probably wrought
up to a firmer and bolder tone by the recollection of the cause she was going
to plead, at the same time that it was exempt from those incapacitating tremors
which would have been felt by one that dared not look poverty in the face. Mr.
Tyrrel was unable to leave the apartment. Sometimes he traversed it with
impatient step; then he hung over the poor innocent whose powers were exerted
to please him; at length he threw himself in a chair opposite, with his eyes
turned toward Emily. It was easy to trace the progress of his emotions. The
furrows into which his countenance was contracted were gradually relaxed; his
features were brightened into a smile; the kindness with which he had upon
former occasions contemplated Emily seemed to revive in his heart.

Emily watched her opportunity. As soon as she had finished one of the pieces,
she rose and went to Mr. Tyrrel.

Now have I not done it nicely? And after all this will not you give me a
reward?

A reward! Ay, come here, and I will give you a kiss.

Pooh! no, that is not it. And yet you have not kissed me this many a day.
Formerly you said you loved me, and called me your Emily. I am sure you did not
love me better than I loved you. You would not make me miserable, would you?

Miserable! how can you ask such a question? But have a care! Do not put me out
of humor. Do not come with any of your romantic notions now.

No, no. I had no romantic notions in my head. I want to speak to you about
something upon which the happiness of my life depends.

I know what you would be at. Be silent. You know it is to no purpose to plague
me with your stubbornness. You will not let me be in good humor with you for a
moment. What my mind is determined on about Grimes, all the world shall not
move me to give up.

Dear, dear cousin, why do but consider now. Grimes is a rough rustic lout,
like Orson in the story-book. He wants a wife like himself. He would be as
uneasy and as much at a loss with me, as I with him. Why should we both of us
be forced to do what neither of us is inclined to? I cannot think what could
ever have put it in your head. But now, for goodness' sake, give it up.
Marriage is a serious thing. You should not think of joining two people for a
whim, who are neither of them fit for one another in any respect in the world.
We should ^eel mortified and disappointed all our lives. Month would go after
month, and year after year, and I could never hope to be my own but by the
death of a person I ought to love. I am sure, sir, you cannot mean me all this
harm. What have I done, that I should deserve to have you for this enemy?

I am not your enemy. I tell you that it is necessary to put you out of harm's
way. But, if I were your enemy, I could not be a worse torment to you than you
are to me. Are not you continually singing the praises of Falkland? Are not you
in love with Falkland? That man is a legion of devils to me! Plausible and
empty himself, he cheats every body, he crosses me in all my wishes; he runs
away with the applause of the men, and the admiration of your foolish sex. An
unspoiled, genuine country-gentleman has no chance with him. I might as well
have been a beggar! I might as well have been a dwarf or a monster! Time was
when I was thought entitled to respect. But now, debauched by this Frenchified
rascal, they call me rude, surly, brutal, a tyrant! It is true that I cannot
talk in these finical phrases, flatter people with hypocritical praise, or
suppress the real feelings of my mind! The scoundrel knows all his pitiful
advantages, and insults me upon them without ceasing. He is my rival and my
persecutor. And (...) last, as if all this were not enough, he has (...) means
to spread the pestilence in my own family. You, whom we took up out of charity,
the chance-born brat of a stolen marriage! you, must turn upon your benefactor,
and wound me in the point where of all others I could least bear it. If I were
your enemy, should I not have reason? Could I ever inflict upon you such
injuries as you have made me suffer? And who are you? The lives of twenty such
as you cannot atone for an hour of my uneasiness. If you were to linger for
twenty years upon the rack, you would never feel what I have felt. But I am
your friend. I see which way you are going, and I am determined to save you
from the thief, the hypocritical destroyer of us all. Every moment that the
mischief is left to itself it does but make bad worse, and I am determined to
save you out of hand.

The angry expostulations of Mr. Tyrrel suggested new ideas to the tender mind
of miss Melvile. He had never confessed the emotions of his soul so explicitly
before; but the growing tempest of his thoughts suffered him to be no longer
master of himself. She saw with astonishment that he was the irreconcilable foe
of Mr. Falkland, whom she fondly imagined it was the same thing to know and
admire; and that he harbored a deep and rooted resentment against herself. She
recoiled without well knowing why before the ferocious passions of her kinsman,
and was convinced that she had nothing to hope from his implacable temper. But
her alarm was the prelude of firmness and not of cowardice.

No, sir, replied she, indeed I will not be driven any way that you happen to
like. I have been used to obey you, and in any thing that is reasonable I will
obey you still. But you urge me a little too far. Why do you tell me of Mr.
Falkland? (...) I ever done any thing to deserve your unkind ^^spicions? I am
innocent, and will continue innocent. Mr. Grimes is well enough, and will no
doubt find women that like him. But he is not sit for me, and torture shall not
force me to be his wife.

Mr. Tyrrel was not a little astonished at the spirit which Emily displayed
upon this occasion. He had calculated too securely upon the general mildness
and suavity of her disposition. He now endeavored to qualify the harshness of
his former sentiments.

G -- damn my soul! And so you can scold can you? You expect every body to turn
out of his way, and fetch and carry, just as you please? I could find in my
heart to break your heart. But you know my mind. I insist upon it that you let
Grimes court you, and that you lay aside your sulks, and give him a fair
hearing. Will you do that? If then you persist in your wilfulness, why there, I
suppose, is an end of the matter. Do not think that any body is going to marry
you, whether you will or no. You are no such mighty prize, I assure you. If you
knew your own interest, you would be glad to take the young fellow, while he is
willing.

Miss Melvile rejoiced in the prospect which the last words of her kinsman
afforded her, of a termination at no great distance to her present
persecutions. Mrs. Jakeman, to whom she communicated them, congratulated Emily
on the returning moderation and good sense of the squire, and herself on her
prudence in having urged the young lady to this happy expostulation. But their
mutual felicitations lasted not long. Mr. Tyrrel informed Mrs. Jakeman of the
necessity in which he found himself of sending her to a distance upon a
business which would not fail to detain her several weeks; and, though the
errand by no means wore an artificial or ambiguous face, the two friends drew a
melancholy presage from this ill-timed separation. Mrs. Jakeman in the mean
time exhorted her ward to persevere, reminded her of the compunction which had
already been manifested by her kinsman, and encouraged her to hope every thing
from her courage and good temper. Emily on her part, though grieved at the
absence of her protector and counselor at so interesting a crisis, was unable
to suspect Mr. Tyrrel of such a degree either of malice or duplicity as could
afford ground for serious alarm. She congratulated herself upon her delivery
from so alarming a persecution, and drew a prognostic of future success from
this happy termination of the first serious affair of her life. She exchanged a
state of fortitude and alarm for her former pleasing dreams respecting Mr.
Falkland. These she bore without impatience. She was even taught by the
uncertainty of the event to desire to prolong rather than abridge a situation,
which might be delusive, but was not without its pleasures.

CHAP. IX.
NOTHING could be farther from Mr. Tyrrel's intention than to suffer his
project to be thus terminated. No sooner was he wholly freed from the fear of
his housekeeper's interference, than he changed the whole system of his
conduct. He ordered Miss Melvile to be closely confined to her own apartment,
and deprived of all the means of communicating her situation to any one out of
his own house. He placed over her a female servant in whose discretion he could
confide, and who, having formerly been honored with some amorous notices from
the squire, considered the distinctions that were paid to Emily at Tyrrel Place
as an usurpation upon her more reasonable claims. The squire himself did every
thing in his power to blast the young lady's reputation, and represented to his
attendants all these precautions as necessary, to prevent her from eloping to
his neighbor, and plunging herself in total ruin.

As soon as Miss Melvile had been twenty-four hours in durance, and there was
some reason to suppose that her spirit might be subdued to the emergency of her
situation, Mr. Tyrrel thought proper to go to her, to explain the grounds of
her present treatment, and acquaint her with the only means by which she could
hope for any change. Emily no sooner saw him, than she turned toward him with
an air of greater firmness than perhaps she had ever assumed in her life, and
accosted him thus:

Well, sir, is it you? I wanted to see you. It seems I am shut up here by your
orders? What does this mean? What right have you to make a prisoner of me? What
do I owe you? Your mother left me a hundred pounds: have you ever offered to
make any addition to my fortune? But, if you had, I do not want it I do not
pretend to be better than the children of other poor parents; I can maintain
myself as they do I prefer liberty to wealth. I see you are surprised at the
resolution I exert. But ought I not to turn again, when I am trampled upon? I
should have left you before now, if Mrs. Jakeman had not overpersuaded me, and
if I had not thought better of you than by your present behavior I find you
deserve. But now, sir, I intend to leave your house this moment, and I insist
upon it that you do not endeavor to prevent me.

Thus saying, she arose, and went toward the door, while Mr. Tyrrel stood
thunderstruck at her magnanimity. Seeing however that she was upon the point of
being out of the reach of his power, he recovered himself, and pulled her back.

What is in the wind now? Do you think, you nasty strumpet, that you shall get
the better of me by sheer impudence? Sit down! rest you satisfied! -- So you
want to know by what right you are here, do you? By the right of possession.
This house is mine, and you are in my power. There is no Mrs. Jakeman now to
spirit you away; no, nor no Mr. Falkland to bully for you. Damn me, I have
countermined you, and blown up all your schemes. Do you think I want any other
^ight, to punish an audacious rebel like you? Do you think I will be
contradicted and opposed for nothing? When did you ever know any body resist my
will without being made to repent? And shall I now see myself brow-beaten by a
chitty-faced girl? I am not come to that neither. -- I have not given you a
fortune? Damn you, who brought you up? I will make you a bill for clothing and
lodging. Do not you know that every creditor has a right to stop his runaway
debtor? You may think as you please; but here you are till you marry Grimes.
Heaven and earth shall not prevent but I will get the better of your obstinacy
yet.

Ungenerous, unmerciful man! and so it is enough for you that I have nobody to
defend me! But I am not so helpless as you may imagine. You may imprison my
body, but you cannot conquer my mind. Marry Mr. Grimes! And is this the way to
bring me to your purpose? Every hardship I suffer puts still farther distant
the end for which I am thus unjustly treated. You are not used to have your
will contradicted! When did I ever contradict it? And in an affair that is so
completely my own concern shall my will go for nothing? Are you not ashamed of
laying down this rule for yourself, and suffering no other creature to take the
benefit of it? I want nothing of you; how dare you refuse me the privilege of a
reasonable being, and deny me to live unmolested in poverty and innocence? What
sort of man do you show yourself in this case, you who lay claim to the respect
and applause of every one that knows you?

The spirited reproaches of Emily had at first the effect to fill Mr. Tyrrel
with astonishment, and make him feel abashed and overawed in the presence of
this unprotected innocent. But his confusion was the result of surprise. When
the first emotion wore off, his habitual passion returned. He cursed himself
for an ass in being moved be her expostulations, and was ten times more
exasperated against Emily for daring to talk to him in this provoking language,
at a time when she had every thing to fear from his power. His despotic and
unforgiving propensities were stimulated to a degree little short of madness.
At the same time his manners, which were gloomy and thoughtful, led him to
meditate a variety of schemes for the punishment of her obstinacy. He began to
suspect that there was little hope of succeeding by open force; he therefore
determined to have recourse to treachery.

He found in Grimes an instrument sufficiently adapted to his purpose. This
fellow, who would not perhaps intentionally have hurt a worm, was fitted by the
mere coarseness of his perceptions for the perpetration of the greatest
injuries. He regarded both injury and advantage merely as they related to the
gratifications of appetite; and considered it as an essential part of true
wisdom to treat with contempt the effeminacy of those who suffer themselves to
be tormented with ideal misfortunes. He conceived that no happier destiny could
befall a young woman than to be his wife, and believed that that termination
would be an ample compensation for any calamines she might suppose herself to
undergo in the interval. He was therefore easily prevailed upon by certain
temptations which Mr. Tyrrel knew how to employ, to take a part in the plot
into which Miss Melvile was meant to be betrayed.

Matters being thus prepared, Mr. Tyrrel proceeded through the means of the
jailor, (for the experience he had already had of personal discussion did not
incline him to repeat his visits) to play upon the fears of his prisoner. This
woman, sometimes under pretense of friendship, and sometimes with open malice,
informed Emily from time to time of the preparations that were making for
consummating her fate. One day the squire had rode over to look at a neat
little farm which was destined for the habitation of the new-married couple,
and at another a quantity of live stock and household furniture was procured
that every thing might be ready for their reception. She then told her of a
license that was bought, a parson in readiness, and a day fixed for the
nuptials. When Emily endeavored, though with increasing misgivings, to
ridicule these proceedings as absolutely nugatory without her consent, her
artful gouvernante told her various stories of forced marriages, and assured
her that neither protestations, nor silence, nor fainting would be of any
avail, either to suspend the ceremony, or to set it aside when once performed.

The situation of Miss Melvile was in an eminent degree pitiable. She had no
intercourse but with her persecutors. She had not a human being with whom to
consult, and who might afford her the smallest degree of consolation and
encouragement. She had courage; but it was neither confirmed nor directed by
the dictates of experience* It could not therefore be expected to be so
inflexible as with better information it would no doubt have been found. She
had a clear and noble spirit; but she had some of her sex's errors. Her mind
sunk under the uniform terrors with which she was assailed, and her health
became visibly impaired.

Her firmness being thus far undermined, Grimes, in pursuance of his
instructions, took care in his next interview to throw out an insinuation, that
for his own part he never cared much for the match, and, since she was so
averse to it, would be very well contented that it should never take place.
Emily was rejoiced to find her admirer in so favorable a disposition; and
earnestly pressed him to give effect to this humane declaration. Her
representations to him on this subject were full of eloquence and energy.
Grimes appeared to be moved at the fervency of her manner; but objected the
resentment of Mr. Tyrrel and his landlord, who would infallibly ruin him upon
the least appearance of backwardness on his part, as poor Hawkins had been
ruined before. At length however he suggested a project in consequence of which
he might assist her in her escape, without its ever coming to their knowledge,
as indeed there was no likelihood their suspicions in this case would fix upon
him. To be sure, said he, you have refused me in a disdainful sort of a way, as
a man may say. Mayhap you thought I was no better than a brute. But I bear you
no malice, and I will show you that I am more kind-hearted than you have been
willing to believe. It is a strange sort of a vagary you have taken, to stand
in your own light, and disoblige all your friends. But, if you are resolute to
be off, do you see, I scorn to be the husband of a lass that is not every bit
as willing as I; and so I will even help to put you in a condition to be free
and follow your own inclinations.

Emily listened to these suggestions at first with eagerness and approbation.
But her fervency was somewhat abated, when they came to discuss the minute
parts of the undertaking* It was necessary, as Grimes informed her, that her
escape should be effected in the dead of the night. He would conceal himself
for that purpose in the garden, and be provided with false keys by which to
deliver her from her prison These circumstances were by no means adapted to
calm her perturbed imagination. To throw herself into the arms of the man,
whose intercourse she was employing every method to avoid, and whom under the
idea of a partner for life she could least of all men endure, was no doubt an
extraordinary proceeding. The attendant circumstances of darkness and solitude
aggravated the picture. The situation of Tyrrel Place was uncommonly lonely: it
was three miles from the nearest village, and no less than seven miles from
that in which Mrs. Jakeman's sister resided, into whose protection Miss Melvile
was desirous of throwing herself. The ingenuous character of Emily did not
allow her to suspect Grimes of intending to make an ungenerous and brutal
advantage of these circumstances; but her mind involuntarily revolted against
the idea of committing herself alone to the disposal of a man whom she had
lately been accustomed to consider as the instrument of her treacherous
relation.

After having for some time revolved these considerations, she thought of the
expedient of desiring Grimes to engage Mrs. Jakeman's sister to wait for her at
the outside of the garden. But this Grimes peremptorily refused. He even flew
into a passion at the proposal. It showed very little gratitude, to desire him
to disclose to other people his concern in this dangerous affair. For his part
he was determined in consideration of his own safety never to appear in it to
any living soul. If Miss did not believe him, when he made this proposal out of
pure good nature, and would not trust him, a single inch, she might even see to
the consequences herself. He was resolved to condescend no farther to the whims
of a person who in her treatment of him had shown herself as proud as Lucifer
himself.

(...) herself to appease his resentment; but all the eloquence of her new
confederate could not prevail upon her instantly to give up her objection. She
desired till the next day to consider of it. The day after was fixed by Mr.
Tyrrel for the marriage ceremony. In the mean time she was pestered with
intimations in a thousand different forms of the fate that so nearly awaited
her. The preparations were so continued, methodical and regular, as to produce
in her the most painful and aching anxiety. If her heart attained a moment's
intermission upon the subject, her female attendant was sure by some sly hint
or sarcastical remark to put a speedy termination to her tranquillity. She felt
herself, as she afterward remarked, alone, uninstructed, just broken loose as
it were from the trammels of infancy, without one single creature to concern
himself in her fate. She, who till then had never known ^n enemy, had now for
three weeks not seen the glimpse of a human countenance that she had not good
reason to consider as wholly estranged to her. She now for the first time
experienced the anguish of never having known her parents, and being cast
entirely upon the charity of people with whom she had too little equality to
hope to receive from them the dues of friendship.

The succeeding night was filled with the most anxious thoughts. When a
momentary oblivion stole upon her senses, her distempered imagination conjured
up a thousand images of violence and falsehood, she saw herself in the hands of
her determined enemies, who did not hesitate by the most unintermitted
treachery to complete her ruin. Her waking thoughts were not more consoling.
The struggle was too great for her constitution. As morning approached, she
resolved at all hazards to put herself into the hands of Grimes. This
determination was no sooner made, than she felt her heart sensibly lightened.
She could not conceive of any purposes of injustice that might not be
perpetrated by him with even more security at present than under any change of
her situation.

When she communicated her determination to Grimes, it was not possible to say
whether he received pleasure or pain from the intimation. He smiled indeed, but
his smile was accompanied by a certain abrupt ruggedness of countenance, so
that it might equally well be the smile of sarcasm or of congratulation. He
however renewed his assurance of fidelity to his engagements and punctuality of
execution. Meanwhile the day was interspersed with nuptial presents and
preparations, all indicating the firmness as well as security of the directors
of the scene. Emily had hoped that, as the crisis approached, they might have
remitted something of their usual diligence. She was resolved in that case, if
a fair opportunity had offered, to give the slip both to her jailors, and to
her new and half trusted confederate* But, though extremely vigilant for that
purpose, she found the execution of this idea impracticable.

At length the night so critical to her happiness approached. The mind of Emily
could not fail on this occasion to be extremely agitated. She had first exerted
all her perspicacity to elude the vigilance of her attendant. This insolent and
unfeeling tyrant, instead of any relentings, had only sought to make sport of
her anxiety. Accordingly in one instance she hid herself, and, suffering Emily
to suppose that the coast was clear, met her at the end of the gallery, near
the top of the staircase. How do you do, my dear? said she, with an insulting
tone. And so the little dear thought itself cunning enough to outwit me, did
it? Oh, it was a sly little gipsey! Go, go back, love; troop! Emily felt deeply
the trick that was played upon her. She sighed, but disdained to return any
answer to this low vulgarity. Being once more in her chamber, she sat down in a
chair, and remained buried in reverie for more than two hours. After this she
went to her drawers, and turned over in a hurrying, confused way her linen and
clothes, having in her mind the provision it would be necessary to make for her
elopement. Her jailor officiously followed her from place to place and observed
what she did for the present in silence. It was now the hour of rest. Good
night, child, said this saucy girl, in the act of retiring. It is time to lock
up. For the few next hours the time is your own. Make the best use of it! Do'ee
think you can creep out at the key hole, lovey? At eight o'clock you see me
again. And then, and then, added she, clapping her hands, it is all over. The
sun is not surer to rise, than you and your honest man to be made one.

There was something in the tone with which this slut uttered her farewell, that
for a moment suggested the question to Emily, What does she mean? Is it
possible she should know what has been planned for the few next hours? If she
do, what will become of me then? But surely her manner of speaking was very
unlike that of detection and reprimand! -- With an aching heart she folded up
the few necessaries she thought proper to take with her. She then listened with
an anxiety that would almost have enabled her to hear the stirring of a leaf.
From time to time she thought her ear was struck with the sound of feet; but
the treading, if treading it were, was so soft, that she could never ascertain
whether it were a real sound or the mere creature of the fancy. Then all was
still as if the universal motion had been at rest. By and by she conceived she
overheard a noise as of buzzing and low muttered speech. Her heart palpitated;
she said, Am I betrayed? Am I the dupe of base artifice and deceit? Presently
she heard the sound of a key in her chamber door, and Grimes made his
appearance. She started, and cried, Are we discovered? did not I hear you
speak? Grimes advanced on tiptoe with his finger to his lip. No, no, replied
be, all is safe! He took her by the hand, led her in silence out of the house
and then across the garden. Emily examined with her eye the doors and passages
as they proceeded, looked on all sid^s with fearful suspicion, but every thing
was as she herself could have wished. Grimes opened a back ^oor of the garden
already unlocked, that led into an unfrequented lane. There stood two horses
ready equipped for the journey, their bridles hung to a post not six yards
distant from the garden. Grimes pushed the door after them. By Gemini, said he,
my heart was in my mouth* As I comed along, I saw Mun, coachey, pop along from
the back door to the stables. He was within a hop, step, and jump of me. But he
had a lanthorn in his hand, and he did not see me, being as I was darkling. --
Saying (...), he assisted Miss Melvile to mount. He troubled her little during
the route. On the contrary, he was remarkably silent and contemplative, a
circumstance by no means disagreeable to Emily, to whom his conversation had
never been acceptable.

After having proceeded about two miles, they turned into a wood, through which
the road lay that led to the place of their destination. The night was
extremely dark, at the same time that the air was soft and mild, it being now
the middle of summer. Under pretense of exploring the way, Grimes contrived,
when they had already penetrated into the midst of this gloomy solitude, to get
his horse abreast with that of Miss Melvile, and then suddenly reaching out his
hand, to seize hold of her bridle. I think we may as well stop here a bit, said
he.

Stop, exclaimed Emily with surprise. Why should we stop? Mr. Grimes, what do
you mean?

Come, come, said he, never trouble yourself to wonder. Did you think I was
such a goose, as to take all this trouble merely to gratify your whim? IN
faith, nobody shall find me a pack horse, to go of other folks' errands,
without knowing a reason why. I cannot say that I much minded to have you at
first; but your ways are enough to stir the blood of my grandad. Far fetched
and dear bought is always relishing. Your consent was so hard to gain, that
squire thought it was surest asking in the dark. A' said however a' would have
no such doings in his house, and so, do you see? we are comed here.

For God's sake, Mr. Grimes, think what you are about! You cannot be base
enough to ruin a poor creature who has put herself under your protection!

That is all bother. Ruin! no, no, I will make an honest woman of you, when all
is done. Nay, none of your airs; no tricks upon travelers! I have you here as
safe as a horse in a pound; there is not a house nor a shed within a mile of
us; and, if I miss the opportunity, you shall call me spade. Faith, you are a
delicate morsel, and there is no time to be lost!

Miss Melvile had but an instant in which to collect her thoughts. She felt
that there was but little hope of softening the obstinate and insensible brute
in whose power she was placed. But the presence of mind and intrepidity, so
peculiar to her character, did not now desert her. Grimes had scarcely finished
his harangue, when with a strong and unexpected jerk she disengaged the bridle
from his grasp, and at the same time put her horse upon full speed. She had
scarcely advanced twice the length of her horse, when Grimes recovered from his
surprise, and pursued her, inexpressibly mortified at being so easily
overreached. The sound of his horse behind served but to rouse more completely
the mettle of that of Emily; whether by accident or sagacity the animal pursued
without a fault the narrow and winding way; and the chase continued the whole
length of the wood.

At the extremity of this wood there was a gate. The recollection of this
softened a little the cutting disappointment of Grimes, as he thought himself
secure of putting an end by its assistance to the career of Emily, nor was it
very probable that they should find any body to interrupt him there in the dead
and silence of the night. By the most extraordinary accident however they sound
a man on horseback in wait at this gate. Help, help! exclaimed the affrighted
Emily! thieves! murder! help! The man was Mr. Falkland. Grimes knew his voice,
and therefore, though he attempted a sort of sullen resistance, it was feebly
made. Two other men, whom by reason of the darkness he had not at first seen,
and who were Mr. Falkland's servants, hearing the bustle of the rencounter, and
alarmed for the safety of their master, rode up; and then Grimes, disappointed
at the loss of his gratification, and admonished by conscious guilt, shrunk
from farther parley and rode off in silence.

It may seem strange that Mr. Falkland should thus a second time have been the
savior of Miss Melvile, and that under circumstances the most unexpected and
singular. But in this instance it is very easily to be accounted for. He had
heard of a man who lurked about this wood for robbery or some other bad design,
and that it was conjectured this man was Hawkins. Mr. Falkland's compassion had
already been strongly interested in behalf of this victim of rural tyranny; he
had in vain endeavored to find him, and do him good; and he easily conceived
that, if the conjecture which had been made in this instance proved true, he
might have it in his power not only to do what he had always intended, but
farther to save from a perilous offense against the laws (...) society a man
who appeared to have strongly imbibed the principles of justice and virtue. He
took with him two servants, because, going with the express design of
encountering robbers, if robbers should be found, he believed he should be
inexcusable if he did not go provided against possible accidents. But he had
directed them, at the same time that they kept within call, to be out of the
reach of being seen; and it was only the eagerness of their zeal that had
brought them up thus early in the present encounter. Mr. Falkland had a little
before had the opportunity to convince himself that the village conjecture in
relation to Hawkins was untrue; and was now upon the point of returning home,
with no other satisfaction than that of having intended an act of benevolence,
when Grimes and Emily came up to the spot upon which he had posted himself.

This new adventure promised something extraordinary. Mr. Falkland did not
immediately recognize Miss Melvile, and the person of Grimes was that of a
total stranger whom he did not recollect to have ever seen. But it was easy to
understand the merits of the case, and the propriety of interfering. The
resolute manner of Mr. Falkland, combined with the dread which Grimes,
oppressed with a sense of wrong, entertained of the opposition of so elevated a
personage, speedily put the ravisher to flight. Emily was lest alone with her
deliverer. He found her much more collected and calm than could reasonably have
been expected from a person who had been a moment before in the most alarming
situation. She told him of the place to which she desired to be conveyed, and
he immediately undertook to escort her. As they went along, she recovered that
state of mind which inclined her to make a person to whom she had such repeated
obligations, and who was so eminently the object of her admiration, acquainted
with the events that had recently befallen her. Mr. Falkland listened with
eagerness and surprise. Though he had already known various instances of Mr.
Tyrrel's mean jealousy and unfeeling tyranny, this surpassed them all, and he
could scarcely credit his ears while he heard the tale. His brutal neighbor
seemed to realise all that had ever been told of the passions of fiends. Miss
Melvile was obliged to repeat in the course of her tale her kinsman's rude
accusation against her of entertaining a passion for Mr. Falkland; and this she
did with the most bewitching simplicity and charming confusion. Though this
part of the tale was a source of real pain to her deliverer, yet it is not to
be supposed but that the flattering partiality of this unhappy girl increased
the interest he felt in her welfare and the indignation he conceived against
her infernal kinsman.

They arrived without accident at the house of the good lady under whose
protection Emily desired to place herself. Here Mr. Falkland willingly left her
as in a place of security. Such conspiracies as that of which she was intended
to have been the victim, depend for their success upon the person against whom
they are formed being out of the reach of help, and the moment they are
detected they are annihilated. Such reasoning will no doubt be generally found
sufficiently solid, and it appeared to Mr. Falkland perfectly applicable to the
present case. But he was mistaken.

CHAP. X.
MR. TYRREL heard with astonishment of the miscarriage of an expedient, of the
success of which he had not previously entertained the slightest suspicion. He
became frantic with vexation. Grimes had not dared to signify the event of his
expedition in person, and the footman whom he desired to announce to his master
that Miss Melvile was lost, the moment after fled from his presence with the
most dreadful apprehensions. Presently he bellowed for Grimes, and the young
man at last appeared before him, more dead than alive. Grimes he compelled to
repeat the particulars of the tale, which he had no sooner done than he once
again slunk away, shocked at the execrations with which Mr. Tyrrel overwhelmed
him. Grimes was no coward; but he reverenced the inborn divinity that attends
upon rank, as Indians worship the devil. Nor was this all. The rage of Mr.
Tyrrel was so ungovernable and fierce, that few hearts could have been found so
stout as not to have trembled before it with a sort of unconquerable
inferiority.

He no sooner obtained a moment's pause than he began to recall to his
tempestuous mind the various circumstances of the case. His complaints were
bitter; and in a tranquil observer might have produced the united feeling of
pity for his sufferings and horror at his depravity. He recollected all the
precautions he had used; he could scarcely find a flaw in the process; and he
cursed that blind and malicious power that delighted to cross his most deep
laid designs. Of this malice he was beyond all other human beings the object.
He was mocked with the shadow of power; and, when he lifted his hand to smite,
it was struck with sudden palsy. To what purpose had heaven given him a feeling
of injury and an instinct to resent, while he could in no case make his
resentment felt! It was only necessary for him to be the enemy of any person,
in order to that person's being insured against the reach of misfortune. What
insults, the most shocking and repeated, had he not received from this paltry
girl? And by whom was she now torn from his indignation? By that devil that
haunted him at every moment, that crossed him at every step, that fixed at
pleasure his arrows in his heart, and made ^ows and mockery at his insufferable
tortures.

There was one other reflection that increased his anguish, and made him
careless and desperate as to his future conduct. It was in vain to conceal from
himself that his reputation would be cruelly wounded by this event. He had
imagined that, while Emily was forced into this odious marriage, she would be
obliged by decorum, as soon as the event was decided, to draw a veil over the
compulsion she had suffered. But this security was now lost, and Mr. Falkland
would take a pride in publishing his dishonor. Though the provocations he had
received from Miss Melvile would in his opinion have justified him in any
treatment he should have thought proper to inflict, he was sensible the world
would see the matter in a very different light. This reflection augmented the
violence of his resolutions, and determined him to refuse no means by which he
could transfer the anguish that now preyed upon his own mind to that of another.

Meanwhile the composure and magnanimity of Emily had considerably subsided,
the moment she believed herself in a place of safety. While danger and
injustice assailed her with their menaces, she found in herself a courage that
disdained to yield. The succeeding appearance of calm was more fatal to her.
There was nothing now powerfully to foster her courage, or excite her energy.
She looked back at the trials she had passed, and her soul sickened at the
recollection of that which, while it was in act, she had had the fortitude to
endure. Till the period at which Mr. Tyrrel had been inspired with this cruel
antipathy, she had been in all instances a stranger to anxiety and fear.
Uninured to misfortune, she had suddenly and without preparation been made the
subject of the most infernal malignity. When a man of robust and vigorous
constitution has a fit of sickness, it produces a much more powerful effect
than the same indisposition upon a delicate valetudinarian. Such was the case
with Miss Melvile. She passed the succeeding night sleepless and uneasy, and
was found in the morning with a high fever. Her distemper resisted for the
present all attempts to assuage it, though there was reason to hope that the
goodness of her constitution, assisted by tranquillity and the kindness of
those about her, would ultimately surmount it. On the second day she was
delirious. On the night of that day she was arrested at the suit of Mr. Tyrrel
for a debt contracted for board and necessaries for the fourteen last years.

The idea of this arrest, as the reader will perhaps recollect, first occurred
in the conversation between Mr. Tyrrel and Miss Melvile soon after he had
thought proper to confine her to her chamber. But at that time he had probably
had no serious conception of ever being induced to carry it into execution. It
had merely been mentioned by way of threat, and as the suggestion of a mind
whose habits had been long familiarised to the recollection of every possible
medium of tyranny and revenge. But now that the unlooked-for rescue and escape
of his poor kinswoman had wrought up the thoughts of Mr. Tyrrel to a degree of
insanity, and he revolved in the gloomy resources of his mind how he might most
effectually shake off the load of disappointment that oppressed him, the idea
recurred with double force. He was not long in forming his resolution; and,
calling for Barnes, his steward, immediately gave him directions in what manner
to proceed.

Barnes had been for several years the instrument of Mr. Tyrrel's injustice.
His mind was hardened by use, and he could without remorse officiate as the
spectator, or even as the immediate author and director of a scene of vulgar
distress. But even he was somewhat startled upon the present occasion. The
character and conduct of Emily in Mr. Tyrrel's family had been without a blot.
She had not a single enemy; and it was impossible to contemplate her youth, her
harmless vivacity, her guileless innocence, without emotions of sympathy and
compassion.

Your worship? -- I do not understand you! -- Arrest miss! -- miss Emily!

Yes, I tell you! What is the matter with you? Go immediately to Swineard, the
lawyer, and bid him finish the business out of hand!

Lord love your honor! Arrest her! Why, she does not owe you a brass farthing;
she always lived upon your charity!

Ass! Scoundrel! I tell you she does owe me, owes me -- eleven hundred pound.
-- The law justifies it. -- What do you think laws were made for? -- I do
nothing but right, and my rights I will have.

Your honor, I never questioned your orders in my life; but I must now. I
cannot see you ruin miss Emily, poor girl! nay, and yourself too, for the
matter of that, and not say which way you are going. I hope you will bear with
me. Why if she owed you ever so much, she cannot be arrested. She is not of age.

Will you have done, sir? Do not tell me of It cannot* and It can. To my
knowledge it has been done before, and it shall be done again. Let him dispute
it that dares. I will do it now, and stand to it afterward. Tell Swineard, if
he make the least boggling, it is as much as his life is worth; he shall starve
by inches.

Pray, your honor, think better of it. Upon my life, the whole country will
cry shame of it.

Barnes? -- What do you mean? I am not used to be talked to, and I will not
bear it! -- They have driven me already with their parleying and their
disobedience to the very end of my patience. You have been a good fellow to me
upon many occasions. But, if I find you out for making one with them that
dispute my authority, damn my soul, if I do not make you sick of your very life!

I have done, your honor. I will not say another word, except this. I have
heard as how that miss Emily is sick a-bed. You are determined, you say, to put
her in jail. You do not mean to kill her, I take it.

Let her die, if she will! I will not spare her for an hour. I will not always
be insulted. She had no consideration for me, and I have no mercy for her. I am
in for it! They have provoked me past all bearing, and they shall feel me! Tell
Swineard, in bed or up, day or night, I will not have him hear of a minute's
delay.

Such were the directions of Mr. Tyrrel, and in strict conformity to his
directions were the proceedings of that respectable limb of the law he employed
upon the present occasion. Miss Melvile had been delirious through a
considerable part of the day on the evening of which the bailiff and his
follower arrived. By the direction of the physician whom Mr. Falkland had
ordered to attend her, a composing draught was administered; and, exhausted as
she was by the wild and distracted images that for several hours had haunted
her fancy, she was now sunk into a refreshing slumber. Mrs. Hammond, the sister
of Mrs. Jakeman, was sitting by her bedside, full of compassion for the lovely
sufferer, and rejoicing in the calm tranquillity that had just taken possession
of her, when a little girl, the only child of Mrs. Hammond, opened the
street-door to the tap of the bailiff. He said ^e wanted to speak with miss
Melvile, and the child answered that she would go tell her mother. So saying,
she advanced to the door of the back-room upon the ground-floor in which Emily
lay; but the moment it was opened, instead of waiting for the appearance of the
mother, the bailiff entered along with the girl.

Mrs. Hammond looked up. Who are you, said she? Why do you come in here? Hush!
be quiet!

I must speak with miss Melvile.

Indeed, but you must not. Tell me your business. The poor lady has been
lightheaded all day. She is just fallen asleep, and must not be disturbed.

That is no business of mine. I must obey orders.

Orders? Whose orders? What is it you mean?

At this moment Emily opened her eyes. What noise is that? I wish you would let
me be quiet.

Miss, I want to speak with you. I have got a writ against you for eleven
hundred pound at the suit of squire Tyrrel.

At these words both Mrs. Hammond and Emily were dumb. The latter was scarcely
able to annex any meaning to the intelligence; and, though Mrs. Hammond was
somewhat better acquainted with the sort of language that was employed, yet in
this strange and unexpected connection it was almost as mysterious to her, as to
poor Emily herself.

A writ! How can she be in Mr. Tyrrel's debt? A writ against a child!

It is no signification putting your questions to us. We only do as we are
directed. There is our authority. Look at it.

Lord Almighty! exclaimed Mrs. Hammond, what does this mean? It is impossible
Mr. Tyrrel should have sent you.

Good woman, none of your jabber to us! Cannot you read?

This is all a trick! This paper is forged! It is a vile contrivance to get the
poor lady out of the hands of those with whom only she can be safe. Proceed
upon it at your peril!

Rest you content; that is exactly what we mean to do. Take it at my word, we
know very well what we are about.

Why, you would not tear her from her bed? I tell you, she is in a high fever;
she is lightheaded; it would be death to remove her! You are bailiffs, are not
you? You are not murderers?

The law says nothing about that. We have orders to take her sick or well. We
will do her no harm; except so far as we must perform our office, be it how it
will.

Where would you take her? What is it you mean to do?

To the county jail. Bullock, go, order a post-chaise from the Griffin!

Stay, I say! Give no such orders! Wait only three hours; I will send off a
messenger express to squire Falkland, and I am sure he will satisfy you as to
any harm that can come to you, without its being necessary to take the poor
lady to jail.

We have particular directions against that. We are not at liberty to lose a
minute. Why are not you gone? Order the horses to be put to immediately!

Emily had listened to the course of this conversation, which had sufficiently
explained to her whatever was enigmatical at the first appearance of the
bailiffs. The painful and incredible reality that was thus presented,
effectually dissipated the illusions of frenzy to which she had just been a
prey. My dear madam, said she to Mrs. Hammond, do not harass yourself with
useless efforts. I am very sorry for all the trouble I have given you. But my
misfortune is inevitable. Sir, if you will step into the next room, I will
dress myself, and attend you immediately.

Mrs. Hammond began to be equally aware that her struggles were to no purpose;
but she could not be equally patient. At one moment she raved upon the
brutality of Mr. Tyrrel, whom she affirmed to be a devil incarnate, and not a
man. At another she expostulated with bitter invective against the
hard-heartedness of the bailiff, and exhorted him to mix some humanity and
moderation with the discharge of his duty; but he was impenetrable to all she
could urge. In the mean while Emily yielded with the sweetest resignation to an
inevitable evil. Mrs. Hammond insisted that at least they should permit her to
attend her young lady in the chaise; and the bailiff, though the orders he had
received were so peremptory that he dared not exercise his discretion as to the
execution of the writ, began to have some apprehensions of danger, and was
willing to admit of any precaution that was not in direct hostility to his
functions. For the rest he understood, that it was in all cases dangerous to
allow sickness, or apparent unfitness for removal as a sufficient cause to
interrupt a direct process, and that accordingly in all doubtful questions and
presumptive murders the practice of the law inclined [with a laudable
partiality] to the vindication of its own officers. In addition to these
general rules he was influenced by the positive injunctions and assurances of
Swineard, and the terror which universally through a circle of many miles was
annexed to the name of Tyrrel. Before they departed Mrs. Hammond dispatched a
messenger with a letter of three lines to Mr. Falkland informing him of this
extraordinary event. Mr. Falkland was from home when the messenger arrived, and
not expected to return till the second day; accident seeming in this instance
to favor the vengeance of Mr. Tyrrel, for he had himself been too much under
the dominion of an uncontrollable fury to have leisure to take a circumstance
of this sort into his estimate.

The forlorn state of these poor women, who were conducted, the one by
compulsion, the other as a volunteer, to a scene so little adapted to their
accommodation as that of a common jail, may easily be imagined. There were
however a masculine courage and impetuosity of spirit in Mrs. Hammond,
eminently necessary in the difficulties they had to encounter. She was in some
degree sitted by a sanguine temper and an impassioned sense of injustice for
the discharge of those very offices which sobriety and calm reflection might
prescribe. The health of miss Melvile, as might have been expected, was very
materially affected by the surprise and removal she had undergone, at the very
time when repose was most necessary for her preservation. Her fever became more
violent than ever; her delirium was stronger; and the tortures of her
imagination were in some degree proportioned to the extreme unfavourableness of
the state in which the removal had been effected. It was highly improbable she
could at all recover.

In the moments of suspended reason she was perpetually calling on the name of
Mr. Falkland. Mr. Falkland, she said, was her first and only love, and he
should be her husband. A moment afterward she exclaimed upon him in a
disconsolate, yet reproachful tone, for his unworthy deference to the
prejudices of the world. It was very cruel of him to show himself so proud, and
tell her that he would never consent to marry a beggar. But, if he were proud,
she was determined to be proud too. He should see that she would not demean
herself like a slighted maiden, and that, though he could reject her, it was
not in his power to break her heart. At another time she imagined she saw Mr.
Tyrrel and his engine Grimes, their hands and garments dropping with blood, and
the pathetic reproaches she vented against them might have affected a heart of
stone. Then the figure of Falkland presented itself to her distracted fancy,
deformed with wounds and of a deadly paleness, and she shrieked with agony,
while she exclaimed that such was the general hard-heartedness, that no one
would make the smallest exertion for his rescue. In such vicissitudes of pain,
perpetually imagining to herself unkindness, insult, conspiracy and murder, she
passed a considerable part of two days.

On the evening of the second Mr. Falkland arrived, accompanied by doctor
Arnold, the physician by whom she had previously been attended. The scene he
was called upon to witness was such as to be most exquisitely agonizing to a
man of his acute sensibility. The news of the arrest had given him an
inexpressible shock; he was transported out of himself at the unexampled
malignity of its author. But, when he saw the figure of Miss Melvile, haggard,
and a warrant of death written in her countenance, a victim to the diabolical
passions of her kinsman, the scene seemed too much to be endured. When he
entered, she was in the midst of one of her ^its of delirium, and immediately
mistook her visitors for two assassins. She asked, where they had hid her
Falkland, her lord, her life, her husband! and demanded that they should
restore to her his mangled corpse, that she might embrace him with her dying
arms, breathe her last upon his lips, and be buried in the same grave. She
reproached them with the sordidness of their conduct in becoming the tools of
her vile cousin, who had deprived her of her reason, and would never be
contented, till he had murdered her. Mr. Falkland tore himself away from this
painful scene, and, leaving doctor Arnold with his patient, desired him when he
had given the necessary directions to follow him to his inn.

The perpetual hurry of spirits in which Miss Melvile had for several days been
kept by the nature of her indisposition was extremely exhausting to her; and in
about an hour from the visit of Mr. Falkland her delirium subsided, and left
her in so low a state as to render it difficult to perceive any marks of life.
Doctor Arnold, who had before withdrawn, to soothe, if possible, the disturbed
and impatient thoughts of Mr. Falkland, was summoned afresh upon this change of
symptoms, and sat by the bedside during (...) remainder of the night. The
situation of his patient was such as to keep him in momentary apprehension of
her decease. While Miss Melvile lay in this feeble and exhausted condition,
Mrs. Hammond betrayed every token of the tenderest, anxiety. Her sensibility
was habitually of the acutest sort, and the qualities of Emily were such as
powerfully to fix her affection. She loved her like a mother, Upon the present
occasion every sound, every motion made her tremble. Doctor Arnold had
introduced another nurse in consideration of the incessant fatigue Mrs. Hammond
had undergone; and he endeavored by representations and even by authority to
compel her to quit the apartment of the patient. But she was uncontrollable;
and he at length found that he should probably do her more injury by the
violence that would be necessary to separate her from the suffering innocent,
than by allowing her to follow her own inclinations. Her eye was a thousand
times turned with the most eager curiosity upon the countenance of doctor
Arnold, without her daring to breathe a question respecting his opinion, lest
he should answer her by a communication of the most fatal tidings. In the mean
time she listened with the deepest attention to every thing that dropped either
from the physician or the nurse, hoping as it were to collect from some oblique
hint the intelligence which she had not courage expressly to require.

Toward morning the state of the patient seemed to take a favorable turn. She
dozed for near two hours, and, when she awoke, appeared perfectly calm and
sensible. Understanding that Mr. Falkland had brought the physician to attend
her, and was himself in the neighborhood, she requested to see him. Mr.
Falkland had gone in the mean time with one of his tenants to bail the debt,
and now entered the prison to enquire whether the young lady might be safely
removed from her present miserable residence to a more airy and commodious
apartment. When he appeared, the sight of him revived in the mind of Miss
Melvile an imperfect rencollection of the wanderings of her delirium. She
covered her face with her hand, and betrayed the most expressive confusion,
while she thanked him with her usual unaffected simplicity for all the trouble
he had taken. She hoped she should not give him much more; she thought she
should get better. It was a shame, she said, if a young and lively girl as she
was, could not contrive to outlive the trifling misfortunes to which she had
been subjected. But, while she said this, she was still extremely weak. She
tried to assume a cheerful countenance; but it was a faint effort, which the
feeble state of her frame did not seem sufficient to support. Mr. Falkland and
the doctor joined to request her to keep herself quiet, and to avoid for the
present all occasions of exertion.

Encouraged by these appearances, Mrs. Hammond now ventured to follow the two
gentlemen out of the room in order to learn from the physician what hopes he
entertained. Doctor Arnold acknowledged that he had found his patient at first
in a very unfavourable situation, that the symptoms were changed for the
better, and that he was not without some expectation of her recovery. He added
however, that he could answer for nothing, that the next twelve hours would be
exceedingly critical, but that, if she did not grow worse before morning, he
would then undertake to answer for her life. Mrs. Hammond, who had hitherto
seen nothing but despair, now became frantic with joy. She burst into tears of
transport, blessed the physician in the most emphatic and impassioned terms,
and uttered a thousand extravagancies. Doctor Arnold seized this opportunity to
press her to give herself a little repose, to which she consented, a chamber
being first procured for her next to that of Miss Melvile, and she having
charged the nurse to give her notice of any alteration in the patient.

Mrs. Hammond enjoyed an uninterrupted sleep of several hours, when toward the
afternoon, she was alarmed by an unusual bustle in the next room. She listened
for a few moments, and then determined to go and see what was the occasion of
it. As she opened her door for that purpose, she met the nurse who was coming
to her. The countenance of the messenger told her what it was she had to
communicate, without the use of words. She hurried to the bed side, and found
Miss Melvile expiring. The appearances that had at first been so encouraging
were but of short duration. The calm of the morning proved to be only a sort of
lightning before death. In a few hours the patient grew worse. The bloom of her
countenance faded; she drew her breath with difficulty; and her eyes became
fixed. Doctor Arnold had come in at this period, and had immediately perceived
that all was over. She was for some time in convulsions; but, these subsiding,
she addressed the physician with a composed, though feeble voice. She thanked
him for his attention; and expressed the most lively sense of her obligations
to Mr. Falkland. She sincerely forgave her cousin, and hoped he might never be
visited by too acute a recollection of his barbarity to her. She would have
been contented to live; few persons had a sincerer relish of the good things of
life; but she was well pleased to die rather than have become the wife of
Grimes. As Mrs. Hammond entered, she turned her countenance toward her, and
with an affectionate expression repeated her name. These were her last words;
in less than two hours from that time she breathed her last in the arms of this
faithful friend.

CHAP. XI.
SUCH was the fate of Miss Emily Melvile. Perhaps tyranny never exhibited a
more painful memorial of the detestation in which it deserves to be held. The
idea irresistibly excited in every spectator of the scene was that of regarding
Mr. Tyrrel as the most diabolical wretch that had ever dishonored the human
form. The very attendants upon this house of oppression, for the scene was
acted upon too public a stage not to be generally understood, expressed their
astonishment and disgust at his unparalleled cruelty. If such were the feelings
of men bred to the commission of injustice, it is easy to conceive what must
have been those of Mr. Falkland. His whole life had tended to cultivate in him
a mind tremblingly alive to moral good and evil. Upon such occasions he was
unable maturely to collect his thoughts and firmly resolve upon the proceeding
which the nature of the case required. His habits urged him to madness and
ungovernable fury. He could not think of such complicated depravity but with
sentiments of preternatural loathing and horror. Perhaps the agonies of the
wretch broken upon the wheel, whom the very first sight of that engine of
torture had thrown into convulsions, did not exceed those of Mr. Falkland in
the present situation. He was therefore deprived for a time of all that
composure of mind which is requisite to enable us to act with discretion. It
was necessary to guard him like a madman. The whole office of judging what was
proper to be done under the present circumstances devolved upon doctor Arnold.

The doctor was a man of cool and methodical habits of acting. One of the first
ideas that suggested itself to him was, that Miss Melvile was a branch of the
family of Tyrrel. He did not doubt of the willingness of Mr. Falkland to
discharge every expense that might be farther incident to the melancholy
remains of this unfortunate victim; but he suspected that the laws of fashion
and decorum required that some notification of the event should be made to the
head of the family* His manners were formal, his temper phlegmatic, and his
whole character was such as to render him little susceptible of those impetuous
impulses which have so considerable a share in the history of the mass of
mankind. Perhaps too he had an eye to his own interest in his profession, and
was reluctant to expose himself to the resentment of a person of Mr. Tyrrel's
consideration in the neighborhood. Inaccessible to the sympathies of the mind,
he was little qualified to calculate their operation in the present instance.
But, with this weakness, he had nevertheless some feelings in common with the
rest of the world, and must have suffered a considerable degree of violence
before he could have persuaded himself to be the messenger; beside which he did
not think it right in the present situation to leave Mr. Falkland.

Doctor Arnold no sooner mentioned these ideas, than they seemed to make a
sudden impression on Mrs. Hammond, and she earnestly requested that she might
be permitted to carry the intelligence. The proposal was unexpected; but the
doctor did not very obstinately refuse his assent. She was determined, she
said, to see what sort of impression the catastrophe would make upon the author
of it; and she promised to comport herself with moderation and civility. The
journey was soon performed.

I am come, sir, said she to Mr. Tyrrel, to inform you that your cousin, Miss
Melvile, died this afternoon.

Died! Is it possible? are you serious?

Yes, sir. I saw her die. She died in my arms.

Dead! Who killed her? What do you mean?

Who killed her? Is it for you to ask that question? It was your cruelty and
malice that killed her?

Me? -- my? -- Poh! she is not dead -- it cannot be -- it is not a week since
she left this house.

Will you not believe me? I say she is dead!

Have a care, woman! this is no jesting matter. No: though she used me ^ll, I
would not believe her dead for all the world!

Mrs. Hammond shook her head in token of the truth of her assertion.

No, no, no, no! -- I will never believe that! -- No, never!

Will you come with me, and convince your own eyes? It is a sight worthy of
you, and will be a feast to such a heart as yours! -- Saying this, Mrs. Hammond
offered her hand, as if to conduct him to the spot.

Mr. Tyrrel shrunk back.

If she be dead, what is that to me? Am I to answer for every thing that goes
wrong in the world? -- What do you come here for? Why bring your messages to me?

To whom should I bring them, but to her kinsman, -- and her murderer?

Murderer! -- Did I employ knives or pistols? Did I give her poison? I did
nothing but what the law allows. If she be dead, nobody can say that I am to
blame!

To blame! -- All the world will abhor and curse you. Were you such a fool as
to think, because in some cases men pay respect to wealth and rank, that this
excuse would extend to such a deed? They will laugh at so barefaced a cheat.
The meanest beggar will spurn and spit at you. Aye* you may well stand
confounded at what you have done. I will proclaim you to the whole world, and
you will be obliged to fly the very face of a human creature!

Good woman, said Mr. Tyrrel, extremely humbled, talk no more in this strain!
-- Emmy is not dead! I am sure -- I hope -- she is not dead! -- Tell me that
you have only been deceiving me, and I will forgive you every thing. -- I will
forgive her -- I will take her into favor -- I will do any thing you please!
-- I never meant her any harm!

I tell you, sir, she is dead! You have murdered the sweetest lady that lived!
Can you bring her back to life, as you have driven her out of it? If you could,
I would kneel to you twenty times a day! -- What is it you have done? Miserable
wretch! did you think you could do and undo, and change the laws of nature, as
you please?

If she is dead, -- what care I? It is no concern of mine. Did I tell her to
run away? I meant every thing for her good. If she took things to heart so, as
to die of the pip like a chicken, is that my fault?

The reproaches of Mrs. Hammond were the first instance in which Mr. Tyrrel was
made to drink the full cup of retribution. This was however only a specimen of
a long series of contempt, abhorrence and insult that was reserved for him. The
words of Mrs. Hammond were prophetic. It evidently appeared that, though wealth
and hereditary elevation operate as an apology for many delinquencies, there
are some which so irresistibly address themselves to the indignation of
mankind, that, like death, they level all distinctions, and reduce their
perpetrator to an equality with the most indigent and squalid of his species.
Against Mr. Tyrrel, as the tyrannical and unmanly murderer of Emily, those who
dared not venture the unreserved avowal of their sentiments, muttered curses,
deep, not loud; while the rest joined in an universal cry of abhorrence and
execration. He himself stood astonished at the novelty of his situation.
Accustomed as he had been to the obedience and trembling homage of mankind, he
had imagined they would be perpetual, and that no excess on his part would ever
be potent enough to break the enchantment. Now he looked round and saw sullen
detestation in every face, which with difficulty restrained itself, and upon
the slightest provocation broke forth with an impetuous tide, and swept away
all the mounds of subordination and fear. His large estate could not n^w
purchase civility from the gentry, the peasantry, scarcely from his own
servants. In the indignation of all around him he found a ghost that haunted
him with every change of place, and a remorse that stung his conscience and
exterminated his peace. The neighborhood appeared more and more every day to
be growing too hot for him to endure the fierceness of its temperature, and it
became evident that he would ultimately be obliged to quit the country. Urged
by the flagitiousness of this last example, people learned to recollect every
other instance of Mr. Tyrrel's excesses, and upon the whole it was no doubt a
fearful catalogue of wanton injustice that now rose up in judgment against him.
It seemed as if the sense of public resentment had been long gathering strength
unperceived, and now at length burst forth into inextinguishable violence.

There was scarcely a human being upon whom this sort of retribution could have
sat more uneasily than upon Mr. Tyrrel. Though he had not a consciousness of
innocence prompting him continually to recoil from the detestation of mankind
as a thing totally unallied to his character, yet the imperiousness of his
temper and the constant experience he had had of the pliability of other men,
prepared him to feel the general and undisguised condemnation into which he was
sunk with uncommon emotions of anger and impatience. That he, at the beam of
whose eye every countenance fell, and whom in the fierceness of his wrath no
one was daring enough to answer, should now be regarded with avowed dislike and
treated with unceremonious censure, was a thing he could not endure to
recollect or believe. Symptoms of the universal disgust smote him at every
instant, and at every blow he writhed with intolerable anguish. His rage was
unbounded and raving. He repelled every attack with the fiercest indignation;
while the more he struggled, the more desperate his situation appeared to
become. At length he determined to collect his strength for a decisive effort,
and to meet the whole tide of public opinion in a single scene.

In pursuance of these thoughts he resolved to repair without delay to the
rural assembly which I have already mentioned in the course of my history. Miss
Melvile had now been dead one month. There was a sort of bustle that took place
at his entrance, it having been agreed by a private vote among the gentlemen of
the assembly that Mr. Tyrrel was to be refused admittance, as a person with
whom they did not choose to associate. This vote had already been notified to
him by letter by the master of the ceremonies, but the intelligence was rather
calculated to a man of Mr. Tyrrel's disposition to excite defiance than to
overawe. At the door of the assembly he was personally met by the master of the
ceremonies, who had perceived the arrival of an equipage, and who now
endeavored to repeat his prohibition; but he was thrust aside by Mr. Tyrrel
with an air of native authority and ineffable contempt. As he entered, every
eye was turned upon him. Presently all the gentlemen in the room assembled
round him. Some endeavored to hustle him, and others began to expostulate. But
he found the secret effectually to silence the one set, and to shake off the
other. His muscular form, the well-known eminence of his intellectual powers,
the long habits to which every man was formed of acknowledging his ascendancy,
were all in his favor. He considered himself as playing a desperate stake, and
had roused all the energies he possessed to enable him to do justice to so
interesting a transaction. Disengaged from the insects that had at first
pestered him, he paced up and down the room with a magisterial stride, and
flashed an angry glance on every side. He then broke silence. "If any one had
any thing to say to him, he should know where and how to answer him. He would
advise any such person however to consider well what he was about. If any man
imagined he had any thing personally to complain of, it was very well. But he
did expect that nobody there would be ignorant and raw enough to meddle with
what was no business of theirs, and intrude into the concerns of any man's
private family".

This being a sort of defiance, one and another gentleman advanced to answer
it. He that was first began to speak; but Mr. Tyrrel, by the expression of his
countenance and a peremptory tone, by well-timed interruptions and pertinent
insinuations, caused him first to hesitate, and then to be silent. He seemed to
be fast advancing to the triumph he had promised himself. The whole company
were astonished. They felt the ^ame abhorrence and condemnation of his
character; but they could not help admiring the courage and resources he
displayed upon the present occasion. They could without difficulty have
concentred afresh their indignant feelings, but they seemed to want a leader.

At this critical moment Mr. Falkland entered the room. He had been absent the
last week in a distant part of the country, and was now returned two or three
days sooner than he expected, Mr. Tyrrel had willingly embraced this
opportunity, trusting that, if he could now effect his reestablishment, he
should easily preserve the ground he had regained even in the face of his most
formidable rival. Mr. Tyrrel was certainly not deficient in courage; but he
conceived that the present was too important an epoch in his life to allow him
to make any unnecessary risk in his chance for future ease and importance. He
would gladly have dispensed with the arrival of the new comer.

Both he and Mr. Falkland reddened at sight of each other. Mr. Falkland
advanced toward him without a moment's pause, and in a peremptory voice asked
him, what he did here?

Here! What do you mean by that? This place is as free to me as you, and you
are the last person to whom I shall deign to give an account of myself.

Sir, the place is not free to you. Do not you know you have been voted out?
Whatever were your rights, your infamous conduct has forfeited them.

Mr. what do you call yourself, if you have any thing to say to me, choose a
proper time and place. Do not think to put on your bullying airs under shelter
of this company! I will not endure it.

You are mistaken, sir. This public scene is the only place where I can have
any thing to say to you. If you would not hear of the universal indignation of
mankind, you must not come into the society of men. Miss Melvile! Shame upon
you, inhuman, unrelenting tyrant! Can you hear her name, and not sink into the
earth? Can you retire into solitude, and not see her pale and patient ghost
rising to reproach you? Can you recollect her virtues, her innocence, her
spotless manners, her unresenting temper, and not run distracted with remorse?
Have you not killed her in the first bloom of her youth? Can you bear to think
that she now lies mouldering in the grave through your cursed contrivance, that
deserved a crown, ten thousand times more than you deserve to live? And do you
expect that mankind will ever forget, or forgive such a deed? Go, miserable
wretch; think yourself too happy that you are permitted to fly the face of man!
Why, what a pitiful figure do you make at this moment! Do you think that any
thing could bring so hardened a wretch as you are, to shrink from reproach, if
your conscience were not in confederacy with him that reproached you? And were
you fool enough to believe that any obstinacy however determined could enable
you to despise the keen rebuke of justice? Go, go, shrink into your miserable
self! Begone, and let me never be blasted with your fight again!

And here, however incredible it may appear, Mr. Tyrrel began to obey his
imperious censurer. His looks were full of wildness and horror; his limbs
trembled; and his tongue refused its office. He felt no power of resisting the
impetuous torrent of reproach that was poured upon him. He hesitated; he was
ashamed of his own defeat; he seemed to wish to deny it. But his struggles were
ineffectual; every attempt perished in the moment it was made. The general
voice was eager to abash him. As his confusion became more visible, the outcry
increased. It swelled gradually to hootings, tumult, and a deafening noise of
indignation. At length he willingly retired from the public scene, unable any
longer to endure the sensations it inflicted.

In about an hour and a half he returned. No precaution had been taken against
this incident, for nothing could be more unexpected. In the interval he had
intoxicated himself with large draughts of brandy. In a moment he was in a part
of the room where Mr. Falkland was standing, and with one blow of his muscular
arm levelled him with the earth. The blow however was not stunning, and Mr.
Falkland rose again immediately. It is obvious to perceive how unequal he must
have been to this species of contest. He was scarcely risen, before Mr. Tyrrel
repeated his blow. Mr. Falkland was now upon his guard, and did not fall. But
the blows of his adversary were redoubled with a rapidity difficult to
conceive, and Mr. Falkland was once again brought to the earth. In this
situation Mr. Tyrrel kicked his prostrate enemy, and stooped, apparently with
the intention of dragging him along the floor. All this passed in a moment, and
the gentlemen present had not time to recover their surprise. They now
interfered, and Mr. Tyrrel once more quitted the apartment.

It is difficult to conceive of any event more terrible to the individual upon
whom it fell, than the treatment which Mr. Falkland in this instance
experienced. Every passion of his life was calculated to make him feel it more
acutely He had repeatedly exerted the most uncommon energy and prudence to
prevent the misunderstanding between Mr. Tyrrel and himself from proceeding to
extremities; but in vain! It was closed with a catastrophe exceeding all that
he had feared, or that the most penetrating foresight could have suggested. To
Mr. Falkland disgrace was worse than death. The slightest breath of dishonor
would have stung him to the very soul. What must it have been with this
complication of ignominy, base, humiliating and public? Could Mr. Tyrrel have
understood the evil he inflicted, even he under all his circumstances of
provocation could hardly have perpetrated it. Mr. Falkland's mind must have
been full of uproar like the war of contending elements, and of such suffering
as casts contempt on the refinements of inventive cruelty. He wished no doubt
for annihilation, to lie down in eternal oblivion, in an insensibility, which
compared with what he experienced was scarcely less enviable than beatitude
itself. Horror, detestation, revenge, inexpressible longings to shake off the
evil, and a persuasion that in this case all effort was powerless, must have
filled his soul even to bursting.

One other event closed the transactions of this memorable evening. Mr.
Falkland was baffled of the vengeance that yet remained to him. Mr. Tyrrel was
found by some of the company dead in the street, having been murdered at the
distance of a few yards from the assembly house.

CHAP. XII.
I SHALL endeavor to state the remainder of this narrative in the words of Mr.
Collins. The reader has already had occasion to perceive that Mr. Collins was a
man of no vulgar order; and his reflections on this subject were uncommonly
judicious.

"This day was the crisis of Mr. Falkland's history. From hence took its
beginning that gloomy and unsociable melancholy of which he has since been the
victim. No two characters can be in certain respects more strongly contrasted,
than the Mr. Falkland of a date prior and subsequent to these events. Hitherto
he had been attended by a fortune perpetually prosperous. His mind was
sanguine; full of that undoubting confidence in its own powers which prosperity
is qualified to produce. Though the habits of his life were those of a serious
and sublime visionary, they were nevertheless full of cheerfulness and
tranquillity. But from this moment his pride and the lofty adventurousness of
his spirit were effectually subdued. From an object of envy he was changed into
an object of compassion. Life, which hitherto no one had so exquisitely
enjoyed, became a burden to him. No more self-complacency, no more rapture, no
more self-approving and heart-transporting benevolence! He, who had lived
beyond any man upon the grand and animating reveries of the imagination, seemed
now to have no visions but of anguish and despair. His case was peculiarly
worthy of sympathy, since no doubt, if rectitude and purity of disposition
could give a title to happiness, few men could exhibit a more consistent and
powerful claim than Mr. Falkland.

"He was too deeply pervaded with the idle and groundless romances of chivalry
ever to forget the situation, humiliating and dishonorable according to his
ideas, in which he had been placed upon this occasion. There is a mysterious
sort of divinity annexed to the person of a true knight, that makes any species
of brute violence committed upon it indelible and immortal. To be knocked down,
cuffed, kicked, dragged along the floor! sacred heaven, the memory of such a
treatment was intolerable! No future lustration could ever remove the stain:
and, what was perhaps still worse in the present case, the offender having
ceased to exist, the lustration which the laws of knight-errantry prescribe was
rendered impossible.

"In some future period of human improvement it is probable that that calamity
will be in a manner unintelligible, which in the present instance contributed
to tarnish and wither the excellence of one of the most elevated and amiable of
human minds. If Mr. Falkland had reflected with perfect accuracy upon the case,
he would probably have been able to look down with indifference upon a wound
which, as it was, pierced to his very vitals. How much more dignity than in the
modern duellist do we find in Themistocles, the most gallant of the Greeks;
who, when Eurybiades, his commander in chief, in answer to some of his
remonstrances, lifted his cane over him with a menacing air, accosted him in
that noble apostrophe, Strike, but hear?

"How would a man of true discernment in such a case reply to his brutal
assailant? I make it my boast that I can endure calamity and pain: shall I not
be able to endure the trifling inconvenience that your folly can inflict upon
me? Perhaps a human being would be more accomplished, if he understood the
science of personal defense; but how few would be the occasions upon which he
would be called to exert it? How few human beings would he encounter so unjust
and injurious as you, if his own conduct were directed by the principles of
reason and benevolence? Beside, how narrow would be the use of this science,
when acquired? It will scarcely put the man of delicate make and petty stature
upon a level with the athletic pugilist; and, if it did in some measure secure
me against the malice of a single adversary, still my person and my life, so
far as mere force is concerned, would* always be at the mercy of two. Farther
than immediate defense against actual violence it could never be of use to me.
The man who can deliberately meet his adversary for the purpose of exposing the
persons of one or both of them to injury, tramples upon every principle of
reason and equity. Duel^ing is the vilest of all egotism, treating the public,
which has a claim to all my powers and exertions, as if it were nothing, and
myself, or rather an unintelligible chimera I annex ^o myself, as if it were
entitled to my exclusive attention. I am unable to cope with you: what then?
Can that circumstance dishonor me? No; I can only be dishonored by
perpetrating an unjust action. My honor is in my own keeping, beyond the reach
of all mankind. Strike! I am passive. No injury that you can inflict shall
provoke me to expose you or myself to unnecessary evil. I refuse that; but I am
not therefore pusillanimous: when I refuse any danger or suffering by which the
general good may be promoted, then brand me for a coward!

"These reasonings, however simple and irresistible they must be found by a
dispassionate enquirer, are little reflected on by the world at large, and were
most of all uncongenial to the prejudices of Mr. Falkland. But the public
disgrace and chastisement that had been imposed upon him, intolerable as they
were to be recollected, were not the whole of the mischief that redounded to
our unfortunate patron from the transactions of that day. It was presently
whispered that he was no other than the murderer of his antagonist. This rumor
was of too much importance to the very continuance of his life, to justify its
being concealed from him. He heard it with inexpressible astonishment and
horror; it formed a dreadful addition to the load of intellectual anguish that
already oppressed him. No man had ever held his reputation so dear to him as
Mr. Falkland; and now in one day he was fallen under the most exquisite
calamities, a complicated personal insult, and the imputation of the foulest of
crimes. He might have fled; for no one was forward to proceed against a man so
adored as Mr. Falkland, or in revenge of one so universally execrated as Mr.
Tyrrel. But flight he disdained. In the mean time the affair was of too serious
a magnitude, the rumor unchecked seemed daily to increase in strength, and the
magistrates were at length obliged to take some steps upon the subject. Without
causing him to be apprehended, they sent to desire he would appear before them
at (...) their meetings. They investigated the particulars of the story. What
could they do? The (...) of the quarrel, and the odious nature of the (...)
give^ by Mr. Tyrrel were notorious. Mr. Falkland had left the rooms immediately
after his (...); and, though he had been attended by one (...) of the gentlemen
to his inn, it appeared (...) had left them upon some slight pretense as soon
as he arrived at it, and, when they enquired for him of the waiters, they were
given to understand that he had mounted his horse and rode home. In
consideration of these particulars the magistrates concluded that they could
not be justified but in committing Mr. Falkland to prison. His defense was
manly, logical, and impressive. But, though they entertained the strongest
presumption of his innocence, they conceived that they were obliged in their
capacity to proceed upon the unfortunate circumstances that appeared against
the accused, and commit him for his deliverance to a trial by his country. In
all this Mr. Falkland was nearly passive. He seemed to fear by too direct an
appeal to judicature to render more precise an imputation the memory of which
he deprecated, at the same time that he was sufficiently willing to meet the
severest scrutiny, and, if he could not hope to have it forgotten that he had
ever been accused, to prove in the most satisfactory manner that the accusation
was unjust.

"Never in this quarter of the island was a court more crowded with persons of
the highest distinction than upon Mr. Falkland's trial. Never was expectation
wrought to a higher pitch, or the passions of men more profoundly interested.
You seem never to have heard of this memorable transaction; and indeed that is
little to be wondered at, since the good nature of the world is interested in
suppressing it, and it is deemed a disgrace to a man to have held up his hand
at a criminal bar, though acquitted with circumstances the most satisfactory
and honorable. It may be supposed that this suppression is particularly
acceptable to Mr. Falkland; and I should not have acted in contradiction to his
modes of thinking in communicating the story to you, had there not been
circumstances of peculiar urgency that seemed to render the communication
desirable.

"The facts adduced upon the trial were precisely those which had already been
laid before the magistrates. By the nature of the case no particular facts
could be stated in balance against these. As soon as the evidence for the crown
had been gone through, Mr. Falkland immediately proceeded to his defense.
Several copies of the trial were made, and Mr. Falkland seemed for a short time
to have the idea of sending it to the press. I have one of these copies in my
possession, and I will read from it the speech of the accused, as it was taken
down in court." -- Saying this, Mr. Collins rose, and took it from a private
drawer in his escri^oire.

"My lord, and gentlemen of the jury,

"I stand here accused of a crime the most black that any human creature is
capable of perpetrating. I am innocent. I have no fear that I shall fail to
make every person in this court acknowledge my innocence. In the mean time what
must be my feelings? Conscious as I am of deserving approbation and not
censure, of having passed my life in acts of justice and philanthropy, can any
thing be more deplorable than for me to stand here to answer a charge of
murder? So wretched is my situation, that I cannot accept your gratuitous
acquittal, if you should be disposed to bestow it. I must answer to an
imputation, the very thought of which is ten thousand times worse than death. I
must exert the whole energy of my mind to prevent my being ranked with the
vilest of men.

"Gentlemen, this is a situation in which a man may be allowed to boast.
Accursed situation! No man need envy me the vile and polluted triumph I am now
to gain! I have called no witnesses to my character. Great God! what sort of a
character is that which must be supported by witnesses? But, if I must speak,
look round the court, ask of every one present, enquire of your own hearts! Not
one word of reproach was ever whispered against my character. I do not hesitate
to call upon those who have known me most to afford me the most honorable
testimony.

"My life has been spent in the keenest and most unintermitted sensibility to
reputation. I am almost indifferent as to what shall be the event of this day.
I would not open my mouth upon the occasion, if my life were the only thing
that was at stake. It is not in the power of your verdict to restore to me my
unblemished reputation, to obliterate the disgrace I have suffered, or to
prevent it from being remembered that I have been brought to trial upon a
charge of murder. Your verdict can never have the efficacy to prevent the
miserable remains of my existence from being the most intolerable of all
burdens.

"I am accused of having committed murder upon the body of Barnabas Tyrrel. I
would most joyfully have given every farthing I possess, and devoted myself to
perpetual beggary, to have preserved his life. His life was precious to me,
beyond that of all mankind. In my opinion the greatest injustice committed by
his unknown assassin was that of defrauding me of my just revenge. I confess
that I would have called him out to the field, and that our encounter should
not have been terminated but by the death of one or both of us. This would have
been a pitiful and inadequate compensation for his unparalleled insult, but it
was all that remained.

"I ask for no pity, but I must openly declare that never was any misfortune so
horrible as mine. I would willingly have taken refuge from the recollection of
that night in a voluntary death. Life was now stripped of all those
recommendations for the sake of which it was dear to me. But even this
consolation is denied me. I am compelled to drag for ever the intolerable load
of existence, upon penalty, if at any period however remote I shake it off, of
having that impatience regarded as confirming a charge of murder. Gentlemen, if
by your verdict you could take away my life, without that act being connected
with my disgrace, I would bless the cord that suspended the breath of my
existence for ever.

"You all know how easily I might have fled from this purgation. If I had been
guilty, should I not have embraced the opportunity? But, as it was, I could
not. Reputation has been the idol, the jewel of my life. I could never have
borne to think that a human creature in the remotest part of the globe should
believe that I was a criminal. Alas! what a deity it is that I have chosen for
my worship! I have entailed upon myself everlasting agony and despair!

"I have but one word to add. Gentlemen, I charge you to do me the imperfect
justice that your office puts in your power! My life is a worthless thing. But
my honor, the paltry remains of honor I have now to boast, is in your
judgment. It is little that you can do for me; but it is not less your duty to
do that little. May that God who is the fountain of honor and good, prosper
and protect you! The man who now stands before you is devoted to perpetual
barrenness and blast! He has nothing to hope for beyond the feeble consolation
of this day!"

"You will easily imagine that Mr. Falkland was acquitted with every
circumstance of honor. Nothing is more to be deplored in human institutions
than that the forms of justice should thus subject a man, of whose innocence
every one was convinced, to a species of purgation to which the ideas of
mankind have annexed a sentiment of disgrace. Nobody entertained the shadow of
a doubt upon the subject, and yet a mere incidental concurrence of
circumstances made it necessary that the best of men should be publicly
arraigned as if really under suspicion of an atrocious crime. It may be granted
indeed that Mr. Falkland had his faults, but those very faults placed him at a
still farther distance from the criminality in question. He was the fool of
honor and fame; a man whom in the pursuit of reputation nothing could divert;
who would have purchased the character of a true, gallant and undaunted hero at
the expense of worlds, and who thought every calamity nominal but a stain upon
his honor. How atrociously absurd to suppose any motive capable of inducing
such a man to play the part of a lurking assassin? How unfeeling to oblige him
to defend himself from such an imputation in a court of justice? Did any man,
and least of all a man of the purest honor, ever pass in a moment from a life
unstained by a single act of injury to the consummation of human depravity?

"When the verdict of the jury was given, a general murmur of applause and
involuntary transport burst forth in the court. It was at first low, and
gradually became louder. As it was the expression of rapturous delight and an
emotion disinterested and divine, so there was an indescribable something in
the very sound that carried it home to the heart, and convinced every spectator
that no personal pleasure ever existed that was not foolish and feeble in the
comparison. Every one strove who should most express his esteem of the amiable
accused. Mr. Falkland was no sooner withdrawn, than the gentlemen in the court
crowded together to consult how they should most effectually express their
congratulation. They immediately named a deputation to wait upon him for that
purpose. The grand jury and the petty jury drew up an address of a similar
nature. The very judges and counsel, though less acquainted with his personal
character, were strongly impressed with the mute and universal testimony they
witnessed in his favor, and zealously concurred to assist the general
sentiment. It was a sort of sympathetic feeling that took hold upon all ranks
and degrees. The multitude received him with huzzas, they took his horses from
his carriage, dragged him in triumph, and attended him many miles in his return
to his own habitation. It seemed as if a public trial before a criminal judge,
which had hitherto been considered in every event as a brand of disgrace, was
converted in the present instance into an occasion of enthusiastic adoration
and unexampled honor.

"But nothing could reach the heart of Mr. Falkland. He was not insensible to
the general kindness and exertions; but it was too evident that the melancholy
that had taken hold of his mind was invincible.

"It was only a few weeks after this memorable trial that the real murderer was
discovered. Every part of this story was extraordinary. The real murderer was
Hawkins. He was found with his son under a feigned name at a village at about
thirty miles distance, in want of all the necessaries of life. He had lived
here from the period of his flight in so private a manner, that all the
enquiries that had been set on foot by the benevolence of Mr. Falkland or the
insatiable malice of Mr. Tyrrel had been insufficient to discover him. The
first thing that had led to the detection was a parcel of clothes covered with
blood that were found in a ditch, and which, when drawn out, were known by the
people of the village to belong to this man. The murder of Mr. Tyrrel was not a
circumstance that could be unknown, and suspicion was immediately roused. A
diligent search being made, the rusty handle with part of the blade of a knife
was sound thrown in a corner of his lodging, which being applied to a piece of
the point of a knife that had been broken in the wound, appeared exactly to
correspond. Upon farther enquiry two rustics, who had been accidentally on the
spot, remembered to have seen Hawkins and his son in the town that very
evening, and to have called after them, and received no answer, though they
were sure of their persons. Upon this accumulated evidence both Hawkins and his
son were tried, condemned and afterward executed. In the interval between the
sentence and execution Hawkins confessed his guilt with many marks of
compunction; though there are persons by whom this is denied; but I have taken
some pains to enquire into the fact, and am persuaded that their disbelief is
precipitate and groundless.

"The cruel injustice that this man had suffered from his village tyrant was
not forgotten upon the present occasion. It was by a strange fatality that the
barbarous proceedings of Mr. Tyrrel seemed never to fall short of their
completion; and even his death served eventually to consummate the ruin of a
man he hated, a circumstance, which, if it could have come to his knowledge,
would perhaps have in some measure consoled him for his untimely end. This poor
Hawkins was surely entitled to some pity, since his being finally urged to
desperation, and brought, together with his son, to an ignominious fate, was
originally owing to the sturdiness of his virtue and independence. But the
compassion of the public was in a great measure shut against him, as they
thought it a piece of barbarous and unpardonable selfishness, that he had not
rather come boldly forward to meet the consequences of his own conduct, than
suffer a man of so much public worth as Mr. Falkland, and who had been so
desirous of doing him good, to be tried for a murder that he had committed.

"From this time to the present Mr. Falkland has been nearly such as you at
present see him. Though it be several years since these transactions, the
impression they made is for ever fresh in the mind of our unfortunate patron.
From thenceforward his habits became totally different. He had before been fond
of public scenes, and acting a part in the midst of the people among whom he
immediately resided. He now made himself a rigid recluse. He had no associates,
no friends. Inconsolable himself, he yet wished to treat others with kindness.
There was a solemn sadness in his manner, attended with the most perfect
gentleness and humanity. Every body respects him, for his benevolence is
unalterable; but there is a stately coldness and reserve in his behavior,
which makes it difficult for those about him to regard him with the familiarity
of affection. These symptoms are uninterrupted, except at certain times when
his sufferings become intolerable, and he displays the marks of a furious
insanity. At those times his language is fearful and mysterious, and he seems
to figure to himself by turns every sort of persecution and alarm which may be
supposed to attend upon an accusation of murder. But, sensible of his own
weakness, he is anxious at such times to withdraw into solitude; and his
domestics in general know nothing of him but the uncommunicative and haughty,
yet mild dejection that accompanies every thing he does."

CHAP. XIII.
I HAVE stated the narrative of Mr. Collins, interspersed with such other
information as I was able to collect, with all the exactness that my memory,
assisted by certain memorandums I made at the time, will afford. I do not
pretend to warrant the authenticity of any part of these memoirs except so much
as fell under my own knowledge, and that part shall be stated with the same
simplicity and accuracy that I would observe toward a court which was to
decide in the last resort upon every thing dear to me. The same scrupulous
fidelity restrains me from altering the manner of Mr. Collins's narrative to
adapt it to the precepts of my own taste; and it will soon be perceived how
essential that narrative is to the elucidation of my own history.

The intention of my friend in this communication was to give me ease; but he
in reality added to my embarrassment. Hitherto I had had no intercourse with
the world and its passions; and, though I was not totally unacquainted with
them as they appear in books, this proved to be of little service to me when I
came to witness them myself. The case seemed entirely altered, when the subject
of those passions was continually before my eyes, and the events had happened
but the other day as it were, in the very neighborhood where I lived. There
was a connection and progress in this narrative, which made it altogether
unlike the little village incidents I had hitherto known. My feelings were
successively interested for the different persons that were brought upon the
scene. My veneration was excited for Mr. Clare, and my applause for the
intrepidity of Mrs. Hammond. I was astonished that any human creature should be
so shockingly perverted as Mr. Tyrrel. I paid the tribute of my tears to the
memory of the artless Miss Melvile. I found a thousand fresh reasons to admire
and love my master.

At first I was satisfied with thus considering every incident in its obvious
sense. But the story I had heard was for ever in my thoughts, and I was
peculiarly interested to comprehend its full import. I turned it a thousand
ways, and examined it in every point of view. In the original communication it
appeared sufficiently distinct and satisfactory; but, as I brooded over it, it
gradually became mysterious. There was something strange in the character of
Hawkins. So firm, so sturdily honest and just, as he appeared at first; all at
once to become a murderer! His first behavior under the prosecution, how
accurately was it calculated to prepossess one in his favor! To be sure, if he
were guilty, it was very cruel of him to suffer a man of so much worth as Mr.
Falkland to be tried for his crime! And yet I could not help bitterly
compassionating the honest fellow, brought to the gallows, as he was, strictly
speaking, by the machinations of that devil incarnate, Mr. Tyrrel. His son too,
that son for whom he voluntarily sacrificed his all, to die with him at the
same tree; surely never was a story more affecting!

Was it possible after all that Mr. Falkland should be the murderer? The reader
will scarcely believe that the idea suggested itself to my mind, that I would
ask him. It was but a passing thought; but it serves to mark the simplicity of
my character. Then I recollected the virtues of my master, almost too sublime
for human nature; I thought of his sufferings so unexampled, so unmerited; and
chid myself for the suspicion. The dying confession of Hawkins recurred to my
mind; and I felt that there was no longer a possibility of doubting. And yet
what was the meaning of all Mr. Falkland's agonies and terrors? In fine, the
idea having once occurred to my mind, it was fixed there for ever. My thoughts
fluctuated from conjecture to conjecture, but this was the center about which
they revolved. I determined to place myself as a watch upon my master.

The instant I had chosen this employment for myself, I found a strange sort of
pleasure in it. To do what is forbidden always has its charms, because we have
an indistinct apprehension of something arbitrary and tyrannical in the
prohibition. To be a spy upon Mr. Falkland! That there was danger in the
employment served to give an alluring pungency to the choice. I remembered the
stern reprimand I had received, his terrible looks; and the recollection gave a
kind of tingling sensation, not altogether unallied to enjoyment. The farther I
advanced, the more the sensation was irresistible. I seemed to myself
perpetually upon the brink of being countermined, and perpetually roused to
guard my designs. The more impenetrable Mr. Falkland was determined to be, the
more uncontrollable was my curiosity. Through the whole my alarm and
apprehension of personal danger, had a large mixture of frankness and
simplicity, conscious of meaning no ill, that made me continually ready to say
every thing that was upon my mind, and would not suffer me to believe that,
when things were brought to the test, any one could be seriously angry with me.

These reflections led gradually to a new state of my mind. When I had first
removed into Mr. Falkland's family, the novelty of the scene rendered me
cautious and reserved. The distant and solemn manners of my master seemed to
have annihilated my constitutional gaiety. But the novelty by degrees wore off,
and my constraint in the same degree diminished. The story I had now heard, and
the curiosity it excited, restored to me activity, eagerness and ^ourage. I had
always had a propensity to communicate my thoughts; my age was naturally
inclined to talkativeness; and I ventured occasionally in a sort of hesitating
way, as if questioning whether such a conduct might be allowed to express my
sentiments as they arose, in the presence of Mr. Falkland.

The first time I did so, he looked at me with an air of surprise, made me no
answer, and presently took occasion to leave me. The experiment was soon after
repeated. My master seemed half inclined to encourage me, and yet doubtful
whether he might venture. He had been long a stranger to pleasure of every
sort, and my artless and untaught remarks appeared to promise him some
amusement. In this uncertainty he could not probably find it in his heart to
treat with severity my innocent effusions. I needed but little encouragement:
for the perturbation of my mind stood in want of this relief. My simplicity,
arising from my being a total stranger to the intercourse of the world, was
accompanied with a mind in some degree cultivated with reading, and perhaps not
altogether destitute of observation and talent. My remarks were therefore
perpetually unexpected, at one time implying extreme ignorance, and at another
some portion of acuteness, but at all times having an air of innocence,
frankness and courage. There was still an apparent want of design in the
manner, even after I was excited accurately to compare my observations and
study the inferences to which they led; for the effect of old habit was more
visible, than that of a recently-conceived purpose which was hardly yet mature.
Mr. Falkland's situation was like that of a fish that plays with the bait
employed to entrap him. By my manner he was in a certain degree encouraged to
lay aside his usual reserve and relax his stateliness; till some abrupt
observation or interrogatory stung him into recollection and brought back his
alarm. Still it was evident that he bore about him a secret wound. Whenever the
cause of his sorrows was touched, though in a manner the most indirect and
remote, his countenance altered, his distemper returned, and it was with
difficulty that he could suppress his emotions, sometimes conquering himself
with painful effort, and sometimes bursting into a sort of paroxism of
insanity, and hastening to bury himself in solitude. These appearances I too
frequently interpreted into grounds of suspicion, though I might with equal
probability and more liberality have ascribed them to the cruel mortifications
he had encountered in the objects of his darling ambition. Mr. Collins had
strongly urged me to secrecy; and Mr. Falkland, whenever my gesture or his
consciousness impressed him with the idea of my knowing more than I expressed,
looked at me with wistful earnestness, as questioning what was the degree of
information I possessed, and how it was obtained. But again at our next
interview the simple vivacity of my manner restored his tranquillity,
obliterated the emotion of which I had been the cause, and placed things afresh
in their former situation. The longer this humble familiarity on my part had
continued, the more effort it would require to suppress it; and Mr. Falkland
was neither willing to mortify me by a severe prohibition of speech, nor even
perhaps to make me of so much consequence as that prohibition might seem to
imply. Though I was curious, it must not be supposed that I had the object of
my enquiry for ever in my mind, or that my questions and innuendos were
perpetually regulated with the cunning of a grey-headed inquisitor. The secret
wound of Mr. Falkland's mind was much more uniformly present to his
recollection than to mine; and a thousand times he applied the remarks that
occurred in conversation, when I had not the remotest idea of such an
application till some singularity in his manner brought it back to my thoughts.
The consciousness of this morbid sensibility, and the imagination that its
influence might perhaps constitute the whole of the case, served probably to
spur Mr. Falkland again to the charge, and connect a sentiment of shame with
every project that suggested itself for interrupting the freedom of our
intercourse.

I will give a specimen of the conversations to which I allude, and as it shall
be selected from those which began upon topics the most general and remote, the
reader will easily imagine the disturbance that was almost daily endured by a
mind so tremblingly alive as that of my master.

Pray, sir, said I, one day as I was assisting Mr. Falkland in arranging some
papers previously to their being transcribed into his collection, how came
Alexander of Macedon to be surnamed the Great?

How came it? Did you never read his history?

Yes, sir.

Well, Williams, and could you find no reasons there?

Why, I do not know, sir. I could find reasons why he should be famous; but
every man that is talked of, is not admired. Judges differ about the merits of
Alexander. Doctor Prideaux says in his Connections that he deserves only to be
called the Great Cutthroat, and the author of Tom Jones has written a volume
to prove that he and all other conquerors ought to be classed with Jonathan
Wild.

Mr. Falkland involuntarily reddened at these citations.

Accursed blasphemy! Did these authors think that by the coarseness of their
ribaldry they could destroy his well-earned fame? Are learning, sensibility and
taste no securities to exempt their possessor from this vulgar abuse? Did you
ever read, Williams, of a man more gallant, generous and free? Was ever mortal
so completely the reverse of every thing engrossing and selfish? He formed to
himself a sublime image of excellence, and his only ambition was to realise it
in his own story. Remember his giving away every thing when he set out upon his
grand expedition, professedly reserving for himself nothing but hope. Recollect
his heroic confidence in Philip, the physician, and his entire and unalterable
friendship for Ephestion. He treated the captive family of Darius with the most
cordial urbanity, and the venerable Sysigambis with all the tenderness and
attention of a son to his mother. Never take the judgment, Williams, upon such
a subject of a clerical pedant or a Westminster justice. Examine for yourself,
and you will find in Alexander a model of honor, generosity and
disinterestedness, a man who for the cultivated liberality of his mind and the
unparalleled grandeur of his projects must stand alone the spectacle and
admiration of all ages of the world.

Ah, sir! it is a very fine thing for us to sit here and compose his panegyric.
But would you have me forget what a vast expense was bestowed in erecting the
monument of his fame? Was not he the common disturber of mankind? Did nor he
overrun nations that would never have heard of him, but for his devastations?
How many hundred thousands of lives did (...) ^acrifice in his career? What
must I think of his cruelties; a whole tribe massacred for a crime committed by
their ancestors one hundred and fifty years before; fifty thousand sold into
slavery; two thousand crucified for their gallant defense of their country? Man
is surely a strange sort of creature, who never praises any one more heartily
than him who has spread destruction and ruin over the face of nations!

The way of thinking you express, Williams, is natural enough, and I cannot
blame you for it. But let me hope that you will become more liberal. The death
of a hundred thousand men is at first fight very shocking; but what in reality
are a hundred thousand such men more than a hundred thousand sheep? It is mind,
Williams, the generation of knowledge and virtue that we ought to love. This
was the project of Alexander; he set out in a great undertaking to civilize
mankind; he delivered the vast continent of Asia from the stupidity and
degradation of the Persian monarchy; and, though he was cut off in the midst of
his career, we may easily perceive the vast effects of his project. Grecian
literature and cultivation, the Seleucidae, the Antiochuses and the Prolomies
followed, in nations which before had been sunk to the condition of brutes.
Alexander was the builder as notoriously as the destroyer of cities.

And yet, sir, I am afraid that the pike and the battle-axe are not the right
instruments for making men wise. Suppose it were admitted that the lives of men
were to be sacrificed without remorse if a paramount good were to result, it
seems to me as if murder and massacre were but a very left handed way of
producing civilisation and love. But pray, do not you think this great hero was
a ^ort of a madman? What now will you say to his firing the palace of
Persepolis, his weeping for other worlds to conquer, and his marching his whole
army over the burning sands of Lybia, merely to visit a temple, and persuade
mankind that he was the son of Jupiter Ammon?

Alexander, my boy, has been much misunderstood. Mankind have revenged
themselves upon him by misrepresentation, for having so far eclipsed the rest
of his species. It was necessary to the realising his project that he should
pass for a God. It was the only way by which he could get a firm hold upon the
veneration of the stupid and bigoted Persians. It was this, and not a mad
vanity, that was the source of his proceeding. And how much had he to struggle
with in this respect in the unapprehending obstinacy of some of his Macedonians?

Why then, sir, at last Alexander did but employ means that all politicians
profess to use, as well as he. He dragooned men into wisdom, and cheated them
into the pursuit of their own happiness. But what is worse, sir, this Alexander
in the paroxysm of his headlong rage spared neither friend nor foe. You will
not pretend to justify the excesses of his ungovernable passion. It is
impossible sure that a word can be said for a man whom a momentary provocation
can hurry into the commission of murders --

The instant I had uttered these words, I felt what it was that I had done.
There was a magnetical sympathy between me and my master, so that their effect
was not sooner produced upon him, than my own mind reproached me with the
inhumanity of the allusion. Our confusion was mutual. The blood forsook at once
the transparent complexion of Mr. Falkland, and then rushed back again with
rapidity and fierceness. I dared not utter a word, lest I should commit a new
error worse than that into which I had just fallen. After a short, but severe,
struggle to continue the conversation, Mr. Falkland began with trepidation, but
afterward became calmer:

You are not candid -- Alexander -- You must learn more clemency -- Alexander,
I say, does not deserve this rigor. Do you remember his tears, his remorse,
his determined abstinence from food, which he could scarcely be persuaded to
alter? Did not that prove acute feeling and a rooted principle of equity? --
Well, well, Alexander was a true and judicious lover of mankind, and his real
merits have been little comprehended.

I know not how to make the state of my mind at that moment accurately
understood. When one idea has got possession of the mind, it is scarcely
possible to keep it from finding its way to the lips. Error, once committed,
has a fascinating power, like the eyes of the rattle-snake, to draw us into a
second error. It deprives us of that proud confidence in our own strength, to
which we are indebted for so much of our virtue. Curiosity is a restless
propensity, and often does but hurry us forward the more irresistibly, the
greater is the danger that attends its indulgence.

Clitus, said I, was a man of very coarse and provoking manners, was he not?

Mr. Falkland felt the full force of this appeal. He gave me a penetrating look
as if he would see my very soul. His eyes were then in an instant withdrawn. I
could perceive him seized with a convulsive shuddering, which, though strongly
counteracted, and therefore scarcely visible, had I know not what of terrible
in it. He left his employment, strode about the room in anger, his visage
gradually assumed an expression as of supernatural barbarity, he quitted the
apartment abruptly, and flung the door with a violence that seemed to shake the
house.

Is this, said I, the fruit of conscious guilt, or of the disgust that a man of
honor conceives at guilt undeservedly imputed?

CHAP. XIV.
THE reader will feel how rapidly I was advancing to the brink of the
precipice. I had a confused apprehension of what I was doing, but I could not
stop myself. Is it possible, said I, that Mr. Falkland, who is thus overwhelmed
with a sense of the unmerited dishonor that has been fastened upon him in the
face of the word, will long endure the presence of a raw and unfriended youth,
who is perpetually bringing back that dishonor to his recollection, and who
seems himself the most forward to entertain the accusation?

I felt indeed that Mr. Falkland would not hastily incline to dismiss me, for
the same reason that restrained him from many other actions which might seem to
savor of a too tender and ambiguous sensibility. But this reflection was little
adapted to comfort me. That he should cherish in his heart a growing hatred
against me, and that he should think himself obliged to retain me a continual
thorn in his side, was an idea by no means of favorable augury to my future
peace.

It was some time after this that in clearing out a case of drawers I found a
paper that by some accident had slipped behind one of the drawers, and been
overlooked. At another time perhaps my curiosity might have given way to the
laws of decorum, and I should have restored it unopened to my master, its
owner. But my eagerness for information had been too much stimulated by the
preceding incidents to allow me at present to neglect any occasion of obtaining
it. The paper proved to be a letter written by the elder Hawkins, and from its
contents seemed to have been penned when he had first been upon the point of
absconding from the persecutions of Mr. Tyrrel. It was as follows.

Honorable Sir,
I have waited some time in daily hope of your honor's return into these
parts. Old Gines and his dame, who are lest to take care of your house, tell
me, they cannot say when that will be, nor justly in what part of England you
are at present. For my share misfortune comes so thick upon me, that I must
determine upon something (that is for certain), and out of hand. Our squire,
who I must own at first used me kindly enough, though I am afraid that was
partly out of spite to squire Underwood, has since determined to be the ruin of
me. Sir, I have been no craven; I fought it up stoutly; for after all, you
know, God bless your honor! it is but a man to a man; but he has been too much
for me.

Perhaps if I were to ride over to the market town and enquire of Munsle, your
lawyer, he could tell me how to direct to you. But having hoped and waited of
this fashion, and all in vain, has put me upon other thoughts. I was in no
hurry, sir, to apply to you; for I do not love to be a trouble to other people.
I kept that for my last stake. Well, sir, and now that has failed me like, I am
ashamed as it were to have thought of it. Have not I, thinks I, arms and legs
as well as other people? I am driven out of house and home. Well, and what
then? Sure I arn't a cabbage, that if you pull it out of the ground, it must
die. I am pennyless. True; and how many hundreds are there that live from hand
to mouth all the days of their life? (Begging your honor's pardon) thinks I,
if we little folks had ^ut the wit to do for ourselves, the great folks would
not be such maggoty changelings as they are. They would begin to look about
them.

But there is another thing that has swayed with me more than all the rest. I
do not know how to tell you, sir -- My poor boy, my Leonard, the pride of my
life, has been three weeks in the county jail. It is true indeed, sir. Squire
Tyrrel put him there. Now, sir, every time that I lay my head upon my pillow
under my own little roof, my heart smites me with the situation of my Leonard.
I do not mean so much for the hardship; I do not so much matter that. I do not
expect him to go through the world upon velvet; I am not such a fool. But who
can tell what may hap in a jail? I have been three times to see him; and there
is one man in the same quarter of the prison that looks so wicked! I do not
much fancy the looks of the rest. To be sure Leonard is as good a lad as ever
lived. I think he will not give his mind to such. But, come what will, I am
determined he shall not stay among them twelve hours longer. I am an obstinate
old fool perhaps; but I have taken it into my head, and I will do it. Do not
ask me what. But, if I were to write to your honor, and wait for your answer,
it might take a week or ten days more. I must not think of it!

Squire Tyrrel is very headstrong, and you, your honor, might be a little
hottish or so. No, I would not have any body quarrel for me. There has been
mischief enough done already; and I will get myself out of the way. So I write
this, your honor, merely to unload my mind. I feel myself equally as much
bound to respect and love you, as if you had done every thing for me that I
believe you would have done if things had chanced differently. It is most
likely you will never hear of me any more. If it should be so, set your worthy
heart at ^est. I know myself too well ever to be tempted to do any thing that
is really bad. I have now my fortune to seek in the world. I have been used ill
enough, God knows. But I bear no malice; my heart is at peace with all mankind;
and I forgive every body. It is like enough that poor Leonard and I may have
hardship enough to undergo, among strangers and being obliged to hide ourselves
like house-breakers or highwaymen. But I defy all the malice of fortune to make
us do an ill thing. That consolation we will always keep against all the
crosses of a heartbreaking world.

God bless you! So prays, Your honor's humble servant to command, BENJAMIN
HAWKINS.


I read this letter with considerable attention, and it occasioned me many
reflections. To my way of thinking it contained a very interesting picture of a
blunt, downright, honest mind. It is a melancholy consideration, said I to
myself; but such is man! To have judged from appearances one would have said,
This is a fellow, to have taken fortune's buffets and rewards with an
incorruptible mind. And yet see where it all ends! This man was capable of
afterward becoming a murderer, and finishing his life at the gallows. O
poverty! thou art indeed omnipotent! Thou grindest us into desperation; thou
confoundest all our boasted and most deep-rooted principles; thou fillest us to
the very brim with malice and revenge, and renderest us capable of acts of
unknown horror! May I never be visited by thee in the fullness of thy power!

Having satisfied my curiosity with respect to this paper, I took care to
dispose of it in such a manner as that it should be found by Mr. Falkland; at
the same time that, in obedience to the principle which at present governed me
with absolute dominion, I was willing that the way in which it offered itself
to his attention, should suggest to him the idea that it had possibly passed
through my hands. The next morning I saw him, and I exerted myself to lead the
conversation, which by this time I well knew how to introduce, by insensible
degrees to the point I desired. After several previous questions, remarks and
rejoinders, I continued:

Well, sir, after all, I cannot help feeling very uncomfortably as to my ideas
of human nature, when I find that there is no dependence to be placed upon its
perseverance, and that, at least among the illiterate, the most promising
appearances may end in the foulest disgrace.

You think then that literature and a cultivated mind are the only assurance
for the constancy of our principles?

Um! -- why do you suppose, sir, that learning and ingenuity do not often serve
people rather to hide their crimes, than to restrain them from committing them?
History tells us strange things in that respect.

Williams! said Mr. Falkland, a little disturbed, you are strangely given to
censure and severity.

I hope not. I am sure I am most fond of looking on the other side of the
picture, and considering how many men have been aspersed, and even at some time
or other almost torn to pieces by their fellow creatures, whom, when properly
understood, we find worthy of our reverence and love.

Indeed, replied Mr. Falkland with a sigh, when I consider these things, I do
not wonder at the dying exclamation of Brutus, O Virtue! I sought thee as a
substance, but I find thee an empty name! I am too much inclined to be of his
opinion.

Why to be sure, sir, innocence and guilt are too much confounded in human
life. I remember a very affecting story of a poor man in the reign of queen
Elizabeth, who would have infallibly been hanged for murder upon the strength
of circumstantial evidence, if the person really concerned had not been himself
upon the jury, and prevented it.

In saying this I touched the spring that wakened madness in his mind. He came
up to me with a ferocious countenance as if determined to force me into a
confession of my thoughts. A sudden pang however seemed to change his design;
he drew back with trepidation; and exclaimed, Detested be the universe, and the
laws that govern it! Honor, justice, virtue are all the juggle of knaves! If
it were in my power, I would instantly crush the whole system into nothing!

I replied; Oh, sir! things are not so bad as you imagine. The world was made
for men of sense to do what they will with it. Its affairs cannot be better
than in the direction of the genuine heroes; and, as in the end they will be
found the truest friends of the whole, so the multitude have nothing to do, but
to look on, be fashioned and admire.

Mr. Falkland made a powerful effort to recover his tranquillity. Williams!
said he, you instruct me well. You have a right notion of things, and I have
great hopes of you. I will be more of a man. I will forget the past, and do
better for the time to come. The future, the future is always our own.

I am sorry, sir, that I have given you pain. I am afraid to say all that I
think. But it is my opinion that mistakes will ultimately be cleared up,
justice be done, and the true state of things come to light in spite of the
false colors that may for a time obscure it.

The idea I suggested did not give Mr. Falkland the proper degree of delight.
He suffered a temporary relapse. Justice! -- he muttered. I do not know what is
justice. My case is not within the reach of common remedies; perhaps of none. I
only know that I am miserable. I began life with the best intentions and the
most fervid philanthropy; and here I am -- miserable -- miserable beyond
expression or endurance.

Having said this, he seemed suddenly to recollect himself, and reassume his
accustomed dignity and command. How came this conversation? cried he. Who gave
you a right to be my confident? Base, artful wretch that you are! learn to be
more respectful! Are my passions to be wound and unwound by an insolent
domestic? Do you think I will be an instrument to be played on at your
pleasure, till you have extorted all the treasures of my soul? Begone, and fear
le^t you be made to pay for the temerity you have already committed.

There was an energy and determination in the gestures with which these words
were accompanied that did not admit of their being disputed. My mouth was
closed; I felt as if deprived of all share of activity, and was only able
silently and passively to quit the apartment.

CHAP. XV.
TWO days subsequent to this conversation Mr. Falkland ordered me to be called
to him. [I shall continue to speak in my narrative of the silent, as well as
the articulate part of the intercourse between us. His countenance was
habitually animated and expressive much beyond that of any other man I have
seen. The curiosity, which, as I have said, constituted at this time my ruling
passion, stimulated me to make it my perpetual study. It will also most
probably happen, while I am thus employed in collecting together the scattered
incidents of my history, that I shall upon some occasions annex to appearances
an explanation, which I was far from possessing at the time, and was only
suggested to me through the medium of subsequent events.]

Upon this occasion Mr. Falkland's countenance exhibited an unwonted composure.
This composure however did not seem to result from internal ease, but from an
effort which, while he prepared himself for an interesting scene, was exerted
to prevent his presence of mind and power of voluntary action from suffering
any diminution.

Williams, said he, I am determined, whatever it may cost me, to have an
explanation with you. You are a rash and inconsiderate boy, and have given me a
great deal of disturbance. You ought to have known that, though I allow you to
talk with me upon indifferent subjects, it is very improper in you to lead the
conversation to any thing that relates to my personal concerns. You have said
many things lately in a very mysterious way, and appear to know something more
than I am aware of. I am equally at a loss to guess how you came by your
knowledge, as of what it consists. But I think I perceive too much inclination
on your part to trifle with my peace of mind. That ought not to be, nor have I
deserved any such treatment from you. But, be that as it will, the guesses in
which you oblige me to employ myself are too painful. It is a sort of sporting
with my feeling, which, as a man of resolution, I am determined to bring to an
end. I expect you therefore to lay aside all mystery and equivocation, and
inform me explicitly what it is upon which your allusions are built. What is it
you know? What is it you want? I have been too much exposed already to an
unparalleled mortification and hardship, and my wounds will not bear this
perpetual handling.

I feel, sir, answered I, how wrong I have been, and am ashamed that such a one
as I should have given you all this trouble and displeasure. I felt it at the
time; but I have been hurried along I do not know how. I have always tried to
stop myself, but the devil that possessed me was too strong for me. I know
nothing, sir, but what Mr. Collins told me. He told me the story of Mr. Tyrrel
and Miss Melvile and Hawkins. I am sure, sir, he said nothing but what was to
your honor, and proved you to be more an angel than a man.

Well, sir: I found a letter written by that Hawkins the other day: did not
that letter fall into your hands? Did not you read it?

For God's sake, sir, turn me out of your house. Punish me in some way or
other, that I may forgive myself. I am a foolish, wicked, despicable wretch. I
confess, sir, I did read the letter.

And how dared you read it? It was indeed very wrong of you. But we will talk
of that by and by. Well, and what did you say to the letter? You know it seems
that Hawkins was hanged.

I say, sir? why it went to my heart to read it. I say, as I said the day
before yesterday, that, when I see a man of so much principle, afterward
deliberately proceeding to the very worst of crimes, I can scarcely bear to
think of it.

That is what you say? It seems too you know, accursed remembrance! that I was
tried for this crime?

I was silent.

Well, sir. You know too perhaps that, from the hour the crime was committed,
-- yes, sir, that was the date [and, as he said this, there was somewhat
frightful, I had almost said diabolical, in his countenance] -- I have not had
an hour's peace; I became changed from the happiest into the most miserable
thing that lives; sleep has fled from my eyes; joy has been a stranger to my
thoughts; and annihilation I should prefer a thousand times to the being that I
lead. As soon as I was capable of a choice, I chose honor and the esteem of
mankind as a good I preferred to all others. You know, it seems, in how many
ways my ambition has been disappointed, -- I do not thank Collins for having
been the historian of my disgrace, -- Would to God that night could be blotted
from the memory of man! -- But the scene of that night, instead of perishing,
has been a source of ever new calamity to me, which must flow for ever! Am I
then, thus miserable and ruined, a proper subject for you upon which to
exercise your ingenuity, and improve your power of tormenting? Was it not
enough that I was publicly dishonored? that I was deprived by the pestilential
influence of some demon of the opportunity of avenging my dishonor? No: in
addition to this I have been tried upon the charge of having in this critical
moment intercepted my own vengeance by the foulest of crimes. That trial is
past. Misery itself has nothing worse in store for me except what you have
inflicted: the seeming to doubt of my innocence which neither persecutor, nor
judge, nor jury ever ventured to do. You have forced me to this explanation.
You have extorted from me a confidence which I had no inclination to confer.
But it is a part of the misery of my situation, that I am at the mercy of every
creature, however little, who feels himself inclined to sport with my distress.
Be content. You have brought me low enough.

Oh, sir! I am not content; I cannot be content! I cannot bear to think what I
have done. I shall never again be able to look in the face the best of masters
and the best of men. I beg of you, sir, to turn me out of your service. Let me
go and hide myself where I may never see you more.

Mr. Falkland's countenance had indicated great severity through the whole of
this conversation; but now it became more harsh and tempestuous than ever. How
now, rascal! cried he. You want to leave me, do you? Who told you that I wished
to part with you? But you cannot bear to live with such a miserable wretch as I
am! You are not disposed to put up with the caprices of a man so dissatisfied
and unjust!

Oh, sir! do not talk to me thus! Do with me any thing you will. Kill me if you
please.

Kill you! [Volumes could not describe the emotions with which this echo of my
words was given and received.]

Sir, I could die to serve you! I love you more than I can express. I worship
you as a being of a superior nature. I am foolish, raw, inexperienced, -- worse
than any of th^se; -- but never did a thought of disloyalty to your service
enter into my heart.

Here our conversation ended; and the impression it made upon my youthful mind
it is impossible to describe. I thought with astonishment, even with rapture,
of the attention and kindness toward me I discovered in Mr. Falkland through
all the roughness of his manner. I could never wonder enough at finding myself,
humble as I was by my birth, obscure as I had hitherto been, thus suddenly
become of so much importance to the happiness of one of the most enlightened
and accomplished men in England. But this consciousness attached me to my
master more eagerly than ever, and made me swear a thousand times as I
meditated upon my situation, that I would never prove unworthy of so generous a
protector.

CHAP. XVI.
IS it not unaccountable that, in the midst of all my increased veneration for
my master, the first tumult of my emotion was scarcely subsided, before the old
question that had excited my conjectures recurred to my mind, Was he the
murderer? It was a kind of fatal impulse that seemed destined to hurry me to
destruction. I did not wonder at the disturbance that was given to Mr. Falkland
by any allusion however distant to this fatal affair. That was as completely
accounted for from the consideration of his excessive sensibility in matters of
honor, as it would have been upon the supposition of the most atrocious guilt.
Knowing as he did, that such a charge had once been connected with his name, he
would of course be perpetually uneasy, and suspect some latent insinuation at
every possible opportunity. He would doubt and fear, lest every man with whom
he conversed harbored the foulest suspicions against him. In my case he found
that I was in possession of some information more than he was aware of, without
its being possible for him to decide to what it amounted, whether I had heard a
just or unjust, a candid or calumniatory tale. He had also reason to suppose
that I gave entertainment to thoughts derogatory to his honor, and that I did
not form that favorable judgment which the exquisite refinement of his ruling
passion made indispensable to his peace. All these considerations would of
course maintain in him a state of perpetual uneasiness. But, though I could
find nothing that I could consider as justifying me in persisting in the shadow
of a doubt, yet, as I have said, the uncertainty and restlessness of my
contemplations would by no means depart from me.

The fluctuating state of my mind produced a contention of opposite principles
that by turns usurped dominion over my conduct. Sometimes I was influenced by
the most complete veneration for my master; I placed an unreserved confidence
in his integrity and his virtue, and implicitly surrendered my understanding
for him to set it to what point he pleased. At other times the confidence,
which had before flowed with the most plenteous tide, began to ebb; I was, as I
had already been, watchful, inquisitive, suspicious, full of a thousand
conjectures as to the meaning of the most indifferent actions. Mr. Falkland,
who was most painfully alive to every thing that related to his honor, saw
these variations, and betrayed his consciousness of them now in one manner and
now in another, frequently before I was myself aware, sometimes almost before
they existed. The situation of both was distressing; we were each of us a
plague to the other; and I often wondered that the forbearance and benignity of
my master was not at length exhausted, and that he did not determine to thrust
from him for ever so incessant an observer. There was indeed one eminent
difference between his share in the transaction and mine. I had some
consolation in the midst of my restlessness. Curiosity is a principle that
carries its pleasures as well as its pains along with it. The mind is urged by
a perpetual stimulus; it seems as if it were continually approaching to the end
of its race; and, as the insatiable desire of satisfaction is its principle of
conduct, so it promises itself in that satisfaction an unknown gratification,
which seems as if it were capable of fully compensating any injuries that may
be suffered in the career. But to Mr. Falkland there was no consolation. What
he endured in the intercourse between us appeared to be all gratuitous evil. He
had only to wish that there was no such person as myself in the world, and to
curse the hour when his humanity led him to rescue me from my obscurity, and
place me in his service.

A consequence produced upon me by the extraordinary nature of my situation it
is necessary to mention. The constant state of vigilance and suspicion in which
my mind was retained worked a very rapid change in my character. It seemed to
have all the effect that might have been expected from years of observation and
experience. The strictness with which I endeavored to remark what passed in
the mind of one man, and the variety of conjectures into which I was led,
appeared as it were to render me a competent adept in the different modes in
which the human intellect displays its secret workings. I no longer said to
myself, as I had done in the beginning, "I will ask Mr. Falkland whether he
were the murderer." On the contrary, after having carefully examined the
different kinds of evidence of which the subject was susceptible, and
recollecting all that had already passed upon the subject, it was not without
considerable pain that I felt myself unable to discover any way in which I
could be perfectly and unalterably satisfied of my master's innocence. As to
his guilt, I could scarcely bring myself to doubt that in some way or other,
sooner or later, I should arrive at the knowledge of that, if it really
existed. But I could not endure to think almost for a moment of that side of
the alternative as true; and, with all my ungovernable suspicion, arising from
the mysteriousness of the circumstances, and the delight which a young and
unfledged mind receives from ideas that give scope to all that imagination can
picture of terrible or sublime, I could not yet bring myself to consider Mr.
Falkland's guilt as a supposition attended with the remotest probability.

I hope the reader will forgive me for dwelling thus long on preliminary
circumstances. I shall come soon enough to the story of my own misery. I have
already said that one of the motives which induced me to the penning of this
narrative was to console myself in my insupportable distress. I derive a
melancholy pleasure from dwelling upon the circumstances which imperceptibly
paved the way to my ruin. While I recollect or describe past scenes which
occurred in a more favorable period of my life, my attention is called off for
a short interval from the hopeless misfortune in which I am at present
involved. The man must indeed possess an uncommon portion of hardness of heart,
who can envy me so slight a relief. -- To proceed.

For some time after the explanation which had thus taken place between me and
my master, his melancholy, instead of being in the slightest degree diminished
by the lenient hand of time, went on perpetually to increase. His fits of
insanity, for such I must denominate them for want of a distinct appellation,
though it is possible they might not fall under the definition that either the
faculty or the court of chancery appropriate to that term, became stronger and
more durable than ever. It was no longer practicable wholly to conceal them
from the family and even from the neighborhood. He would sometimes without any
previous notice absent himself from his house for two or three days,
unaccompanied by any servants or attendants. This was the more extraordinary,
as it was well known that he paid no visits, nor kept up any sort of
intercourse with the gentlemen of the vicinity. But it was impossible that a
man of Mr. Falkland's distinction and fortune should long continue in such a
practice without its being discovered what was become of him, though a
considerable part of our county was among the wildest and most desolate
districts that are to be sound in South Britain. Mr. Falkland was sometimes
seen climbing among the rocks, reclining motionless for hours together upon the
edge of a precipice, or lulled into a kind of nameless lethargy of despair by
the dashing of the torrents. He would remain for whole nights together under
the naked cope of heaven, inattentive to the consideration either of place or
time, insensible to the variations of the weather, or rather seeming to be
delighted with that uproar of the elements which partially called off his
attention from the discord and dejection which occupied his own mind.

At first, when we received intelligence at any time of the place to which Mr.
Falkland had withdrawn himself, some person of his household, Mr. Collins or
myself, but most generally myself, as I was always at home, and always in the
received sense of that word at leisure, went to him to persuade him to return.
But after a few experiments we thought it advisable to desist, and to leave my
master to prolong his absence, or to terminate it, as might happen to suit his
own inclination. Mr. Collins, whose gray hairs and long services seemed to give
him a sort of right to be importunate, sometimes succeeded; though even in that
case there was nothing that could sit more uneasy upon Mr. Falkland than this
insinuation as if he wanted a guardian to take care of him, or as if he were,
or were in danger of, falling into a state in which he would be incapable of
deliberately controuling his own words and actions. At one time he would
sullenly yield to his humble, venerable friend, murmuring grievously at the
constraint that was put upon him, but without spirit enough even to complain of
it with energy. At another time, even though complying, he would suddenly burst
out in a paroxysm of resentment. Upon these occasions there was something
inconceivably, savagely terrible in his anger, that gave to the person against
whom it was directed the most humiliating and insupportable sensations. Me he
always treated at these times with fierceness, and drove me from him with a
vehemence, lofty, emphatical and sustained beyond any thing of which I should
have thought human nature to be capable. These sallies seemed always to
constitute a sort of crisis in his indisposition; and, whenever he was induced
to such a premature return, he would fall immediately after into a state of the
most melancholy inactivity, in which he usually continued for two or three
days. It was by an obstinate fatality that, whenever I saw Mr. Falkland in
these deplorable situations, and particularly when I lighted upon him after
having sought him among the rocks and precipices, pale, emaciated, solitary and
haggard, the suggestion would continually recur to me, in spite of inclination,
in spite of persuasion, and in spite of evidence, Surely this man is a murderer!

CHAP. XVII.
IT was in one of the lucid intervals, as I may term them, that occurred during
this period, that a peasant was brought before him, in his character of a
justice of peace, upon an accusation of having murdered his fellow. As Mr.
Falkland had by this time acquired the repute of a melancholy valetudinarian,
it is probable he would not have been called upon to act in his official
character upon the present occasion, had it not been that two or three of the
neighboring justices were all of them from home at once, so that he was the
only one to be found in a circuit of many miles. The reader however must not
imagine, though I have employed the word insanity in describing Mr. Falkland's
symptoms, that he was by any means reckoned for a madman by the generality of
those who had occasion to observe him. It is true that his behavior at certain
times was singular and unaccountable; but then at other times there was in it
so much dignity, regularity and economy; he knew so well how to command and
make himself respected; his actions and carriage were so condescending,
considerate and benevolent; that, far from having forfeited the esteem of the
unfortunate or the many, they were loud and earnest in his praises.

I was present at the examination of this peasant. The moment I heard of the
errand which had brought this rabble of visitors, a sudden thought struck me. I
conceived the possibility of rendering the incident subordinate to the great
enquiry which drank up all the currents of my soul. I said, This man is
arraigned of murder, and murder is the master-key that wakes distemper in the
mind of Mr. Falkland. I will watch him without remission. I will trace all the
mazes of his thought. Surely at such a time his secret anguish must betray
itself. Surely, if it be not my own fault, I shall now be able to discover the
true state of his plea before the tribunal of unerring justice.

I took my station in a manner most favorable to the object upon which my mind
was intent. I could perceive in Mr. Falkland's features as he entered a strong
reluctance to the business in which he was engaged; but there was no
possibility of retreating. His countenance was embarrassed and anxious; he
scarcely saw any body. The examination had not proceeded far before he chanced
to turn his eye to the part of the room where I was. It happened in this, as in
some preceding instances; we exchanged a silent look by which we told volumes
to each other. Mr. Falkland's complexion turned from red to pale, and from pale
to red. I perfectly understood his feelings, and would willingly have withdrawn
myself. But it was impossible; my passions were too deeply engaged; I was
rooted to the spot: though my own life, that of my master, or almost of a whole
nation had been at stake, I had no power to change my position.

The first surprise however having subsided, Mr. Falkland assumed a look of
determined constancy, and even seemed to increase in self-possession much
beyond what could have been expected from his first entrance. This he could
probably have maintained, had it not been that the scene, instead of being
permanent, was in some sort perpetually changing. The man who was brought
before him was vehemently accused by the brother of the deceased as having
acted from the most rooted malice. He swore that there had been an old grudge
between the parties, and related several instances of it. He affirmed that the
murderer had sought the earliest opportunity of wreaking his revenge, had
struck the first blow, and, though the contest was in appearance only a common
boxing match, had watched the occasion of giving a fatal stroke which was
followed by the instant death of his antagonist.

While the accuser was giving in his evidence, the accused discovered every
token of the most poignant sensibility. At one time his features were convulsed
with anguish, tears unbidden rolled down his manly cheeks; and at another be
started with astonishment at the unfavourable turn that was given to the
narrative, though without betraying any impatience to interrupt. I never saw a
man less ferocious in his appearance. He was tall, well made and comely. His
countenance was ingenuous and benevolent, without folly. By his side stood a
young woman, his sweetheart, extremely agreeable in her person, and her looks
testifying how deeply she interested herself in the fate of her lover. The
accidental spectators were divided between indignation against the enormity of
the supposed criminal, and compassion for the poor girl that accompanied him.
They seemed to take little notice of the favorable appearances visible in the
person of the accused, till in the sequel those appearances were more forcibly
suggested to their attention. For Mr. Falkland, he was at one moment engrossed
by curiosity and earnestness to investigate the tale, while at another be
betrayed a sort of revulsion of sentiment which made the investigation too
painful for him to support.

When the accused was called upon for his defense, he readily owned the
misunderstanding that had existed, and that the deceased was the worst enemy he
had in the world. Indeed he was his only enemy, and he could not tell the
reason that had made him so. He had employed every possible effort to overcome
his animosity, but in vain. The deceased had upon all occasions sought to
mortify him, and do him an ill turn; but he had resolved never to be engaged in
a broil with him, and till this day he had succeeded. If he had met with a
misfortune with any other man, people at least might have thought it matter of
accident; but now it would always be believed that he had acted from secret
malice and a bad heart.

The fact was that he and his sweetheart had gone to a neighboring fair, where
this man had met them. The man had often tried to affront him, and his
passiveness, interpreted into cowardice, had perhaps encouraged the other to
additional rudeness. Finding that he had endured trivial insults to himself
with an even temper, the deceased now thought proper to turn his brutality upon
the young woman that accompanied him. He pursued them; he endeavored in
various manners to harrass and vex them; they had sought in vain to shake him
off. The young woman was considerably terrified. The accused expostulated with
their persecutor, and asked him how he could be so barbarous as to persist in
frightening a woman? He replied with an insulting tone, Then the woman should
find some one able to protect her; people that encouraged and trusted to such a
thief as that, deserved no better! The accused tried every expedient he could
invent; at length he could endure it no longer; he became exasperated, and
challenged the assailant. The challenge was accepted; a ring was formed; he
confided the care of his sweetheart to a bystander; and unfortunately the
first blow he struck proved fatal.

The accused added that he did not care what became of him. He had been anxious
to go through the world in an inoffensive manner, and now he had the guilt of
blood upon him. He did not know but it would be a kindness in them to hang him
out of the way; for his conscience would reproach him as long as he lived, and
the figure of the deceased, as he had laid senseless and without motion at his
feet, would perpetually haunt him. The thought of this man, at one moment full
of life and vigor, and the next lifted a helpless corpse from the ground, and
all owing to him, was a thought too dreadful to be endured. He had loved the
poor maiden who had been the innocent occasion of this with all his heart, but
from this time he should never support the sight of her. The sight would bring
a tribe of fiends in its rear. One unlucky minute had poisoned all his hopes,
and made life a burden to him. -- Saying this his countenance fell, the muscles
of his face trembled with agony, and he looked the statue of depair.

This was the story of which Mr. Falkland was called upon to be the auditor.
Though the incidents were for the most part wide of those which belonged to the
adventures we have just related, and there had been much less policy and skill
displayed on either part in this rustic encounter, yet there were many points
which, to a man who bore the former strongly in his recollection, suggested a
sufficient resemblance. These points perpetually smote upon the heart of Mr.
Falkland. He at one time started with astonishment, and at another shifted his
posture like a man who is unable longer to endure the sensations that press
upon him. Then he new-strung his nerves to stubborn patience. I could see,
while his muscles preserved an inflexible steadiness, tears of unbidden anguish
roll down his cheeks. He dared not trust his eyes to glance toward the side of
the room where I stood; and this gave an air of embarrassment to his whole
figure. But, when the accused came to speak of his own feelings, to describe
the depth of his compunction for an involuntary fault, he could endure it no
longer. He suddenly rose, and with every mark of horror and despair rushed out
of the room.

This circumstance made no material difference in the affair of the accused.
The parties were detained about half an hour. Mr. Falkland had already heard
the material parts of the evidence in person. At the expiration of that
interval, he sent for Mr. Collins out of the room. The story of the culprit was
confirmed by many witnesses who had seen the transaction. Word was brought that
my master was indisposed, and at the same time the accused was ordered to be
discharged. The vengeance of the brother however, as I afterward understood,
did not rest here, and he sound a magistrate more scrupulous or more despotic,
by whom the culprit was committed.

This affair was no sooner concluded than I hastened into the garden, and
plunged into the deepest of its thickets. My mind was full almost to bursting.
I no sooner conceived myself sufficiently removed from all observation, than my
thoughts forced their way spontaneously to my tongue, and I exclaimed in a sit
of uncontrollable enthusiasm: "This is the murderer! the Hawkinses were
innocent! I am sure of it! I will pledge my life of it! It is out! It is
discovered! Guilty upon my soul!"

While I thus proceeded with hasty steps along the most secret paths of the
garden, and from time to time gave vent to the tumult of my thoughts in
involuntary exclamations, I felt as if my animal system had undergone a total
revolution. My blood boiled within me. I was conscious to a kind of rapture for
which I could not account. I was solemn, yet full of rapid emotion, burning
with indignation and energy. In the very tempest and hurricane of the passions,
I seemed to enjoy the most soul-ravishing calm. I cannot better express the
then state of my mind, than by saying, I was never so perfectly alive as at
that moment.

This state of mental elevation continued for several hours, but at length
subsided and gave place to more deliberate reflection. One of the first
questions that then occurred was, What shall I do with the knowledge I have been
so eager to acquire? I had no inclination to turn informer. I felt, what I had
had no previous conception of, that it was possible to love a murderer, and, as
I then understood it, the worst of murderers. I conceived it to be in the
highest degree absurd and iniquitous to cut off a man qualified for the most
essential and extensive utility merely out of retrospect to an act which,
whatever were its merits, could not now be retrieved.

This thought led me to another which had at first passed unnoticed. If I had
been disposed to turn informer, what had occurred amounted to no evidence that
was admissible in a court of justice. Well then, added I, if it be such as
would not be admitted at a criminal tribunal, am I sure it is such as I ought
to admit? There were twenty persons beside myself present at the scene from
which I pretend to derive such entire conviction. Not one of them saw it in the
light that I did. It either appeared to them a casual and unimportant
circumstance, or they thought it sufficiently accounted for by Mr. Falkland's
infirmity and misfortunes. Did it really contain such an extent of arguments
and application, that nobody but I was discerning enough to see?

But all this reasoning produced no alteration in my way of thinking. For this
time I could not get it out of my mind for a moment: "Mr. Falkland is the
murderer! He is guilty! I see it! I feel it! I am sure of it!" Thus was I
hurried along by an uncontrollable destiny. The state of my passions in their
progressive career, the inquisitiveness and impatience of my thoughts, appeared
to make this determination unavoidable.

An incident occured while I was in the garden, that seemed to make no
impression upon me at the time, but which I recollected when my thoughts were
got into somewhat of a slower motion. In the midst of one of my paroxysms of
exclamation, and when I thought myself most alone, the shadow of a man as
avoiding me passed transiently by me at a small distance. Though I had scarcely
caught a faint glimpse of his person, there was something in the occurrence
that persuaded me it was Mr. Falkland. I shuddered at the possibility of his
having overheard the words of my soliloquy. But this idea, alarming as it was,
had not power immediately to suspend the career of my reflections. Subsequent
circumstances however brought back the apprehension to my mind. I had scarcely
a doubt of its reality, when dinner time came, and Mr. Falkland was not to be
found. Supper and bedtime passed in the same manner. The only conclusion made
by his servants upon this circumstance was, that he was gone upon one of his
accustomed melancholy rambles.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE period at which my story is now arrived seemed as if it were the very
crisis of the fortune of Mr. Falkland. Incident followed upon incident in a
kind of breathless succession. About nine o'clock the next morning an alarm was
given that one of the chimnies of the house was on fire. No accident could be
apparently more trivial; but presently it blazed with such fury, as to make it
clear that some beam of the house, which in the first building had been
improperly placed, had been reached by the flames. Some danger was apprehended
for the whole edifice. The confusion was the greater, in consequence of the
absence of the master, as well as of Mr. Collins, the steward. While some of
the domestics were employed in endeavoring to extinguish the flames, it was
thought proper that others should busy themselves in removing the most valuable
movables to a lawn in the garden. I took some command in the affair, to which
indeed my station in the family seemed to entitle me, and for which I was
thought qualified by my understanding and mental resources.

Having given some general directions, I conceived that it was not enough to
stand by and superintend, but that I should contribute my personal labor in
the public concern. I set out for that purpose; and my steps by some mysterious
fatality were directed to the private apartment at the end of the library.
Here, as I looked round, my eye was suddenly caught by the chest mentioned in
the first pages of my narrative.

My mind was already raised to its utmost pitch. In a window-seat of the room
lay a parcel of chissels and other carpenter's tools. I know not what
infatuation instantaneously seized me. The idea was too powerful to be
resisted. I forgot the business upon which I came, the employment of the
servants and the urgency of general danger. I should have done the same, if the
apartment round me had been in flames. I snatched a tool suitable for the
purpose, threw myself upon the ground, and applied with eagerness to a magazine
which enclosed all for which my heart panted. After two or three efforts, in
which the energy or uncontrollable passion was added to my bodily strength, the
fastenings gave way, the chest opened, and all that I sought was at once within
my reach.

I was in the act of lifting up the lid, when Mr. Falkland entered, wild,
breathless, distraction in his looks! He had been brought home from a
considerable distance by the sight of the flames. At the moment of his
appearance the lid dropped down from my hand. He no sooner saw me, than his eyes
emitted sparks of rage. He ran with eagerness to a brace of loaded pistols
which hung up in the room, and, seizing one, presented it to my head. I saw his
design, and sprang to avoid it; but with the same rapidity with which he had
formed his resolution, he changed it, and instantly went to the window and
slung the pistol into the court below. He bade me begone with his usual
irresistible energy; and, overcome as I was already by the horror of the
detection, I eagerly complied.

A moment after a considerable part of the chimney was tumbled with noise into
the court below, and a voice exclaimed that the fire was more violent than
ever. These circumstances seemed to produce a mechanical effect upon my master,
who, having first locked the closet, appeared on the outside of the house,
ascended the roof, and was in a moment in every place where his presence was
required. The flames were presently extinguished.

The reader can with difficulty form a conception of the state to which I was
now reduced. My act was in some sort an act of insanity; but how undescribable
are the feelings with which I looked back upon it! It was an instantaneous
impulse, a short lived and passing alienation of mind; but what must Mr.
Falkland think of that alienation? To any man a person, who had once shown
himself capable of so wild a flight of the mind, must appear dangerous; how
must he appear to a man under Mr. Falkland's circumstances? I had just had a
pistol held to my head by a man resolved to put a period to my existence. That
indeed was past; but what was it that fate had yet in reserve for me! The
insatiable vengeance of a Falkland, of a man whose hands were to my
apprehension red with blood and his thoughts familiar with cruelty and murder.
How great were the resources of his mind, resources henceforth to be
confederated for my destruction! This was the termination of an ungoverned
curiosity, an impulse that I had represented to myself as so innocent and so
venial.

In the high tide of boiling passion I had overlooked all consequences. It now
appeared to me like a dream. Is it in man to leap from the highraised
precipice, or rush unconcerned into the midst of flames? Was it possible I
could have forgotten for a moment the awe-creating manners of Falkland, and the
inexorable fury I should awake in his soul? No thought of future security had
reached my mind. I had acted upon no plan. I had conceived no means of
concealing my deed, after it had once been effected. But it was over now. One
short minute had effected a reverse in my situation, the suddenness of which
the history of man perhaps is unable to surpass.

I have always been at a loss to account for my having plunged thus headlong
into an act so monstrous. There is something in it of unremarked and
involuntary sympathy. One sentiment flows by necessity of nature into another
sentiment of the same general character. This was the first instance in which I
had witnessed a danger by fire. All was confusion around me, and all changed
into hurricane within. The general situation to my unpractised apprehension
partook of desperate, and I by contagion became alike desperate. At first I had
been in some degree calm and collected, but that too was a desperate effort,
and when it gave way, a kind of instant insanity became its successor.

I had now every thing to fear. And yet what was my fault? It proceeded from
none of those errors which are justly held up to the aversion of mankind; my
object had been neither wealth, nor the means of indulgence, nor the usurpation
of power. No spark of malignity had ^arboured in my soul. I had always
reverenced the sublime mind of Mr. Falkland; I reverenced it still. My offense
had merely been a mistaken thirst of knowledge. Such however it was as to admit
neither of forgiveness nor remission. This epoch was the crisis of my fate,
dividing what may be called the offensive part, from the defensive which was
the sole business of my remaining years. Alas, my offense was short, not
aggravated by any sinister intention: but the reprisals I was to suffer, are
long, and can terminate only with my life!

In the state in which I found myself, when the recollection of what I had done
flowed back upon my mind, I was incapable of any resolution. All was chaos and
uncertainty within me. My thoughts were too full of horror to be susceptible of
activity. I felt deserted of my intellectual powers, palsied in mind, and
compelled to sit in speechless expectation of the misery to which I was
destined. To my own conception I was like a man, who, though blasted with
lightning and deprived for ever of the power of motion, should yet retain the
consciousness of his situation. Death-dealing despair was the only idea of
which I was sensible.

I was still in this situation of mind when Mr. Falkland sent for me. His
message roufed me from my trance. In recovering I felt those sickening and
loathsome sensations, which a man may be supposed at first to endure who should
return from the sleep of death. Gradually I recovered the power of arranging my
ideas and directing my steps. I understood that the minute the affair of the
chimney was over Mr. Falkland had retired to his own room. It was evening
before he ordered me to be called.

I found in him every token of extreme distress, except that there was an air
of solemn and sad composure that crowned the whole. For the present all
appearance of gloom, stateliness and austerity was gone. As I entered, he
looked up, and, seeing who it was, ordered me to bolt the door. I obeyed. He
himself went round the room, and examined all its other avenue^. He then
returned to where I was. I trembled in every joint of my frame. I exclaimed
within myself, "What bloody (...) scene has Roscius now to act?"

Williams, said he, in a tone that had more in it of sorrow than resentment, I
have attempted your life! I am a wretch devoted to the scorn and execration of
mankind! -- There he stopped.

If there be one being in the whole earth, that feels the scorn and execration
due to such a wretch more strongly than another, it is myself. I have been kept
in a state of perpetual torture and madness. But I can put an end to it and its
consequences; and, so far at least as relates to you, I am determined to do it.
I know the price, and -- I will make the purchase.

You must swear, said he. You must attest every sacrament, divine and human,
never to disclose what I am now to tell you. -- He dictated the oath, and I
repeated it with an aching heart. I had no power to offer a word of remark.

This confidence, said he, is of your seeking, not of mine. It is odious to me,
as it is dangerous to you.

Having thus prefaced the disclosure he had to make, he paused. He seemed to
collect himself as for an effort of magnitude. He wiped his face with his
handkerchief. The moisture that incommoded him appeared not to be tears, but
sweat.

Look at me. Observe me. Is it not strange that such a one as I should retain
lineaments of a human creature? I am the blackest of villains. I am the
murderer of Tyrrel. I am the assassin of the Hawkinses.

I started, as if I had trod upon a rattle-snake.

What a story is mine! Insulted, disgraced, polluted in the face of hundreds, I
was capable of any act of desperation. I watched my opportunity, followed Mr.
Tyrrel from the rooms, seized a sharp-pointed knife that fell in my way, came
behind him, and stabbed him to the heart. My gigantic oppressor rolled at my
feet.

All are but links of one chain. A blow! A murder! My next business was to
defend myself, to tell so well digested a lie, as that all mankind should
believe it true. Never was a task so harrowing and intolerable!

Well: thus far fortune favored me. She favored me beyond my desire. The
guilt was removed from me, and cast upon another; but this I was to endure.
Whence came the circumstantial evidence against him, the broken knife and the
blood, I am unable to tell. I suppose by some miraculous accident he was
passing by, and endeavored to assist his oppressor in the agonies of death.
You have heard Hawkins's story; you have read one of his letters. But you do
not know the thousandth part of the proofs of his simple and unalterable
rectitude that I have known. His son suffered with him, that son for the sake
of whose happiness and virtue he ruined himself, and would have died a hundred
times. -- I have had feelings, but I cannot describe them.

This it is to be a gentleman! a man of honor! I was the fool of fame. My
virtue, my honesty, my everlasting peace of mind were cheap sacrifices to be
made at the shine of this divinity. But, what is worse, there is nothing that
has happened that has in any degree contributed to my cure. I am as much the
fool of fame as ever, I cling to it to my last breath. Though I be the blackest
of villains, I will leave behind me a spotless and illustrious name. There is
no crime so malignant, no scene of blood so horrible, in which that object
cannot engage me. It is no matter that I regard these things at a distance with
aversion; -- I am sure of it; bring me to the test, and I shall yield. I
despise myself; but thus I am; things are gone too far to be recalled.

Why is it that I am compelled to this confidence? From the love of fame. I
should tremble at the sight of every pistol, or instrument of death that
offered itself to my hands; and perhaps my next murder may not be so fortunate
as those I have already committed. I had no alternative but to make you my
confident or my victim. It was better to trust you with the whole truth under
every seal of secrecy, than to live in perpetual fear of your penetration or
your rashness.

Do you know what it is you have done? To gratify a foolishly inquisitive
humor you have sold yourself. You shall continue in my service, but can never
share in my affection. I will benefit you in respect of fortune, but I shall
always hate you. If ever an unguarded word escape from your lips, if ever you
excite my jealousy or suspicion, expect to pay for it by your death or worse.
It is a dear bargain you have made. But it is too late to look back. I charge
and adjure you by every thing that is sacred and that is tremendous, preserve
your faith!

My tongue has now for the first time for several years spoken the language of
my heart; and the intercourse from this hour shall be shut for ever. I want no
pity. I desire no consolation. Surrounded as I am with horrors, I will at least
preserve my fortitude to the last. If I had been reserved to a different
destiny, I have qualities in that respect worthy of a better cause. I can be
mad, miserable and frantic, but even in frenzy I can preserve my presence of
mind and discretion.

Such was the story I had been so earnestly desirous to know. Though my mind
had brooded upon the subject for months, there was not a syllable of it that
did not come to my ear with the most perfect sense of novelty. Mr. Falkland is
a murderer! said I, as I retired from the conference. This dreadful appellative
"a murderer," made my very blood run cold within me. He killed Mr. Tyrrel, for
he could not control his resentment and anger: he sacrificed Hawkins the elder
and Hawkins the younger, because he could upon no terms endure the public loss
of honor: how can I expect that a man thus passionate and unrelenting will not
sooner or later make me his victim?

But notwithstanding this terrible application of the story, an application to
which perhaps in some form or other mankind are indebted for nine-tenths of
their abhorrence against vice, I could not help occasionally recurring to
reflections of an opposite nature. Mr. Falkland is a murderer! resumed I. He
might yet be a most excellent man, if he did but think so. It is the thinking
ourselves vicious then, that principally contributes to make us vicious?

Amidst the shock I received from finding, what I had never suffered myself
constantly to believe, that my suspicions were true; I still discovered new
cause of admiration for my master. His menaces indeed were terrible. But, when
I recollected the offense I had given, so contrary to every received principle
of civilized society, so insolent and rude, so intolerable to a man of Mr.
Falkland's elevation and in Mr. Falkland's peculiarity of circumstances, I was
astonished at his forbearance. There were indeed sufficiently obvious reasons
why he might not choose to proceed to extremities with me. But how different
from the fearful expectations I had conceived were the calmness of his
behavior and the regulated mildness of his language! In this respect I for a
short time imagined that I was emancipated from the mischiefs which had
appalled me, and that in having to do with a man of Mr. Falkland's liberality I
had nothing rigorous to apprehend.

It is a miserable prospect, said I, that he holds up to me. He imagines that I
am restrained by no principles, and deaf to the claims of personal excellence.
But he shall find himself mistaken. I will never become an informer. I will
never injure my master; and therefore he will not be my enemy. With all his
misfortunes and all his errors, I feel that my soul yearns for his welfare. If
he have been criminal, that is owing to circumstances; the same qualities under
other circumstances would have been, or rather were sublimely beneficent.

My reasonings were no doubt infinitely more favorable to my master than those
which human beings are accustomed to make in the case of such as they style
great criminals. This will not be wondered at, when it is considered that I had
myself just been trampling on the established boundaries of obligation, and
therefore might well have a fellow-feeling for other offenders. Add to which, I
had known Mr. Falkland from the first as a beneficent divinity. I had observed
at leisure and with a minuteness which could not deceive me the excellent
qualities of his heart, and I found him possessed of a mind beyond comparison
the most fertile and accomplished I had ever known.

But, though the terrors which had impressed me were considerably alleviated,
my situation was notwithstanding sufficiently miserable. The ease and
light-heartedness of my youth were for ever gone. The voice of an irresistible
necessity had commanded me to "sleep no more." I was tormented with a conscious
secret of which I must never disburthen myself; and this consciousness was at
my age a source of perpetual melancholy. I had made myself a prisoner, in the
most intolerable sense of that term, for years, perhaps for the rest of my
life. Though my prudence and discretion should be invariable, I must remember
that I should have an overseer, vigilant from conscious guilt, full of
resentment at the unjustifiable means by which I had extorted from him a
confession, and whose lightest caprice might at any time decide upon every
thing that was dear to me. The vigilance even of a public and systematical
despotism is poor, compared with a vigilance which is thus goaded by the most
anxious passions of the soul. Against this species of persecution I knew not
how to invent a refuge. I dared neither fly from the observation of Mr.
Falkland, nor continue exposed to its operation. I was at first indeed lulled
in a certain degree to security upon the verge of the precipice. But it was not
long before I found a thousand circumstances perpetually reminding me of my
true situation. Those I am now to relate are among the most memorable.

CHAP. XIX.
IN no long time after the disclosure Mr. Falkland had made. Mr. Forester, his
elder brother by the mother's side, came to reside for a short period in our
family. This was a circumstance peculiarly adverse to my master's habits and
inclinations. He had broken off, as I have already said, all intercourse of
visiting his neighbors. He debarred himself every kind of amusement and
relaxation. He shrunk from the society of his fellows, and thought he could
never be sufficiently buried in obscurity and solitude. This principle was in
most cases of no difficult execution to a man of firmness. But Mr. Falkland
knew not how to avoid the visit of Mr. Forester. This gentleman was just
returned from a residence of several years upon the continent, and his demand
of an apartment in the house of his half-brother till his own house at the
distance of thirty miles should be prepared for his reception, was made with an
air of confidence that scarcely admitted of a refusal. Mr. Falkland could only
say that the state of his health and spirits was such, that he feared a
residence at his house would be little agreeable to his kinsman; and Mr.
Forester conceived that this was a disqualification which would always augment
in proportion as it was tolerated, and hoped that his society, by inducing Mr.
Falkland to suspend his habits of seclusion, would be the means of essential
benefit. Mr. Falkland opposed him no farther. He would have been sorry to be
thought unkind to a kinsman for whom he had a particular esteem; and the
consciousness of not daring to assign the true reason, made him cautious of
adhering to his objection.

The character of Mr. Forester was in many respects the reverse of that of my
master. Like him he had seen much of the world; but to judge of him from the
unfashioned bluntness of his manner, you would have thought he had never
stirred from his fireside. Yet under this rude exterior it was easy to
distinguish various knowledge, nice discrimination, and a strong and active
mind. Nor was it ill-humour or misanthropy that gave this turn to Mr.
Forester's behavior. He disclaimed exaggeration of every kind, and was equally
averse to the cynic who paints every thing in the most splenetic colors, and
the sanguine enthusiast to whom the whole appears to be exactly as it ought. In
the mean time, while he hated exaggeration, he was himself one of its grossest
dupes. He was positive in all things, even where good sense required him to be
skeptical; and he roughly imputed perverseness, where true wisdom would have
taught him to correct mistake. The same inconsistency followed him throughout.
Full of originality and genius, he pretended to despise them in others. His
favorite principle was to care nothing for what the world should say, and to
aim only at doing right. So long as that debt was discharged, he would not
stoop to purchase, at the expense of moving a finger, the applause of mankind
in preferences to their hatred. He believed that the credit which is sometimes
given to men of ability, was the dishonest gains of a combination, not the just
reward of merit; and he took pleasure in stating this opinion in its harshest
form. He held that (...) honest ploughman is a more useful member of society,
than all the poets and philosophers that ever existed. In a word, Mr. Forester
was one of those men who, with every seeming requisite for the discovery of
important truth, are all their lives in subjection to the most contemptible
prejudices.

The peculiarities of this gentleman's character were not undisplayed in the
scene to which he was now introduced. Having much kindness in his disposition,
he soon became deeply interested in the unhappiness of his relation. He did
every thing in his power to remove it; but his attempts were rude and
unskilful. He exhorted his host to pluck up a spirit, and defy the foul fiend;
but the tone of his exhortations found no sympathetic chord in the mind of Mr.
Falkland. The more he explained the articles of his creed, the more
irreconcilable did they appear with those of my master. He had not the skill
to carry conviction to an understanding so well fortified in error; and the
less so as the effort of his reflections had long been turned to a bold and
intelligible enunciation of principles, rather than to analyzing the rudiments
out of which they were formed. In a word, after a thousand efforts of kindness
to his entertainer, he drew off his forces, growling and dissatisfied with his
own impotence, rather than angry at the obstinacy of Mr. Falkland. He felt no
diminution of his affection for him, and was sincerely grieved to find that he
did him so little good. Both parties in this case did justice to the merits of
the other; at the same time that the disparity of their humors was such as to
prevent the stranger from being even a dangerous companion to the master of the
house. They had scarcely any points of contact in their characters; Mr.
Forester was incapable of giving Mr. Falkland that degree either of pain or
pleasure, which can raise the soul into a tumult and deprive it for a while of
tranquillity and self-command.

Our visitor was a man of an extremely communicative disposition, and he began
to feel himself painfully out of his element upon the present occasion. Mr.
Falkland was devoted to contemplation and solitude. He put upon himself some
degree of restraint upon the arrival of his kinsman, though even then his
darling habits would break out. But when they had seen each other a certain
number of times, and it was sufficiently evident that the society of either
would be a burden rather than a pleasure to the other, they consented by a
sort of silent compact that each should be at liberty to follow his own
inclination. Mr. Falkland was in a certain sense the greatest gainer by this.
He returned to the habits of his choice, and acted as nearly as possible just
as he would have done if Mr. Forester had not been in existence. But the latter
was wholly at a loss. He had all the disadvantages of retirement, without being
able, as he might have done at his house, to bring his own associates or his
own amusements about him.

In this situation he cast his eyes upon me. It was his principle to do every
thing that his thoughts suggested, without caring for the forms of the world.
He saw no reason why a peasant, with certain advantages of education and
opportunity, might not be as eligible a companion as a lord: at the same time
that he was deeply impressed with the venerableness of old institutions.
Reduced as he was to a kind of last resort, he sound me better qualified for
his purpose than any other person of Mr. Falkland's household. My habitual
simplicity was extremely agreeable to him: and, be it observed by the way, he
loved to countenance the appearance of talents, while he professed to be their
enemy.

The manner in which he began this sort of correspondence was sufficiently
characteristical. It was abrupt; but it was strongly stamped with essential
benevolence. It was blunt and humorous; but there was attractiveness,
especially in a case of unequal intercourse, in that very rusticity by which he
levelled himself with the great bulk of his species. He had to reconcile
himself, as well as to invite me; not to reconcile himself to the postponing an
aristocratical vanity, for of that he had a very slender portion, but to the
trouble of invitation, for he loved his ease. All this produced some
irregularity and indecision in his own mind, and gave a very whimsical
impression to his behavior.

On my part I was by no means ungrateful for the distinction that was paid me.
My mind had been relaxed into temporary dejection, but my reserve had no alloy
of moroseness or insensibility. It did not long hold out against the
condescending attentions of Mr. Forester. I became gradually heedful,
encouraged, confiding. I had a most eager thirst for the knowledge of mankind;
and, though no person perhaps ever purchased so dearly the instructions he
received in that school, the inclination was in no degree diminished. Mr.
Forester was the second man I had seen who seemed almost as much worth being
studied as Mr. Falkland himself. I was glad to escape from the uneasiness of my
thoughts; and, while engaged with this new friend, I forgot the criticalness of
the evils with which I was hourly menaced.

Stimulated by these feelings on either part we were never at a loss for
subjects of conversation. The observations Mr. Forester had made in his
travels, the set of opinions he had formed to himself, all amused and
interested me. His manner of telling a story or explaining his thoughts was
forcible, perspicuous and original: his style in conversation had an uncommon
zest, which while it seemed to disdain ornament, was unconsciously interspersed
with the boldest figures; and often wandered into all the vehemence of oratory,
while it affected to be blunt, simple, and abrupt. Nor was the part I sustained
upon these occasions without its recommendations. I received the communications
of my friend with an ingenuous and unprejudiced mind. If I objected to any of
his views, my objections were not drawn from the stores of common place, and
had therefore the grace of novelty. And I may venture to say that my objections
depended more for effect upon their inherent value, than upon any positiveness
and parade with which they were announced.

Mr. Falkland was destined to be for ever unhappy; and it seemed as if no new
incident could occur from which he was not able to extract food for this
imperious propensity. He was wearied with a perpetual repetition of similar
impressions, and entertained an invincible disgust against all that was new.
The visit of Mr. Forester he regarded with antipathy. He was scarcely able to
look at him without shuddering; an emotion which his guest perceived, and
pitied as the result of habit and disease rather than of judgment. None of his
actions passed unremarked; the most indifferent excited uneasiness and
apprehension. No sooner had the first overtures of a sort of intimacy between
me and Mr. Forester taken place, than they probably gave birth to sentiments of
jealousy in the mind of my master. It was not long before he intimated to me
that it would not be agreeable to him that there should be too much intercourse
between me and his visitor.

What could I do? Young as I was, could it be expected that I should play the
philosopher, and put a perpetual curb upon my inclinations? Imprudent though I
had been, could I voluntarily subject myself to an eternal penance, and
estrangement from human society? Could I discourage a frankness so perfectly in
consonance with my wishes, and receive in an ungracious way a kindness that
stole away my heart?

Beside this, I was but ill prepared for the servile submission Mr. Falkland
demanded. In early life I was accustomed to be much my own master. When I first
entered into Mr. Falkland's service, my personal habits were checked by the
novelty of my situation, and my affections were gained by the high
accomplishments of my patron. To novelty and its influence, curiosity had
immediately succeeded. Curiosity, so long as it lasted, was a principle
stronger in my bosom than even the love of independence. To that I would have
sacrificed my liberty or my life; I would have submitted to the condition of a
West Indian Negro, or to the tortures inflicted by North American savages. But
the turbulence of curiosity had now subsided.

As long as the threats of Mr. Falkland had been confined to generals, I
endured it. I was conscious of the unbecoming action I had committed, and this
rendered me humble. But, when he went farther, and undertook to prescribe to
every article of my conduct, my patience was at an end. He stretched his power
beyond the limits of policy and prudence, and thus brought its very existence
into question. I believed that nothing which his rage irritated by the most
open rebellion could inflict, would be worse than the slavery he now pretended
to impose. I had been adventurous in the gratification of an infantine and
unreasonable curiosity, and I was resolved not to be less adventurous, if need
were, in the defense of every thing that can make life a blessing. I was
prepared for an amicable adjustment of interests; I would undertake that Mr.
Falkland should never sustain injury through my means; but I expected in return
that I should suffer no incroachment, but be lest to the direction of my own
understanding.

I went on then to seek Mr. Forester's society with eagerness; and it is the
nature of an intercourse that does not decline, progressively to increase. Mr.
Falkland observed these symptoms with visible perturbation. Whenever I was
conscious of their being perceived by him, I betrayed tokens of confusion; this
did not tend to allay his uneasiness. One day he drew me aside; and, with a
look of mysterious, but terrible import, addressed me thus:

Young man, take warning! Perhaps this is the last time you shall have an
opportunity to take it! I will not always be the butt of your simplicity and
inexperience, nor suffer your weakness to triumph over my strength! Why do you
trifle with me? You little suspect the extent of my power. At this moment you
are surrounded with the engines of my vengeance, and before you are aware they
will close upon you. You might as well think of escaping from the reach of the
omnipresent God, as from mine! If you could touch so much as my finger, you
should expiate it in hours and months and years of a torment of which as yet
you have not the remotest idea! Remember! I am not talking at random! I do not
utter a word, that, if you provoke me, shall not be executed to the severest
letter!

It may be supposed that these menaces were not without their effect. I
withdrew in silence. My whole soul revolted against the treatment I endured,
and yet I could not utter a word. Why could not I speak the expostulations of
my heart, or propose the compromise I meditated? It was inexperience, and not
want of strength, that awed me. Every act of Mr. Falkland contained something
of new, and I was unprepared to meet it. Perhaps it will be found that the
greatest hero owes the propriety of his conduct to the habit of encountering
difficulties and calling out with promptness the energies of his mind.

I contemplated ^he proceedings of my master with the deepest astonishment.
Humanity and general kindness were fundamental parts of his character, but in
relation to me they were sterile and inactive. His own interest required that
he should purchase my kindness; but he preferred to govern me by terror, and
watch me with unceasing anxiety. I ruminated with the most mournful sensations
upon the nature of my calamity. I believed that no human being was ever placed
in a situation so pitiable as mine. Every atom of my frame seemed to have a
several existence, and to crawl within me. I had but too much reason indeed to
believe that Mr. Falkland's were not empty words. I knew his ability; I felt
his ascendancy. If I encountered him, what chance had I of victory? If I were
defeated, what was the penalty I had to suffer? Well then, the rest of my life
must be devoted to slavish subjection? Miserable sentence! And, if it were,
what security have I against the injustice of a man, vigilant, capricious and
criminal? I envied the condemned wretch upon the scaffold. I envied the (...)
of the inquisition in the midst of his torture. They know what they have to
suffer. I have only to imagine every thing terrible, and then say, The fate
reserved for me is worse than this!

It was well for me that these sensations were but transient: human nature
could not long support itself under what I then felt. By degrees my mind shook
off its burden. Indignation succeeded to emotions of terror. The hostility of
Mr. Falkland excited hostility in me. I was determined I would never calumniate
him in matters of the most trivial import; much less betray the grand secret
upon which every thing dear to him depended. But, totally abjuring the
offensive, I resolved to stand firmly upon the defensive. The liberty of acting
as I pleased I would preserve at whatever risque. If I were worsted in the
contest, I would at least have the consolation of reflecting that I had exerted
myself with energy. In proportion as I thus determined, I drew off my forces
from petty incursions, and felt the propriety of acting with premeditation and
system. I ruminated incessantly upon plans of deliverance, but I was anxious
that my choice should not be precipitately made.

It was during this period of my deliberation and uncertainty that Mr. Forester
terminated his visit. He observed a strange distance in my behavior, and in
his good-natured, encouraging way chid me for it. I could only answer with a
gloomy look of mysterious import, and a mournful and expressive silence. He
sought me for an explanation, but I was now as ingenious in avoiding, as I had
before been ardent to seek him; and he quitted our house, as he afterward told
me, with an impression, that there was some ill destiny that hung over it, that
seemed fated to make all its inhabitants miserable, without its being possible
for a by-stander to penetrate the reason.

CHAP. XX.
MR. Forester had left us about three weeks, when Mr. Falkland sent me upon
some business to an estate he possessed in a neighboring county about fifty
miles from his principal residence. The road led in a direction wholly wide of
the habitation of our late visitor. I was upon my return from the place to
which I had been sent, when I began in fancy to take a survey of the various
circumstances of my condition, and by degrees lost in the profoundness of my
contemplation all attention to the surrounding objects. The first determination
of my mind was to escape from the lynx-eyed jealousy and despotism of Mr.
Falkland; the second to provide, by every effort of prudence and deliberation I
could devise, against the danger with which I well knew my attempt must be
accompanied.

Occupied with these meditations, I rode many miles before I perceived that I
had totally deviated from the right path. At length I roused myself, and
surveyed the horizon round me; but I could observe nothing with which my organ
was previously acquainted. On three sides the heath stretched as far as the eye
could reach; on the fourth I discovered at some distance a wood of no ordinary
dimensions. Before me scarcely a single track could be found to mark that any
human being had ever visited the spot. As the best expedient I could devise, I
bent my course toward the wood I have mentioned, and then pursued as well as I
was able the windings of the enclosure. This led me after some time to the end
of the heath, but I was still as much at a loss as ever respecting the road I
should pursue. The sun was hid from me by a gray and cloudy atmosphere; I was
induced to continue along the skirts of the wood, and surmounted with some
difficulty the hedges and other obstacles that from time to time presented
themselves. My thoughts were gloomy and disconsolate; the dreariness of the day
and the solitude which surrounded me seemed to communicate a sadness to my
soul. I had proceeded a considerable way, and was quite overcome with hunger
and fatigue, when I discovered a road and a little inn at no great distance. I
made up to them, and upon enquiry found that, instead of pursuing the proper
direction, I had taken one that led to Mr. Forester's, rather than to my own
habitation. I alighted, and was entering the house, when the appearance of that
gentleman struck my eyes.

Mr. Forester accosted me with kindness, invited me into the room where he had
been sitting, and enquired what accident had brought me to that place. While he
was speaking, I could not help recollecting the extraordinary manner in which
we were thus once more brought together, and a train of ideas was by this means
suggested to my mind. Some refreshment was by Mr. Forester's order prepared for
me; I sat down and partook of it. Still this thought dwelt upon my
recollection: -- Mr. Falkland would never be made acquainted with our meeting;
I had an opportunity thrown in my way, which if I did not improve, I should
deserve all the consequences that might result. I could now converse with a
friend, and a powerful friend, without fear of being watched and overlooked.
What wonder that I was tempted to disclose, not Mr. Falkland's secret, but my
own situation, and receive the advice of a man of worth and experience, which
might perhaps be adequately done without entering into any detail injurious to
my master?

Mr. Forester was forward on his part, to learn why it was that I thought
myself unhappy, and why I had avoided him during the latter part of his
residence under the same roof, as evidently as I had before taken pleasure in
his communications. I told him that I could give him but an imperfect
satisfaction upon these points, but what I could I would willingly explain. The
fact, I proceeded, was, that there were certain reasons which rendered it
impossible for me to have a tranquil moment under the roof of Mr. Falkland. I
had revolved the matter again and again in my mind, and was finally convinced
that I owed it to myself to withdraw from his service. I added, that I was
sensible by this half confidence I might rather seem to merit the
disapprobation of Mr. Forester than his countenance; but I declared my
persuasion that, if he could be acquainted with the whole affair, however
strange my behavior might at present appear, he would applaud my reserve.

He asked what reason I had to complain of Mr. Falkland? I replied, that I
entertained the deepest reverence for my master; I admired his abilities, and
considered him as formed for the benefit of his species. I should in my own
opinion be the vilest of miscreants, if I uttered a whisper to his
disadvantage. But all this did not avail: I was not fit for him; perhaps I was
not good enough for him; at all events I must be perpetually miserable so long
as I continued to live with him.

I observed Mr. Forester gaze upon me eagerly with curiosity and surprise, but
this circumstance I did not think proper to notice. Having recovered himself,
he asked, Why then, that being the case, I did not quit his service? I
answered, What he now touched upon was that which most of all contributed to my
misfortune. Mr. Falkland was not ignorant of my dislike to my present
situation; perhaps he thought it unreasonable, unjust; but I knew that he would
never be brought to consent to my giving way to it.

Here Mr. Forester interrupted me: and, smiling, said, I magnified obstacles,
and overrated my own importance, adding that he would undertake to remove that
difficulty, as well as to provide me with a more agreeable appointment. This
suggestion produced in me a serious alarm. I replied, that I must entreat him
upon no account to think of applying to Mr. Falkland upon the subject. I added,
that perhaps I was only betraying my own imbecility; but in reality,
unacquainted as I was with experience and the world, I was afraid, though
disgusted with my present residence, to expose myself upon a mere project of my
own, to the resentment of so considerable a man as Mr. Falkland, If he would
favor me with his advice upon the subject, or if he would only give me leave
to hope for his protection in case of any unforeseen accident, this was all I
presumed to request; and, thus encouraged, I would venture to obey the dictates
of my inclination, and fly in pursuit of my lost tranquillity.

Having thus opened myself to this generous friend as far as I could do it with
propriety and safety, he sat for some time silent with an air of deep
reflection. At length with a countenance of unusual severity he thus addressed
me: Young man, I am afraid you are ignorant of the nature of the tale you have
been telling me. There is mystery in it; there is something you cannot prevail
upon yourself to disclose. Mystery always implies somewhere or other an
uncommon portion of wrong; what am I to think of you? Are you aware of the
prejudice you are voluntarily creating against yourself thus upon the threshold
of life?

I answered that, whatever were the amount of that prejudice, I must submit. I
placed my hope of a candid construction in the present instance, in the
rectitude of his nature.

He went on: Well, be it as you please. It was absolutely necessary I should
tell you what you were doing. I am in some respects the worst person you could
have applied to under these circumstances. I am the idolator of frankness, and
have an unconquerable abhorrence to every thing that is the reverse of it. If
any body had told me six months ago that I could have been brought to
countenance a person that practiced that reverse, I should not have believed
him. But I will tell you fairly the state of my mind. Your conduct in this
respect has not, as yet at least; destroyed the early predilection I conceived
in your favor. The balance, so far as I am able at present to adjust it, is
with you. I will therefore, though in total opposition to my principles, yield
to this instigation. I put myself into your hands; I will do exactly what you
require. I will receive you either now or hereafter under my own roof, trusting
that you will not deceive my confidence, and that I shall find unfavourable
appearances ultimately terminating as the man most solicitous for your welfare
would desire.

We were engaged in the earnest discussion of subjects thus interesting to my
peace, when we were interrupted by an event of all others the most seriously to
be deprecated. Without the smallest notice, and as if he had dropped upon us
from the clouds, Mr. Falkland burst into the room. I found afterward that Mr.
Forester had come thus far upon an appointment to meet Mr. Falkland, and that
the place of their intended rendezvous was the next stage. Mr. Forester was
detained unexpectedly at the inn where we now were, by our accidental
rencounter, and in reality had for the moment forgotten his appointment; while
Mr. Falkland, not finding him where he expected, had proceeded thus far toward
the house of his kinsman. To me the meeting was the most unaccountable in the
world.

I instantly foresaw the dreadful complication of misfortune that was included
in this event. To Mr. Falkland the meeting between me and his relation must
appear, not accidental, but concerted. I was totally out of the road I had been
traveling by his direction; I was in a road that led directly to the house of
Mr. Forester. What must he think of this? How must he suppose I came to that
place? The truth, if told, that I came there without design, and purely in
consequence of having lost my way, must appear to be the most impudent lie that
ever was devised.

Here then I stood detected in the fact of that intercourse which had been so
severely forbidden. But in this instance it was infinitely worse, than in those
which had already given so much disturbance to Mr. Falkland. It was then open,
frank and unconcealed; and therefore the presumption was that it was for
purposes that required no concealment. But the present interview, if concerted,
was in the most emphatical degree clandestine. Nor was it less perilous than it
was clandestine. It had been forbidden with the most dreadful menaces, and Mr.
Falkland was not ignorant how deep an impression those menaces had made upon my
imagination. Such a meeting therefore could not have been concerted under such
circumstances for a trivial purpose, or for any purpose that his heart did not
quake to think of. Such was the amount of my crime; such was the agony my
appearance was calculated to inspire; and it was reasonable to suppose that the
penalty I had to expect would be proportionable. The threats of Mr. Falkland
still sounded in my ears, and I was in a transport of terror.

The conduct of the same man in different circumstances is often so various as
to render it very difficult to be accounted for* Mr. Falkland, in this to him
terrible crisis, did not seem to be in any degree hurried away by his passions.
For a moment he was dumb, his eyes glared with astonishment; and the next
moment as it were, he had the most perfect calmness and self-command. Had it
been otherwise I have no doubt that I should instantly have entered into an
explanation, the ingenuousness and consistency of which could not but have been
in some degree attended with a favorable event. But as it was, I suffered
myself to be overcome; I yielded as in a former instance to the discomfiting
influence of surprise. I dared scarcely breathe; I observed the appearances
with anxiety and wonder. Mr. Falkland quietly ordered me to return home, and
take along with me the groom he had brought with him. I obeyed in silence.

I afterward understood that he enquired minutely of Mr. Forester the
circumstances of our meeting, and that that gentleman, perceiving that the
meeting itself was discovered, and guided by habits of frankness, which, when
once rooted in a character, it is very difficult to counteract, told Mr.
Falkland every thing that had passed, together with the remarks it had
suggested to his own mind. Mr. Falkland received the communication with an
ambiguous and studied silence, which by no means operated to my advantage in
the already-poisoned mind of Mr. Forester. His silence was partly the direct
consequence of a mind watchful, inquisitive and doubting; and partly perhaps
was adopted for the sake of the effect it was qualified to produce, Mr.
Falkland not being unwilling to encourage a prejudice against the character of
a person who might one day become the adversary of his own.

As to me, I went home indeed, for this was not a moment to resist. Mr.
Falkland, with a premeditation to which he had artfully given the appearance of
accident, had taken care to send with me a guard to attend upon his prisoner. I
seemed as if conducting to one of those fortresses, famed in the history of
despotism, from which the wretched victim is never known to escape; and, when I
entered my chamber, I felt as if I were entering a dungeon. I reflected that I
was at the mercy of a man, exasperated at my disobedience, and who was already
formed to cruelty by successive murders. I had occasionally indulged in visions
of pleasure, authority and honor as the attendants of my maturer years: who
has not? especially who, with an imagination as busy and a spirit as ardent as
mine? All these prospects were now closed; I was cut off for ever from pursuits
that I had meditated with ineffable delight; my death might be the event of a
few hours. I was a victim at the shrine of conscious guilt that knew neither
rest nor satiety; I should be blotted from the catalogue of the living, and my
fate remain eternally a secret; the man who added my murder to his former
crimes, would show himself the next morning, and be hailed with the admiration
and applause of his species.

In the midst of these terrible imaginations one idea presented itself that
alleviated my feelings. This was the recollection of the strange and
unaccountable tranquillity which Mr. Falkland had manifested, when he
discovered me in company with Mr. Forester. I was not deceived by this. I knew
full well that this calm was temporary, and would be succeeded by a tumult and
whirlwind of the passions of the most dreadful sort. But a man under the power
of such terrors as now occupied me, catches at every reed. I said to myself,
that this tranquil^ity was a period it was incumbent upon me to improve; and
the shorter its duration might be found, the more speedy was I obliged to be in
the use of it. I could not endure the thought that the apprehensions I now
entertained, should be realised through the neglect of any exertion or even
daring on my part. In a word, I took the resolution, because I already stood in
fear of the vengeance of Mr. Falkland, to risque the possibility of provoking
it in a degree still more inexpiable, and terminate at once my present state of
uncertainty. Add to which, I had now opened my case to Mr. Forester, and he had
given me positive assurances of his protection. This in the present desperation
of my fortune was an idea to which my mind willingly had recourse for support
and consolation. -- Instigated by these reflections, I sat down to address the
following letter to Mr. Falkland.

SIR,
I have conceived the intention of quitting your service. This is a measure we
ought both of us to desire. I shall then be, what it is my duty to be, the
master of my own actions. You will be delivered from the presence of a person,
whom you cannot prevail upon yourself to behold without unpleasing emotions.

Why should you subject me to an eternal penance? Why should you consign all my
youthful hopes to suffering and despair? Consult the principles of humanity
that have marked the general course of your proceedings, and do not let me, I
entreat you, be made the subject of a useless severity. My heart is impressed
with gratitude for your favors. I sincerely ask your forgiveness for the many
errors of my conduct. I consider the treatment I have received under your roof
as one almost uninterrupted scene of kindness and generosity. I shall never
forget my obligations to you, and will never betray them.

I remain, SIR, Your most grateful, respectful and dutiful servant, CALEB
WILLIAMS.


Such was my employment of the evening of a day, which will be ever memorable
in the history of my life. Mr. Falkland not being yet returned, though expected
every hour, I was induced to make use of the pretext of fatigue to avoid an
interview. I went to bed. The next morning I was informed, that he did not come
home till late, that h^ ^ad enquired for me, and being told that I was in bed,
had said nothing farther upon the subject. Satisfied in this respect, I went to
the breakfasting parlour, and busied myself for some time in arranging a few
books and some other little occupations, till Mr. Falkland should appear. After
a little time I heard his step, which I perfectly knew how to distinguish, in
the passage. Presently, he stopped, and, speaking to some one in a sort of
deliberate, but smothered voice, I overheard him repeat my name as enquiring
for me. In conformity to the plan I had persuaded myself to adopt, I now laid
the letter I had written upon the table, near where he usually sat, and made my
exit at one door as Mr. Falkland entered at the other. This done, I withdrew in
expectation of the event to a private apartment, a sort of light-closet at the
end of the library, where I was accustomed not unfrequently to sit.

I had not been here three minutes when I heard the voice of Mr. Falkland
calling me. I went to him in the library. That is your letter, said he,
throwing it. His manner was that of a man laboring with some dreadful thought,
and endeavoring to give an air of carelessness and insensibility to his
behavior. I think no carriage of any other sort could have produced a
sensation of such inexplicable horror, or have excited in the person who was
most immediately its object, such an alarm for the event.

My lad, continued he, I believe now you have played almost all your tricks,
and, damn me, if the farce be not nearly at an end! With your apishness and
absurdity however you have taught me one thing, and, whereas before now I have
winced at them with torture, I am now as tough as an elephant. I shall crush
you in the end with the same indifference that I would any other little insect
that disturbed my serenity.

I believe you have decided your fate. I think myself sure that you will never
have done till you have brought my whole weight upon you. You may try however.
Your only chance is in passiveness. I am now perfectly insensible to every
thing you can suffer, but I have no pleasure in it. I will let you alone, if I
can.

I am unable to tell what brought about your meeting with Mr. Forester
yesterday. It might be design; it might be accident. But, be it which it will,
I shall not forget it. You write me here, that you are desirous to quit my
service. To that I have a short answer, You shall never quit it with life. If
you attempt it, you shall never cease to rue your folly as long as you exist.
That is my will; and I will not have it resisted. The very next time you
disobey me in that or any other article, there is an end of your vagaries for
ever. Perhaps your situation may be a pitiable one; it is for you to look to
that. I only know that it is in your power to prevent its growing worse; no
time nor chance shall ever make it better.

Do not imagine I am afraid of you! I wear an armor, against which all your
weapons are impotent. I have dug a pit for you; and, whichever way you move,
backward or forward, to the right or to the left, it is ready to swallow you.
Be still! If once you fall, call as loud as you will, no man on earth shall
hear your cries; prepare a tale ever so plausible, or ever so true, the whole
world shall execrate you as an impostor. Your innocence shall be of no service
to you; I laugh at so feeble a defense. It is I that say it; you may believe
what I tell you. Do you not know, miserable wretch! added he, suddenly altering
his tone, and stamping upon the ground with fury, that I have sworn to preserve
my reputation at whatever expense, that I love it more than the whole world and
its inhabitants taken together? And do you think that you shall wound it?
Begone, miscreant! reptile! and cease to contend with unsurmountable power!

The part of my history which I am now relating is that which I reflect upon
with the least complacency. Why was it that I was once more totally overcome by
the imperious carriage of Mr. Falkland, and unable to utter a word? The reader
will be presented with many occasions in the sequel in which I wanted neither
facility in the invention of expedients, nor fortitude in entering upon my
justification. Persecution at length gave firmness to my character, and taught
me the better part of manhood. But in the present instance I was irresolute,
overawed and abashed.

The speech I had heard was the dictate of frenzy, and it created in me a
similar frenzy. It determined me to do the very thing against which I was thus
solemnly warned, and fly from my master's house. I could not enter into parley
with him; I could no longer endure the vile subjugation he imposed on me. It
was in vain that my reason came to my aid, and warned me of the rashness of a
measure to be taken without concert or preparation. I seemed to be in a state
in which reason had no power. I felt as if I could coolly survey the several
arguments of the case, perceive that they had prudence, truth and common sense
on their side: and then answer, I am under the guidance of a director more
energetic than you.

I was not long in executing what I had thus rapidly determined. I fixed on the
evening of that very day as the period of my evasion. Even in this short
interval I had perhaps sufficient time for deliberation. But all opportunity
was useless to me; my mind was fixed, and each succeeding moment only increased
the unspeakable eagerness with which I meditated my escape. The hours usually
observed by our family in this country residence were regular; and one in the
morning was the time I selected for my undertaking. I stole down quietly from
my chamber with a lamp in my hand; I went along a passage that led to a small
door opening into the garden, and then crossed the garden to a gate that
intersected an elm walk and a private horse-path on the outside.

I could scarcely believe my good-fortune in having thus far executed my design
without interruption. The terrible images Mr. Falkland's menaces had suggested
to my mind, made me expect impediment and detection at every step, though the
impassioned state of my mind impelled me to advance with desperate resolution.
I drew a favorable omen as to the final result of my project, from the
desirable event which had attended me in the outset.

CHAP. XXI.
THE first plan that had suggested itself to me was, to go to the nearest
public road, and take the earliest stage for London. There I believed I should
be most safe from discovery, if the vengeance of Mr. Falkland should prompt him
to pursue me; and I did not doubt, among the multiplied resources of the
metropolis, to find something which should suggest to me an eligible mode of
disposing of my person and industry. I reserved Mr. Forester in my arrangement
as a last resource, not to be called forth unless for immediate protection from
the hand of persecution and power.

The mode of my proceeding being thus far digested, I traced with a cheerful
heart the unfrequented path it was now necessary for me to pursue. The night
was gloomy, and it drizzled with rain. But these were circumstances I had
scarcely the power to perceive; all was sunshine and joy within me. I hardly
felt the ground; I repeated to myself a thousand times, I am free. What concern
have I with danger and alarm; I feel that I am free; I feel that I will
continue so. What power is able to hold in chains a mind ardent and determined?
What power can cause that man to die, whose whole soul commands him to continue
to live? I looked back with abhorrence to the subjection in which I had been
held. I did not hate the author of my misfortunes; truth and justice acquit me
of that; I rather pitied the hard destiny to which he seemed condemned. But I
thought with unspeakable loathing of those errors, in consequence of which
every man is fated to be more or less the tyrant or the slave. I was astonished
at the ^olly of my species, that they did not rise up as one man, and shake off
chains so ignominious and misery so insupportable. So far as related to myself,
I resolved, and this resolution has never been entirely forgotten by me, to
hold myself disengaged from the odious scene, and never fill the part either of
the oppressor or the sufferer.

My mind continued in this enthusiastical state, full of confidence, and
accessible only to such a portion of sear as served rather to keep up a state
of pleasurable emotion, than to generate anguish and distress, during the whole
of this nocturnal expedition. After a walk of three hours I arrived without
accident at the village from which I hoped to have taken my passage for the
metropolis. At this early hour every thing was quiet; no found of any thing
human saluted my ear. It was with difficulty that I gained admittance into the
yard of the inn, where I ^ound a single ostler taking care of some horses. From
him I received the unwelcome tidings that the coach was not expected till six
o'clock in the morning of the following day, its route through that town
recurring only three times a-week.

This intelligence gave the first check to the rapturous inebriation by which
my mind had been possessed from the moment I quitted the habitation of Mr.
Falkland. The whole of my fortune in ready cash consisted of about eleven
guineas. I had about fifty more that had fallen to me from the disposal of my
property at the death of my father; but that was so vested as to preclude it
from immediate use, and I even doubted whether it would not be found better
ultimately to resign it, than by claiming it to risk the furnishing a clue to
what I most of all dreaded to incur, the persecution of Mr. Falkland. There was
nothing I so ardently desired as the annihilation of all future intercourse
between us, that he should not know there was such a person on the earth as
myself, and that I should never more hear the name of my quondam master.

Thus circumstanced, I conceived frugality to be an object by no means unworthy
of my attention, unable as I was to prognosticate what discouragements and
delays might present themselves to the accomplishment of my wishes, after my
arrival in London. For this and other reasons I determined to adhere to my
design of traveling by the stage; it only remaining for me to consider in what
manner I should prevent the eventual delay of twenty-four hours from becoming
by any untoward event a source of new calamity. It was by no means advisable to
remain at the village where I now was, during this interval; nor did I even
think it proper to employ it in proceeding on foot along the great road. I
therefore decided upon making a circuit, the direction of which should seem at
first extremely wide of my intended route, and then suddenly striking into a
different path should enable me to arrive by the close of day at a market town
twelve miles nearer to the metropolis.

Having fixed the economy of the day, and persuaded myself that it was the best
which under the circumstances could be adopted, I dismissed for the most part
all farther anxieties from my mind, and eagerly yielded myself up to the
different amusements that arose. I rested and went forward at the impulse of
the moment. At one time I reclined upon a bank immersed in contemplation, and
at another exerted myself to analyze the prospects which succeeded each other.
The haziness of the morning was followed by a spirit-stirring and beautiful
day. With the ductility so characteristic of a youthful mind, I forgot the
anguish which had lately been my continual guest, and occupied myself entirely
in dreams of future novelty and felicity. I scarcely ever in the whole course
of my existence spent a day of more various or exquisite gratification. It
furnished a strong and perhaps not an unsalutary contrast to the terrors which
had preceded, and the dreadful scenes that awaited me.

In the evening I arrived at the place of my destination, enquired for the inn
at which the coach was accustomed to call, and ordered myself refreshment and a
bed. I had not been long here, before, having occasion to cross the inn yard
upon some occasion, just as I was going again to enter the house I saw one of
Mr. Falkland's footmen riding into the gate-way. I had no doubt that I was
myself the object of his journey. But it was too late to think of avoiding his
observation; he was almost upon me before I saw him. Every incident connected
with my late abhorred situation was calculated to impress me with the deepest
alarm. My first thought was to betake myself to the fields, and trust to the
swiftness of my flight for safety. But I presently remarked that he was alone;
and I believed that it would be disgraceful to fly, when, man to man, I might
reasonably hope I could at any time get the better, either by the firmness of
my determination, or the subtlety of my invention.

Thus determined, I came up to him as he alighted from his horse and bade him
follow into the room where I had been sitting. Well, Thomas, said I, I guess
your errand; but it is to no purpose. You come to conduct me back to Falkland
House; but no force shall ever drag me to that place alive. I have not taken my
resolution without great consideration and strong reasons; and, having taken
it, all the world shall never persuade me to alter. I am an Englishman; and it
is the privilege of an Englishman to be sole judge and master of his own
actions.

Why, master Williams, replied Thomas, to be sure you should know best what you
are about. We are all at a stound, as a man may say, to think what you have got
in your head. But that is none of my business. Sure enough the squire expects
you to go back with me; but I have a letter for you, and mayhap when you have
read that, you may come off from a little of your stoutness. For my part I knew
poor farmer Williams, your father, these many a day, and I should be main ^oth
for his fake and your own too, that you should come to any sorrow.

Thus saying, he gave me his letter, which was from Mr. Forester, whom, as he
told me, he had left at my master's house. It was as follows:

WILLIAMS,
My brother Falkland has sent his man Thomas in pursuit of you. He expects
that, if found, you will return with him. I expect so too. It is of the utmost
consequence to your future honor and character. After reading these lines, if
you are a villain and a rascal, you will perhaps endeavor to fly. If your
conscience tells you, You are innocent, you will out of all doubt come back.
Let me know whether I have been your dupe; and whether, while I was won over by
your seeming ingenuity, I was the tool of a designing knave. If you come, I
pledge myself that, if you clear your reputation, you shall not only be free to
go wherever you please, but shall receive every assistance it is in my power to
give. Remember! (...) engage for nothing farther than that.

VALENTINE FORESTER.


What a letter was this? To a mind like mine glowing with the love of virtue,
such an address was strong enough to draw the person to whom it was addressed
from one end of the earth to the other. Prisons, racks and gibbets would have
shrunk into nothing in comparison with it. The ideas it suggested had a
tendency to fill the mind, and shut out the possibility of competition.

I repassed in my thoughts every memorable incident that had happened to me
under the roof of Mr. Falkland. I could recollect nothing, except the affair of
the mysterious chest, out of which the shadow of an accusation of the nature
alluded to in Mr. Forester's letter could be extorted. In that instance no
doubt my conduct had been highly reprehensible, and I had never looked back
upon it without remorse and self-condemnation. But I did not believe that it
was of the nature of those actions which can be brought under legal censure. I
still less could persuade myself to believe, that Mr. Falkland, who shuddered
at the very possibility of his own detection, and who considered himself as
completely in my power, would dare to bring forward a subject so closely
connected with that topic, which wakened eternal agony in his soul. In a word,
the more I reflected on the phrases of Mr. Forester's billet, the less could I
imagine the nature of those scenes to which they were to serve as a prelude.

The inscrutableness however of the mystery they contained was by no means
calculated to mitigate my apprehensions. It served on the contrary to give new
pungency to my alarm. It overwhelmed every quality of my mind; except my
fortitude. What resources had not my persecutor at his command? It was now that
I began to fear him. All the apprehensions that had before haunted my mind
seemed, in comparison with what I now felt, like the gambols of children. But
what could I do? This was an enemy to face and not to fly. Tear me to pieces,
exclaimed I, tremendous and incomprehensible genius! hang up this miserable
car^ass to writhe beneath a burning ^un! inflict upon me unheard of and
lingering tortures! -- that in some part or other of the earth you might do!
But my good name shall never be your victim! I will be heard; I will be
understood! All the arts of hell shall not prevent that! I may be unfortunate;
but my very persecutors shall confess my innocence!

Thomas, said I, after a considerable interval spent in silence, to my
attendant, You are right. This is indeed a very extraordinary letter you have
brought me; but it answers its purpose. I will certainly go with you now,
whatever be the consequence. No person shall ever be able to lay any blame to
me, so long as I have it in my power to clear myself. So, get ready immediately!

Bless us, cried Thomas, this is a surprising change indeed! But I should
think, sir, if you please, that there is no need of being in such a devil of a
hurry. It is now dark night, and I am woundy tired. Whatever it is you may have
got in your head, I dare to say neither you nor master will do any thing till
tomorrow.

To this remonstrance I replied, that I would willingly consent to a respite of
an hour or two hours, if he desired it, but longer than that I was determined I
would not wait, and, if he were not then ready, I would proceed without him. I
conceived that, in the circumstances in which I was placed by Mr. Forester's
letter, it became me to show, not merely a willingness, but an alacrity and
impatience to return. Thomas confessed that it was in his orders not to part
from me when I was once found, and of consequence he was obliged to agree to
the compromise I proposed. We procured a second horse from the village. As we
rode home, my mind was occupied again and again in endeavoring to account for
Mr. Forester's letter; but none of my attempts were productive of satisfaction.
I knew the inflexibility and sternness of Mr. Falkland's mind in accomplishing
the purposes he had most at heart; but I also knew that every virtuous and
magnanimous principle was congenial to his character.

When we arrived it was still dark, though the greater part of the night had
already elapsed. We were obliged to waken one of the servants to give us
admittance. I found that Mr. Forester had left a message for me in
consideration of the possibility of my arrival during the night, directing me
immediately to go to bed, and to take care that I did not come weary and
exhausted to the business of the following day. I endeavored to take his
advice; but my slumbers were unrefreshing and disturbed. This did not
discourage me; the singularity of my situation, my conjectures with respect to
the present, my apprehensions for the future did not allow me to think it
possible that I could sink into a languid and inactive state.

Next morning the first person I saw was Mr. Forester. He told me that he did
not yet know what Mr. Falkland had to allege against me, for that he had
refused to know. He had arrived at the house of his brother by appointment on
the preceding day to settle some indispensable business, his intention having
been to depart the moment the business was finished, as he knew that conduct on
his part would be most agreeable to Mr. Falkland. But he was no sooner come
than he found the whole house in confusion, the alarm of my elopement having
been given a little before. Mr. Falkland had dispatched servants in all
directions in pursuit of me; and the servant from the market town arrived at
the same moment with Mr. Forester, with intelligence that a person answering to
the description h^ gave had been there very early in the morning enquiring
respecting the stage to London.

Mr. Falkland seemed extremely disturbed at this information, and exclaimed
upon me with great acrimony as an unthankful and unnatural villain.

Mr. Forester replied: Have more command of yourself, sir! Villain is a very
serious appellation, and ought not to be trifled with. Englishmen are free; and
no man ought to be charged with villainy because he chooses to change one
source of subsistence for another.

Mr. Falkland shook his head, and with a smile expressive of acute sensibility
said, Brother, brother, you are the dupe of his art. For my part I always
considered him with an eye of suspicion, and was aware of his depravity. But I
have just discovered --

Stop, sir! interrupted Mr. Forester. I own I thought you might be employing in
a moment of acrimony harsh epithets without any accurate meaning. But, if you
have any serious accusation to make against Williams, let us not be told of
that, till it be known whether the poor lad is within reach of a hearing.
Though a just man will cheerfully suffer the ill opinion of others, he will not
lightly entertain an ill opinion against them. For my part the slenderest
allowance I can make to such as are unhappy enough to incur the detestation of
their species, is that of being previously heard in their own defense. It is a
wise principle in English law that requires the judge to come into court
totally uninformed of the merits of the cause he is to try; and to that
principle I am determined to conform as an individual. I think it right to be
severe and inflexible in proceeding against offenders, but the severity I
exercise in the sequel shall always be accompanied with impartiality in the
preliminary.

While Mr. Forester related to me th^se particulars, he observed me ready to
break out into some of the expressions which the narrative suggested, but he
would not suffer me to speak. No, Williams, said he; I would not hear Mr.
Falkland against you; neither will I hear you in your defense. I am come to you
at present to speak, and not to hear. I thought it became me to warn you of
your danger, but I have nothing more to do now. Reserve what you have to say to
the proper time. Make the best story you can for yourself; true, if truth, as I
hope, will serve your purpose; but, if not, the most plausible and ingenious
you can invent. That is an exertion which self-defence requires from every man
in cases where, as it always happens when a man is put upon his trial, he has
the whole world against him, and has his own battle to fight against the world.
Farewell, and God send you a good deliverance! If Mr. Falkland's accusation,
whatever it be, shall appear to be premature, depend upon having me more
zealously your friend than ever. If not, this is the last act of friendship you
will ever receive from me!

It may be believed that this address, so singular, so solemn, so big with
conditional menace, did not greatly tend to assuage my anxieties. I was totally
ignorant of the charge to be advanced against me; and not a little astonished,
when it was in my power to be in the most formidable degree the accuser of Mr.
Falkland, to find the principles of equity so completely reversed, as for the
innocent, but instructed individual, to be the party accused and suffering,
instead of having, as was just, the real criminal at his mercy. I was still
more astonished at the supernatural power Mr. Falkland seemed to possess of
bringing back by the most irresistible means the object of his persecution
within the sphere of his authority; a reflection attended with some
discouragement to that thirst of independence which now constituted the ruling
passion of my mind.

But this was no time for meditation. To the sufferer the course of events is
taken out of his direction, and he is hurried along with an irresistible force,
without finding it within the compass of his efforts to check their rapidity. I
was allowed only a very short time to recollect myself, when my trial
commenced. I was conducted to the library where I had passed so many happy and
so many contemplative hours, and found there Mr. Forester and three of four of
the servants already assembled in expectation of me and my accuser. Every thing
was calculated to suggest to me that I must trust only in the justice of the
parties concerned, and had nothing to hope from their mercy. Mr. Falkland
entered at one door, almost as soon as I entered at the other.

END OF VOL. I.
ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS.

THINGS AS THEY ARE: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS. BY WILLIAM GODWIN.
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

Amidst the woods the leopard knows his kind;
The tiger preys not on the tiger brood:
Man only is the common foe of man.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR H. AND P. RICE, NO. 50, MARKET-STREET, AND SOLD BY
J. RICE, AND CO. BALTIMORE. 1795.

THE ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS.
CHAP. I.
HE began: It has been the principle of my life never to inflict a wilful
injury upon any thing that lives; I need not express my regret when I find
myself obliged to be the promulgator of a criminal charge. How gladly would I
pass unnoticed the evil I have sustained! but I owe it to society to detect an
offender, and prevent other men from being imposed upon, as I have been, by an
appearance of integrity.

It would be better, interrupted Mr. Forester, to speak directly to the point.
We ought not, though unwarily, by apologizing for ourselves, to create at such
a time a prejudice against an individual, against whom a criminal accusation
will always be prejudice enough.

I strongly suspect, continued Mr. Falkland, this young man, who has been
peculiarly the object of my kindness, of having robbed me to a considerable
amount.

What, replied Mr. Forester, are the grounds of your suspicion?

The first of them is the actual loss! have sustained in notes, jewels and
plate. I have missed bank notes to the amount of nine hundred pounds, three
gold repeaters of extraordinary value, a complete suit of diamonds the property
of my late mother, and several other articles.

And why, continued my arbitrator, astonishment, grief, and a desire to retain
his self-possession strongly contending in his countenance and voice, do you
fix on this young man as the instrument of the depredation?

I found him, on my coming home upon the day when every thing was in disorder
from the alarm of ^ire, in the very act of quitting the private apartment where
these things were deposited. He was confounded at seeing me, and hastened to
withdraw as soon as he possibly could.

Did you say nothing to him, take no notice of the confusion your sudden
appearance produced?

I asked what was his errand in that place. He was at first so terrified and
overcome that he could not answer me. Afterward with a good deal of faltering
he said that, when all the servants were engaged in endeavoring to save the
most valuable part of my property, he had come hither with the same view; but
that he had as yet removed nothing.

Did you immediately examine to see that every thing was safe?

No. I was accustomed to confide in his honesty, and I was suddenly called away
in the present instance to attend to the increasing progress of the flames. I
therefore only took out the key from the door of the apartment, having first
locked it, and, putting it in my pocket, hastened to go where my presence
seemed indispensably necessary.

How long was it before you missed your property?

The same evening. The hurry of the scene had driven the circumstance entirely
out of my mind, till, going by accident near the apartment, the whole affair,
together with the singular and equivocal behavior of Williams, rushed at once
upon my recollection. I immediately entered, examined the chest in which these
things were contained, and to my astonishment found the locks broken and the
property gone.

What steps did you take upon this discovery?

I sent for Williams, and talked to him very seriously upon the subject. But he
had now perfectly recovered his self-command, and calmly and stoutly denied all
knowledge of the matter. I urged him with the enormousness of the offense, but
it made no impression. He did not discover either the surprise (...)
indignation one would have expected from (...) entirely innocent, or the
uneasiness that gener^^^y attends upon guilt. He was rather silent and (...). I
then informed him, that I should proce^^ in a manner different from what he
might perhaps expect. I would not, as is too frequent in such cases* make a
general research, for I had rather lose my property for ever without redress,
than expose a multitude of innocent persons to anxiety and injustice. My
suspicion for the present ^^^^^^dably fixed upon him. But in a matter of so
great consequence I was determined not to act upon suspicion. I would neither
incur the possibility of raining him being innocent, nor be the instrument of
exposing others to (...) depredations, if guilty. I should therefore merely
insist upon his continuing in my service. He might depend upon it he should be
well watched, and I trusted the whole truth would eventually appear. Since he
avoided confession now, I advised him to con^ider how far it was likely he
would come off with impunity at last. This I was determined on, that the moment
he attempted an escape, I would confider that as an indication of guilt and
proceed accordingly.

What circumstances have occurred from that time to the present?

None upon which I can infer * certainty of guilt. Several that agree to favor
a suspicion. From that time Williams was perpetually uneasy in his situation,
always desirous, as it now appears, to escape, but afraid to adopt such a
measure without certain precautions. It was not long after, that you, Mr.
Forester, became my visitor. I observed with dissatisfaction the growing
intercourse between you, reflecting on the equivocalness of his character, and
the attempt he would probably make to render you the dup^ of his hypocrisy. I
accordingly threatened him severely, and I believe you observed the change that
presently after took place in his behavior with relation to you.

I did, and it appeared at that time mysterious and extraordinary.

Some time after, as you well know, a rencounter took place between you,
whether accidental or intentional on his part I am not able to say, when he
confessed to you the uneasiness of his mind without discovering the cause, and
openly proposed to you to assist him in his ^light, and stand in case of
necessity between him and my resentment. You offered, it seems, to take him
into your service, but nothing, as he acknowledged, would answer his purpose,
that did not place his retreat wholly out of my power to discover.

Did it not appear extraordinary to you that he should hope for any effectual
protection from me, while it remained perpetually in your power to satisfy me
of his unworthiness?

Perhaps he had hopes that I should not proceed to that step, at least so long
as the place of his retreat should be unknown to me, and of consequence the
event of my proceeding dubious. Perhaps he confided in his own powers, which
are far from contemptible, to construct a^ plausible tale, especially as he had
taken care to have the first impression in his favor. After all, this
protection on your part was merely reserved in case all other expedients
failed. He does not appear to have had any other sentiment upon the subject,
than that, if he were defeated in his projects for placing himself beyond the
reach of justice, it was better to have bespoken himself a place in your
patronage than to be destitute of every resource.

Mr. Falkland having thus finished his evidence, called upon Robert, the valet,
to confirm that part of it which related to the day of the fire.

Robert stated, that he happened to be coming through the library that day, a
few minutes after Mr. Falkland's being brought home by the sight of the fire,
that he had found me standing there with every mark of perturbation and fright,
that he was so struck with my appearance that he could not help stopping to
notice it, that he had spoken to me two or three times before he could obtain
an answer, and that all he could get from me at last, was that I was the most
miserable creature alive.

He farther said, that in the evening of the same day Mr. Falkland called him
into the private apartment adjoining to the library, and bid him bring him a
hammer and some nails. He then showed him a chest standing in the apartment
with its locks and fastenings broken, and ordered him to observe and remember
what he saw, but not to mention it to any one. Robert did not at that time know
what Mr. Falkland intended by these directions; but he entertained no doubt
that the fastenings were broken and wrenched by the app^ication of a chissel or
such like instrument with the intention of forcibly opening the chest.

Mr. Forester observed upon this evidence, that as much of it as related to the
day of the fire seemed indeed to afford powerful reasons for suspicion, and
that the circumstances that had occurred since strang^ ^^oncurred to fortify
that suspicion. Meantime, that nothing proper to be done might be omitted, he
proposed searching my boxes to see whether by that means any trace could be
discovered to confirm the imputation. Mr. Falkland treated this suggestion
slightly, saying that, if I were the thief, I had no doubt taken the precaution
to obviate so palpable a means of detection. To this Mr. Forester only replied,
that conjecture, however skilfully formed, was not always realised in the
actions and behavior of mankind; and ordered that my boxes and trunks should
be brought into the library. The two that were first opened contained nothing
to confirm the accusation against me; in the third were found a watch and
several jewels that were immediately known to be the property of Mr. Falkland.
The production of this ^^^mingly decisive evidence excited emotions of
astonishment and concern: but no person's astonishment appeared to be greater
than that of Mr. Falkland.

To the rest of the persons present I seemed to be merely the subject of
detection; but in reality I was of all the spectators that individual who was
most at a loss to conceive through every stage of the scene what would come
next, and who listened to every word that was uttered with the most
uncontrollable amazement. Amazement however alternately yielded the ascendancy
to indignation and horror. At first I could not refrain from repeatedly
attempting to interrupt; but I was checked in these attempts by Mr. Forester,
and I presently felt how necessary it was to my future peace that I should
collect the whole energy of my mind to repel the charge, and assert my
innocence.

Every thing being now produced that could be produced against me, Mr. Forester
turned to me with a look of concern and pity, and told me that now was the time
if I chose to allege any thing in my defense. In reply to this invitation I
spoke nearly as follows:

I am innocent. It is in vain that circumstances are accumulated against me:
there is not a person upon earth less capable than I of the things of which I
am accused. I appeal to my heart; I appeal to my looks; I appeal to every
sentiment my tongue ever uttered.

I could perceive that the fervor with which I spoke made some impression upon
every one that heard me. But in a moment their eyes were turned upon the
property that lay before them, and their countenances changed. I proceeded:

One thing more I must aver; Mr. Falkland is not deceived: he perfectly knows
that I am innocent.

I had no sooner uttered these words than an involuntary cry of indignation
burst from every person in the room. Mr. Forester turned to me with a look of
extreme severity, and said:

Young man, consider well what you are doing! It is the privilege of the party
accused to say whatever he thinks proper; and I will take care that you shall
enjoy that privilege in its utmost extent. But do you think it will conduce in
any respect to your benefit to throw out such insolent and intolerable
insinuations?

I thank you most sincerely, replied I, for your caution; but I well know what
it is that I am doing. I make this averment nor merely because it is solemnly
true, but because it is inseparably connected with my vindication. I am the
party accused, and I shall be told that I am not to be believed in my own
defense. I can produce no other witnesses of my innocence; I therefore call
upon Mr. Falkland to be my evidence. I ask him,

Did you never boast to me in private of your power to ruin me? Did you never
say that, if once I brought on myself the weight of your displeasure, my fall
should be irreparable? Did you not tell me that, though I should prepare in
that case a tale ever so plausible or ever so true, you would take care that
the whole world should execrate me as an impostor? Were not those your very
words? Did you not add that my innocence should be of no service to me, and
that you laughed at so feeble a defense? I ask you farther, Did you not receive
a letter from me the morning of the day on which I departed, requesting your
consent to my departure? Should I have done that, if my flight had been that of
a thief? I challenge any man to reconcile the expressions of that letter with
this accusation. Should I have begun with stating that I had conceived a desire
to quit your service, if my desire and the reasons for it had been of the
nature that is now alleged? Should I have dared to ask for what reason I was
thus subjected to an eternal penance?

Saying this, I took out a copy of my letter and laid it open upon the table.

Mr. Falkland returned no immediate answer to my interrogations. Mr. Forester
turned to him, and said, Well, sir, what is your reply to this challenge of
your servant?

Mr. Falkland answered: Such a mode of defense hardly stands in need of a
reply. But I answer, I held no such conversation; I never used such words; I
received no such letter. Surely it is no sufficient rebutter of a criminal
charge, that the criminal repels what is alleged against him with volubility
of speech and intrepidity of manner?

Mr. Forester then turned to me. If, said he, you trust your vindication to the
plausibility of your tale, you must take care to render it consistent and
complete. You have not told us what was the cause of the confusion and anxiety
in which Robert professes to have found you, why you were so impatient to quit
the service of Mr. Falkland, or how you account for certain articles of his
property being found in your possession?

All that, sir, answered I, is true. There are certain parts of my story that I
have not told. If they were told, they would not contribute to my disadvantage,
and they would make the present accusation appear still more astonishing. But I
cannot, as yet at least, prevail upon myself to tell them. Is it necessary to
give any particular and precise reasons why I should wish to change the place
of my residence? You all of you know the unfortunate state of Mr. Falkland's
mind. You know the sternness, reservedness and distance of his manners. If I
had no other reasons, surely it would afford small presumption of criminality
that I should wish to change his service for another.

The question of how these articles of Mr. Falkland's property came to be found
in my possession is more material. It is a question I am wholly unable to
answer. Their being found there was at least as unexpected to me as to any one
of the persons now present. I only know that, as I have the most perfect
assurance of Mr. Falkland's being conscious of my innocence, for, observe! I do
not shrink from that assertion, I reiterate it with new confidence; I therefore
firmly and from my soul believe that their being there is of Mr. Falkland's
contrivance.

I had no sooner said this, than I was again interrupted by an involuntary
exclamation from every one present. They looked at me with furious glances, as
if they could have torn me to pieces, I proceeded:

I have now answered every thing that is alleged against me.

Mr. Forester, you are a lover of justice; I conjure you not to violate it in
my person. You are a man of penetration; look at me, do you see any of the
marks of guilt? Recollect all that has ever passed under your observation; is
it compatible with a mind capable of what is now alleged against me? Could a
real criminal have shown himself so unabashed, composed and firm as I have now
done?

Fellow servants! Mr. Falkland is a man of rank and fortune; he is your master.
I am a poor country lad without a friend in the world. That is a ground of real
difference to a certain extent; but it is not a sufficient ground for the
subversion of justice. Remember, that I am in a situation that is not to be
trifled with, that a decision given against me now, in a case in which I
solemnly assure you I am innocent, will for ever deprive me of reputation and
peace of mind, combine the whole world in a league against me, and determine
perhaps upon my liberty and my life. If you believe, if you see, if you know
that I am innocent, speak for me. Do not suffer a pusillanimous timidity to
prevent you from saving a fellow creature from destruction, who does not
deserve to have a human being for his enemy. Why have we the power of speech,
but to communicate our thoughts? I will never believe that a man conscious of
innocence, cannot make other men perceive that he has that thought. Do not you
feel that my whole heart tells me, I am not guilty of what is imputed to me?

To you, Mr. Falkland, I have nothing to say. I know you, and know that you are
impenetrable. At the very moment that you are urging such odious charges
against me, you admire my resolution and forbearance. But I have nothing to
hope from you. You can look upon my ruin without pity or remorse. I am most
unfortunate indeed in having to do with such an adversary. You oblige me to say
ill things of you; but I appeal to your own heart whether it is not in my power
to say infinitely worse.

Every thing that could be alleged on either side being now concluded, Mr.
Forester undertook to make some remarks upon the whole. Williams, said he, the
charge against you is heavy; the direct evidence is strong; the corroborating
circumstances are numerous and striking. I grant that you have shown
considerable dexterity in your answers; but you will learn, young man, to your
cost, that dexterity, however powerful it may be in certain cases, will avail
little against the stubbornness of truth. It is fortunate for mankind that the
empire of talents has its limitations, and that it is not in the power of
ingenuity to subvert the distinctions of right and wrong. Take my word for it,
that the true merits of the case against you will be too strong for sophistry
to overturn, that justice will prevail, and impotent malice be defeated.

To you, Mr. Falkland, society is obliged for having placed this black affair
in its true light. Do not suffer the malignant aspersions of the criminal to
give you any uneasiness. Depend upon it that they will be found of no weight. I
have no doubt that your character in the judgment of every person that has
heard them stands higher than ever. We feel for your misfortune in being
obliged to hear such calumnies from a person who has injured you so grossly.
But you must be considered in that respect as a martyr in the public cause. The
purity of your motives and dispositions are beyond the reach of malice; and
truth and equity will not fail to award to your calumniator infamy, and to you
the love and approbation of mankind.

I have now told you, Williams, what I think of your case. But I have no right
to assume to be your ultimate* judge. Desperate as it appears to me, I will
give you one piece of advice as if I were retained as a counsel to assist you.
Leave out of it whatever tells to the disadvantage of Mr. Falkland. Defend
yourself as well as you can, but do not attack your master. It is your business
to create in those that hear you a prepossession in your favor. But the
recrimination you have been now practicing will always create indignation.
Dishonesty will admit of some palliation. The deliberate malice you have now
been showing is a thousand times more atrocious. It proves you to have the mind
of a demon rather than a felon. Wherever you shall repeat it, those who hear
you will pronounce you guilty upon that, even if the proper evidence against
you were glaringly defective. If therefore you would consult your interest,
which seems to be your only consideration, it is incumbent upon you by all
means immediately to retract that. If you desire to be believed honest, you
must in the first place show that you have a due sense of merit in others. You
cannot better serve your cause than by begging pardon of your master, and doing
homage to rectitude and worth even when they are employed in vengeance against
you.

It is easy to conceive that my mind sustained an extreme shock from the
decision of Mr. Forester; but his call upon me to retract and humble myself
before my accuser penetrated my whole soul with indignation. I answered:

I have already told you I am innocent. I believe that I could not endure the
effort of inventing a plausible defense, if it were otherwise. You have just
affirmed that it is not in the power of ingenuity to subvert the distinctions
of right and wrong, and in that very moment I find them subverted. This is
indeed to me a very awful moment. New to the world, I know nothing of its
affairs but what has reached me by rumor, or is recorded in books. I have come
into it with all the ardour and confidence inseparable from my years. In every
fellow-being I expected to find a friend. I am unpractised in its wiles, and
have even no acquaintance with its injustice. I have done nothing to deserve
the animosity of mankind, but, if I may judge from the present scene, I am from
henceforth to be deprived of the benefits of integrity and honor. I am to
forfeit the friendship of every one I have hitherto known, and to be precluded
from the power of acquiring that of others. I must therefore be reduced to
derive my satisfaction from myself. Depend upon it I will not begin that career
by dishonorable concessions. If I am to despair of the good will of other men,
I will at least maintain the independence of my own mind. Mr. Falkland is my
implacable enemy. Whatever may be his merits in other respects, he is acting
toward me without humanity, without remorse and without principle. Do you
think I will ever make any submissions to a man by whom I am thus treated, that
I will fall down at the feet of one who is to me a devil, or kiss the hand that
is red with my blood?

In that respect, answered Mr. Forester, do as you shall think proper. I must
confess that your firmness and consistency astonish me. They add something to
what I had conceived of human powers. Perhaps you have chosen the part which
all things considered may serve your purpose best, though I think more
moderation would be more conciliating. The exterior of innocence will, I ^^ant,
stagger the persons who may have the direction of your fate, but it will never
be able to prevail against plain and incontrovertible facts. But I have done
with you. I see in you a new instance of that abuse which is so generally made
of talents the admiration of an undiscerning public. I regard you with horror.
And all that remains is that I should discharge my duty in consigning you as a
monster of depravity to the justice of your country.

No, rejoined Mr. Falkland, to that I can never consent. I have put a restraint
upon myself thus far, because it was right that evidence and enquiry should
take their course. I have suppressed all my habits and sentiments, because it
seemed due to the public that hypocrisy should be unmasked. But I can suffer
this violence no longer. I have through my whole life interfered to protect,
not overbear the sufferer; and I must do so now. I feel not the smallest
resentment of his impotent attacks upon my character; I smile at their malice;
and they make no diminution in my benevolence to their author. Let him say what
he pleases; he cannot hurt me. It was proper that he should be brought to
public shame, that other people might not be deceived by him as we have been.
But there is no necessity for proceeding any farther; and I must insist upon it
that he be permitted to depart wherever he pleases. I am sorry that public
interest affords so gloomy a prospect for his future happiness.

Mr. Falkland, answered Mr. Forester, these sentiments do honor to your
humanity; but I must not give way to them. They only serve to set in a stronger
light the venom of this serpent, this monster of ingratitude, who first robs
his benefactor, and then reviles him. Wretch that you are, will nothing move
you? Are you inaccessible to remorse? Are you not struck to the heart with the
unmerited goodness of your master? Vile calumniator! you are the abhorrence of
nature, the opprobrium of the human species, and the earth can only be freed
from an insupportable burden by your being exterminated! Recollect, sir, that
this villain, at the very moment that you are exercising such unexampled
forbearance in his behalf, has the presumption to charge you with prosecuting a
crime of which you know him to be innocent, nay, with having conveyed the
pretended stolen goods among his property for the express purpose of ruining
him. By this unexampled villainy he makes it your duty to free the world from
such a pest, and your interest to admit no relaxing in your pursuit of him,
lest the world should be persuaded by your clemency to credit his vile
insinuations.

I care no for consequences, replied Mr. Falkland, I will obey the dictates of
my own mind. I will never lend my personal assistance to the reforming mankind
by axes and gibbets; I am sure things will never go well, till honor and not
law be the dictator of mankind, till vice is taught to shrink before the
resistless might of inborn dignity, and not before the cold formality of
statutes. If my calumniator were worthy of my resentment I would chastise him
with my own sword, and not that of the magistrate; but in the present case I
smile at his malice, and resolve to spare him, as the generous lord of the
forest spares the insect that would disturb his repose.

The language you now hold, said Mr. Forester, is that of romance, and not of
reason. Yet I cannot but be struck with the contrast exhibited before me of the
magnanimity of virtue and the obstinate, impenetrable injustice of guilt. While
your mind overflows with goodness, nothing can touch the heart of this
thrice-bred villain. I shall never forgive myself for having once been
entrapped by his detestable arts. This is no time for us to settle the question
between chivalry and law. I shall therefore simply insist as a magistrate,
having taken the evidence in this felony, upon my right and duty of following
the course of justice, and committing the accused to the county jail.

After some farther contest Mr. Falkland, finding Mr. Forester obstinate and
impracticable, withdrew his opposition. Accordingly a proper officer was
summoned from the neighboring village, a mittimus made out, and one of Mr.
Falkland's carriages prepared to conduct me to the place of custody. It will
easily be imagined that this sudden reverse was very painfully felt by me. I
looked round on the servants who had been the spectators of my examinations,
but not one of them either by word or gesture expressed any compassion for my
calamity. The robbery of which I was accused appeared to them atrocious from
its magnitude, and whatever sparks of compassion might otherwise have sprung up
in their ingenuous and undisciplined minds, were totally obliterated by
indignation at my supposed profligacy in recriminating upon their worthy and
excellent master. My fate being already determined, and one of the servants
dispatched for the officer, Mr. Forester and Mr. Falkland withdrew, and left me
in the custody of two others.

One of these was the servant who had gone in pursuit of me and found me at the
market town from whence I had intended to take coach for London. I was willing
accurately to discover the state of mind of those who had been witnesses of
this scene, and who had had some previous opportunity of observing my character
and manners. I therefore endeavored to open a conversation with him. Well, my
good Thomas, said I, in a querulous tone and with a hesitating manner, am I not
a most miserable creature?

Do n^^ speak to me, master Williams! You have given me a shock that I shall
not get the better of for one while. You were hatched by a hen, as the saying
is, but you came of the spawn of a cockatrice. I am glad to my heart, that
honest farmer Williams is dead, your villainy would else have made him curse the
day that ever he was born.

Thomas, I am innocent! I swear by the great God that shall judge me another
day, I am innocent!

Pray, do not swear! for goodness sake, do not swear! Your poor soul is damned
enough without that. For your sake, lad, I will never take any body's word, nor
trust to appearances, thof it should be an angel. Lord bless us! how smoothly
you palavered it over, for all the world as if you had been as fair as a
newborn babe! But it will not do; you will never be able to persuade people
that black is white. For my own part I have done with you. I loved you
yesterday, all one as if you had been my own brother. To day I love you so
well, that I would go ten miles with all the pleasure in life to see you hanged.

Good God! Thomas, have you the heart? What a change! I call God to witness I
have done nothing to deserve it! What a world do we live in!

Hold your tongue, boy! It makes my very heart sick to hear you! I would not
lay a night under the same roof with you for all the world! I should expect the
house to fall and crush such wickedness! I admire that the earth does not open
and swallow you alive! It is poison so much as to look at you! If you go on at
this hardened rate, I believed from my soul that the people you talk to will
tear you to pieces, and you will never live to come to the gallows. Oh, yes,
you do well to pity yourself: poor, tender thing! that spit venom all round you
like a toad, and leave the very ground upon which you crawl infected with your
slime.

Finding the person with whom I talked thus impenetrable to all I could say,
and considering that the advantage to be gained was but small even if I could
overcome his prepossession, I took his advice and was silent. It was not much
longer before every thing was prepared for my departure, and I was conducted to
the same prison which had so lately enclosed the wretched and innocent
Hawkinses. They too had been the victims of Mr. Falkland. He exhibited, upon a
very contracted scale indeed, but in which the truth of delineation was
faithfully sustained, a copy of what monarchs are, who reckon among the
instruments of their power prisons of state.

CHAP. II.
FOR my own part I had never seen a prison, and like the majority of my
brethren had given myself little concern to enquire what was the condition of
those who committed offense against, or became obnoxious to suspicion from the
community. Oh, how enviable is the most tottering shed under which the labourer
retires to rest, compared with the residence of these walls!

To me every thing was new, the massy doors, the resounding locks, the gloomy
passages, the grated windows, and the characteristic looks of the keepers,
accustomed to reject every petition, and to steel their hearts against feeling
and pity. Curiosity and a sense of my situation induced me to fix my eyes on
the faces of these men, but in a few minutes I drew them away with
unconquerable loathing. It is impossible to describe the sort of squalidness
and filth with which these mansions are distinguished. I have seen dirty faces
in dirty apartments, which have nevertheless borne the impression of health,
and spoke carelessness and levity rather than distress. But the dirt of a
prison speaks sadness to the heart, and appears to be already in a state of
putridity and infection.

I was detained for more than an hour in the apartment of the keeper, one
turnkey after another coming in, that they might make themselves familiar with
my person. As I was already considered as guilty of felony to a considerable
amount, I underwent a rigorous search, and they took from me a penknife, a pair
of scissars, and that part of my money which was in gold. It was debated
whether or not these should be sealed up, to be returned to me, as they said,
as soon as I should be acquitted; and had I not displayed an unexpected
firmness of manner and vigor of expostulation, such was the conduct that would
have been pursued. Having undergone these ceremonies, I was thrust into a
day-room in which all the persons then under confinement for felony were
assembled, to the number of eleven. Each of them was too much engaged in his
own reflections to take notice of me. Of these two were imprisoned for
horse-stealing, and three for having stolen a sheep, one for shop-lifting, one
for coining, two for highway-robbery and two for burglary.

The horse-stealers were engaged in a game at cards, which was presently
interrupted by a difference of opinion, attended with great vociferation, they
calling upon one and another to decide it to no purpose, one paying no
attention to their summons, and another leaving them in the midst of their
story, being no longer able to endure his own internal anguish in the midst of
their mummery.

It is a custom among thieves to constitute a sort of mock tribunal of their
own body, from whose decision every one is informed whether he shall be
acquitted, respited or pardoned, as well as respecting the most skilful way of
conducting his de^ence. One of the housebreakers who had already passed this
ordeal was stalking up and down the room with a forced bravery, exclaiming to
his companion that he was as rich as the duke of Bedford himself. He had five
gui^^as and a half, which was as much as he could possibly spend in the course
of the ensuing month, and what happened after that it was Jack Ketch's business
to see to, not his. As he uttered these words he threw himself abruptly upon a
bench that was near him, and seemed to be asleep in a moment. But his sleep was
uneasy and disturbed, his breathing was hard, and at intervals had rather the
nature of a groan. A young fellow from the other side of the room came softly
to the place where he lay with a large knife in his hand, and pressed the back
of it with such violence upon his neck, the head hanging over the side of the
bench, that it was not till after several efforts that he was able to rise. Oh,
Jack! cried this manual jester, I had almost done your business for you! The
other expressed no marks of resentment, but sullenly answered, Damn you, why
did not you take the edge? It would have been the best thing you have done this
many a day This incident really occurred, and was witnessed by a friend of the
author a few years since in Newgate.
!

The case of one of the persons committed for highway-robbery was not a little
extraordinary. He was a common soldier, of a most engaging physiognomy, and two
and twenty years of age. The prosecutor, who had been robbed one evening as he
returned very late from the alehouse, of the sum of three shillings, swore
positively to his person. The character of the prisoner was such as has seldom
been equalled. The meanness of his condition did not preclude him from the
pursuit of intellectual cultivation; and he drew his favorite amusement from
the works of Virgil and Horace. His integrity had been proverbially great. In
one instance he had been employed by a lady to convey a sum of a thousand
pounds to a person at some miles distance: in another he was entrusted by a
gentleman during his absence with the care of his house and furniture to the
value of at least five times that sum. His habits of thinking were peculiar,
full of justice, simplicity and wisdom. He from time to time earned money of
his officers by his peculiar excellence in furbishing arms; but he declined
offers that had been made him to become a sergeant or a corporal, saying, that
he did not want money, and that in a new situation he should have less leisure
for study. He was equally constant in refusing presents that were offered him
by persons that had been struck with his merit: not that he was under the
influence of false delicacy and pride, but that his conscience would not allow
him to accept that, the want of which he did not feel to be an evil. This man
died while I was in prison. I received his last breath A story extremely
similar to this is to b^ ^ound in the Newgate Calendar, Vol. I. p. 382.
.

The whole day I was obliged to spend in the company of these men, some of them
having really committed the actions laid to their charge, others whom their ill
fortune had rendered the victims of suspicion. The whole was a scene of misery
such as nothing short of actual observation can suggest to the mind. Some were
noisy and obstreperous, endeavoring by a false bravery to keep at bay the
remembrance of their condition; while others, incapable even of this effort,
had the torment of their thoughts aggravated by the perpetual noise and
confusion that prevailed around them. In the faces of those who assumed the
most courage you might trace the furrows of anxious care, and in the midst of
their labored hilarity dreadful ideas would ever and anon intrude, convulsing
their features and working every line into an expression of the keenest agony.
To these men the sun brought no return of joy. Day after day ro^^ed on, but
their state was immutable. Existence was to them a theater of invariable
melancholy; every moment was a moment of anguish, yet di^ they wish to prolong
that moment, fearful that the coming period would bring a severer fate. The^
thought of the past with insupportable repenta^^^, each man contented to give
his right hand, to have again the choice of that peace and liberty which he had
unthinkingly bartered away. We talk of instruments of torture; Englishmen take
credit to themselves for having banished the use of them from their happy
shore! Alas, he that has observed the secrets of a prison, well knows that
there is infinitely more torture in the lingering existence of a criminal, in
the silent, intolerable minutes that he spends, than in the tangible misery of
whips and racks!

Such were our days. At sunset our jailors appeared, and ordered each man to
come away, and be locked into his dungeon. It was a bitter aggravation of our
fate to be under the arbitrary control of these fellows. They felt no man's
sorrow; they were of all men least capable of any sort of feeling. They had a
barbarous and sullen pleasure in issuing their detested mandates, and observing
the mournful reluctance with which they were obeyed. Whatever they directed, it
was in vain to expostulate; setters and bread and water were the sure
consequences of resistance. Their tyranny had no other limit than their own
caprice; to whom shall the unfortunate felon appeal? To what purpose complain,
when his complaints are sure to be received with incredulity? A tale of mutiny
and necessary precaution is the unfailing refuge of the keeper, and this tale
is an everlasting bar against redress.

Our dungeons were cell^, 7 feet by 6, below the surface of the ground, damp,
without window, light or air, except from a few holes worked for that purpose
in the door. In some of these miserable receptacles three persons were put to
sleep together See Howard on Prisons.
. I was fortunate enough to have one to myself. It was now the approach of
winter. We were not allowed to have candles; and, as I have already said, were
thrust in here at sunset and not liberated till the returning day. This was
our situation for fourteen or fifteen hours out of the four and twenty I had
never been accustomed to sleep more than six or seven hours, and my inclination
to sleep was now less than ever. Thus was I reduced to spend half my day in
this dreary abode and in complete darkness. This was no trifling aggravation of
my lot.

Among my melancholy reflections I tasked my memory, and counted over the
doors, the lo^ks, the chains, the massy walls and grated windows that were
between me and liberty. These, said I, are the engines that tyranny sits down
in cold and serious meditation to invent. This is the empire that man exercises
over man. Thus is a being, formed to expatiate, to act, to smile and enjoy,
restricted and benumbed. How great must be his depravity or heedlessness who
vindicates this scheme for changing health and gaiety and serenity, into the
wanness of a dungeon and the deep furrows of agony and despair!

Thank God, exclaims the Englishman, we have no Bastille! Thank God, with us no
man can be punished without a crime! Unthinking wretch! Is that a country of
liberty where thousands languish in dungeons and ^^tters? Go, go, ignorant
fool! and visit the scenes of our prisons! witness their unwholesomeness, their
filth, the tyranny of their governors, the misery of their inmates! After that
show me the man shameless enough to triumph, and say, England has no Bastille!
Is there any charge so frivolous upon which men are not consigned to these
detested abodes? Is there any villainy that is not practiced by justices and
prosecutors? But against all this, perhaps you have been told, th^^e is
redress. Yes, a redress, that it is the consummation of insult so much as to
name! Where shall the poor wretch, reduced to the last despair, and to whom
acquittal perhaps comes just time enough to save him from perishing, -- where
shall this man find leisure, and much less money, to see counsel and officers,
and purchase the tedious, dear-bought remedy of the law? No, he is too happy to
leave his dungeon and the memory of his dungeon behind him; and the same
tyranny and wanton oppression become the inheritance of his successor.

For myself I looked round upon my walls, and forward upon the premature death
I had too much reason to expect; I consulted my own heart that whispered
nothing but innocence; and I said, This is society. This is the object, the
distribution of justice, which is the end of human reason. For this sages have
toiled, and the midnight oil has been wasted. This!

The reader will forgive this digression from the immediate subject of my
story. If it should be said, these are general remarks; let it be remembered
that they are the dear-bought result of experience. It is from the fullness of a
bursting heart that invective thus flows to my pen. These are not the
declamations of a man desirous to be eloquent. I have felt the iron slavery
grating upon my soul.

I believed that misery, more pure than that which I now endured, had never
fallen to the lot of a human being. I recollected with astonishment my puerile
eagerness to be brought to the test and have my innocence examined. I execrated
it as the vilest and most insufferable pedantry. I exclaimed in the bitterness
of my heart, Of what value is a fair fame? It is the jewel of men formed to be
amused with baubles. Without it I might have had serenity of heart and
cheerfulness of occupation, peace and liberty; why should I consign my
happiness to other men's arbitration? But, if a fair fame were of the most
inexpressible value, is this the method which common sense would prescribe to
retrieve it? The language which these institutions hold out to the unfortunate
is, Come, and be shut out from the light of day, be ^he associate of those whom
society has marked out for her abhorrence, be the slave of jailers, be loaded
with fetters; thus shall you be cleared from every unworthy aspersion, and
restored to reputation and honor! This is the consolation she affords to those
whose malignity or folly, private pique or unfounded positiveness have without
the smallest foundation loaded with calumny. For myself I felt my own
innocence, and I soon found upon enquiry that three-fourths of those who are
regularly subjected to a similar treatment, are persons, whom even with all the
superciliousness and precipitation of our courts of justice no evidence can be
found to convict. How slender then must be that man's portion of information
and discernment, who is willing to commit his character and welfare to such
guardianship!

But my case was even worse than this. I intimately felt that a trial, such as
institution is able to make it, is only the worthy sequel of such a beginning.
What chance had I, after the purgation I was now suffering, that I should come
out acquitted at last? What probability was there that the trial I had just
endured in the house of Mr. Falkland was not just as fair as any that might be
expected to follow? No, I have already anticipated my own condemnation.

Thus was I cut off for ever from all that existence has to bestow, from all
the high hopes I had so often conceived, from all the future excellence my soul
so much delighted to imagine, to spend a few weeks in a miserable prison, and
then to perish by the hands of the public executioner. No language can do
justice to the indignant and soul-sickening loathing that these ideas excited.
My resentment was not restricted to my prosecutor, but extended itself to take
in the whole machine of human society. I could never believe that all this was
the fair result of institutions inseparable from the general good. I regarded
the whole human species as so many hangmen and torturers. I considered them as
confederated to tear me to pieces; and this wide scene of inexorable
persecution inflicted upon me inexpressible agony. I looked on this side and on
that; I was innocent, I had a right to expect assistance; but every heart was
ready to lend its force to make my ruin secure. No man that has not f^lt in his
own most momentous concerns justice, eternal truth, unalterable equity engaged
in his behalf; and on the other side brute force, impenetrable obstinacy and
unfeeling insolence, can imagine the sensations that then passed through my
mind. I saw treachery triumphant and enthroned; I saw the sinews of innocence
crumbled into dust by the gripe of almighty guilt.

What relief had I from these sensations? Was it relief that I spent the day in
the midst of profligacy and execrations, that I saw reflected from every
countenance agonies only inferior to my own? He that would form a lively idea
of the regions of the damned, needed only to witness for six hours a scene to
which I was confined for many months. Not for one hour could I withdraw myself
from this complexity of horrors, or take refuge in the calmness of meditation.
Air, exercise, series, contrast, those grand enliveners of the human frame, I
was for ever debarred, by the inexorable tyranny under which I was fallen. Nor
did I find the solitude of my nightly dungeon less insupportable. Its only
furniture was the straw that served me for my repose. It was narrow, damp and
unwholesome. The slumbers of a mind, wearied like mine with the most detestable
uniformity, to whom neither amusement nor occupation ever offered themselves to
beguile the painful hours, were short, disturbed and unrefreshing. My sleeping,
still more than my waking thoughts, were full of perplexity, deformity and
disorder. To these slumbers succeeded the hours which by the regulations of our
prison I was obliged though awake to spend in solitary and chearless darkness.
Here I had neither books, nor pens, nor any thing upon which to engage my
attention; all was a sightless blank. How was a mind, active and indefatigable
like mine, to endure this misery? I could not sink it in lethargy; I could not
forget my woes; they haunted me with unintermitted and demoniac malice. Cruel,
inexorable policy of human affairs, that condemns a man to torture like this,
that sanctions it and knows not what is done under its sanction; that is too
supine and unfeeling to enquire into these p^t^y details; that (...) this the
ordeal of innocence and the protector of freedom! A thousand times I could have
dashed my brains against the walls of my dungeon; a thousand times I longed for
death, and wished with inexpressible ardour for an end to what I suffered; a
thousand times I meditated suicide, and ruminated in the bitterness of my soul
upon the different means of escaping from the load of existence. What had I to
do with life? I had seen enough to make me regard it with detestation. Why
should I wait the lingering process of legal despotism, and not dare so much as
to die but when and how its instruments decreed? Still some inexplicable
suggestion withheld my hand. I clung with desperate fondness to this shadow of
existence, its mysterious attractions and its hopeless prospects.

CHAP. III.
SUCH were the reflections that haunted the first days of my imprisonment, in
consequence of which they were spent in perpetual anguish. But after a time
nature, wearied with distress, would no longer stoop to the burden; thought,
which is incessantly varying, introduced a series of reflections totally
different.

My fortitude revived. I had always been accustomed to cheerfulness,
good humor and serenity, and this habit now returned to visit me at the bottom
of my dungeon. No sooner did my contemplations take this turn, than I saw the
reasonableness and possibility of tranquillity and peace, and my mind whispered
to me the propriety of showing in this forlorn condition that I was superior to
all my persecutors. Blessed state of innocence and self-approbation! The
sunshine of conscious integrity pierced through all the harriers of my cell,
and spoke ten thousand times more joy to my heart than the accumulated
splendours of nature and art can communicate to the slaves of vice.

I found out the secret of employing my mind. I said, I am shut up for half the
day in total darkness without any external source of amusement; the other half
I spend in the midst of noise, turbulence and confusion. What then? Can I not
draw amusement from the stores of my own mind? Is it not freighted with various
knowledge? Have I not been employed from my infancy in gratifying an insatiable
curiosity? When should I derive benefit from these superior advantages, if not
at present? Accordingly I tasked the stores of my memory and my powers of
invention. I amused myself with recollecting the history of my life. By degrees
I called to mind a number of minute circumstances which but for this exercise
would have been for ever forgotten. I repassed in my thoughts whole
conversations, I recollected their subjects, their arrangement, their incidents
and frequently their very words. I mused upon these ideas till I was totally
absorbed in thought. I repeated them till my mind glowed with enthusiasm. I had
my different employments fitted for the solitude of the night in which I could
give full scope to the impulses of my mind, and the uproar of the day in which
my chief object was to be insensible to the disorder with which I was
surrounded.

By degrees I quitted my own story, and amused myself with imaginary
adventures. I figured to myself every situation in which I could be placed, and
conceived the conduct to be observed in each. Thus scenes of insult and danger,
of tenderness and oppression became familiar to me. In fancy I often passed the
awful hour of dissolving nature. In some of my reveries I boiled with impetuous
indignation, and in others patiently collected the whole force of my mind for
some fearful encounter. I cultivated the powers of oratory suited to these
different states, and improved more in eloquence in the solitude of my dungeon,
than perhaps I should have done in the busiest and most crowded scenes At
length I proceeded to as regular a disposition of my time, as the man in his
study who passes from mathematics to poetry, and from poetry to the law of
nations in the different parts of each single day; and I as seldom infringed
upon my plan. Nor were my subjects of disquisition less numerous than his. I
went over, by the assistance of memory only, a considerable part of Euclid
during my confinement, and revived day after day the series of facts and
incidents in some of the most celebrated historians.

While I was thus employed I reflected with exultation upon the degree in which
man is independent of the smiles and frowns of fortune. I was beyond her reach,
for I could fall no lower. To an ordinary eye I might seem destitute and
miserable, but in reality I wanted for nothing. My fare was coarse; but I was
in health. My dungeon was noisome; but I felt no inconvenience. I was shut up
from the usual means of exercise and air; but I found the method of exercising
myself even to perspiration in my dungeon. I had no means of withdrawing my
person from a disgustful society in the most cheerful and valuable part of the
day; but I soon brought to perfection the art of withdrawing my thoughts, and
saw and heard the people about me for just as short a time and as seldom as I
pleased.

Such is man in himself considered; so simple his nature; so few his wants. How
different from the man of artificial society! Palaces are built for his
reception, a thousand vehicles provided for his exercise, provinces are
ransacked for the gratification of his appetite, and the whole world traversed
to supply him with apparel and furniture. Thus vast is his expenditure, and the
purchase slavery. He is dependent on a thousand accidents for tranquillity and
health, and his body and soul are at the devotion of whoever will satisfy his
imperious cravings.

In addition to the disadvantages of my present situation, I was reserved for
an ignominious death. What then? Every man must die. No man knows how soon. It
surely is not worse to encounter the king of terrors in health and with every
advantage for the collection of fortitude, than to encounter him already half
subdued by sickness, and suffering. I was resolved at least fully to possess
the days I had to live, and this is peculiarly in the power of the man who
preserves his health to the last moment of his existence. Why should I suffer
my mind to be invaded by unavailing regrets? Every sentiment of vanity, or
rather of independence and justice within me, instigated me to say to my
persecutor, You may cut off my existence, but you cannot disturb my serenity.

CHAP. IV.
IN the midst of these reflections another thought, which had not before struck
me, occurred to my mind. I exult, said I, and reasonably, over the impotence of
my persecutor. Is not that impotence greater than I have yet imagined? I say,
he may cut off my existence, but cannot disturb my serenity. It is true: my
mind, the clearness of my spirit, the firmness of my temper, are beyond his
reach; is not my life equally so, if I please? What are the material obstacles
that man never subdued? What is the undertaking so arduous that by some has not
been accomplished? And, if by others, why not by me? Had they stronger motives
than I? Was existence more variously endeared to them, or had they more
numerous methods by which to animate and adorn it? Many of those who have
exerted most perseverance and intrepidity were obviously my inferiors in that
respect. Why should not I be as daring as they? Adamant and steel have a
ductility like water to a mind sufficiently bold and contemplative. The mind is
its own place; and is endowed with powers that might enable it to laugh at the
tyrant's vigilance. I passed and repassed these ideas in my mind; and, heated
with the contemplation, I said, No, I will not die!

My reading in early youth had been extremely miscellaneous. I had read of
housebreakers to whom locks and bolts were a jest, and who, vain of their art,
exhibited the experiment of entering a house the most strongly barricaded, with
as little noise and almost as little trouble as other men would lift up a
latch. This circumstance had caught my attention. There is nothing so
interesting to the juvenile mind as the wonderful; there is no power that it so
eagerly covets as that of astonishing spectators by its miraculous exertions.
Mind appeared to my untutored reflections vague, airy and unfettered, the
susceptible perceiver of reasons, but never intended by nature to be the slave
of force. Why should it be in the power of man to overtake and hold me by
force? Why, when I choose to withdraw myself, should I not be capable of
eluding the most vigilant search? These limbs and this trunk are a cumbrous and
unfortunate load for the power of thinking to drag along with it; but why
should not the power of thinking be able to lighten the load till it shall be
no longer felt? -- These early modes of reflection were by no means indifferent
to my present enquiries.

Our next-door neighbor at my father's house had been a carpenter. Fresh from
the sort of reading, I have mentioned, I was eager to examine his tools, their
powers and their uses. This carpenter was a man of a strong and vigorous mind;
and, his faculties having been chiefly confined to the range of his profession,
he was fertile in experiments and ingenious in reasoning upon these particular
topics. I therefore obtained from him considerable satisfaction; and, my mind
being set in action, I sometimes even improved upon the hints he furnished. His
conversation was particularly agreeable to me; I at first worked with him
sometimes for my amusement, and afterward occasionally for a short time as his
journeyman. I was constitutionally vigorous, my bones well knit, and my limbs
sinewy and powerful; and by the experience thus attained I added to the
abstract possession of power the skill of applying it, when I pleased, in such
a manner as that no part should be inefficient.

It is a strange, but no uncommon feature in the human mind, that the very
resource of which we stand in greatest need in a critical situation, though
already accumulated it may be by preceding industry, fails to present itself at
the time when it should be called into action. Thus my mind had passed through
two very different stages since my imprisonment, before this means of
liberation suggested itself. My faculties were overwhelmed in the first
instance, and raised to a pitch of enthusiasm in the second, while in both I
took it for granted in a manner that I must passively submit to the good
pleasure of my persecutors.

During the period in which my mind had been thus undecided, the assizes, which
were held twice a year in the town in which I was a prisoner, came on. Upon
this occasion my case was not brought forward, but was suffered to stand over
six months longer. It would have been just the same, if I had had as strong
reason to expect acquittal, as I had conviction. If I had been apprehended upon
the most frivolous reasons upon which any justice of the peace ever thought
proper to commit a naked beggar for trial, I must still have waited about two
hundred and seventeen days, before my innocence could be cleared. So imperfect
are the effects of the boasted laws of a country whose legislators hold their
assembly from four to six months in every year! I never certainly discovered
whether this delay were owing to any interference on the part ^f my prosecutor,
or whether it fell out in the regular administration of justice, which (...)
^oo solemn and dignified to accommodate itself to the rights or benefit of an
insignificant individual.

The term of my imprisonment was thus unaccountably prolonged. But this was not
the only incident that occurred to me during my confinement for which I could
find no satisfactory solution. It was nearly at the same time, that is, when I
had been little more than a month in durance, that the keeper began to alter
his behavior to me. He sent for me one morning into the part of the building
which was appropriated for his own use, and after some hesitation told me he
was sorry my accommodations had been so indifferent, and asked whether I should
like to have a chamber in his family? I was struck with the unexpectedness of
this question, and desired to know whether any body had employed him to ask it.
No, he replied; but, now the assizes were over, he had fewer felons on his
hands, and more time to look about him: He believed I was a good kind of a
young man; and he had taken a sort of a liking to me. I fixed my eye upon his
countenance as he said this. I could discover none of the usual symptoms of
kindness; he appeared to me to be acting a part, unnatural and that sat with
aukwardness upon him. He went on however to offer me the liberty of eating at
his table, which, if I chose it, he said would make no difference to him, and
he should not think of charging me any thing for it. He had always indeed as
much upon his hands as one person could see to; but his wife and his daughter
Peggy would be woundily pleased to hear a person of learning talk, as he
understood I was; and perhaps I might not feel myself disagreeable in their
company.

I reflected on this proposal, and had little doubt, notwithstanding what the
keeper had affirmed to the contrary, that it did not proceed from any
spontaneous humanity in him, but that he had, to speak the language of persons
of his cast, good reasons for what he did. I busied myself in conjectures as to
who could be the author of this sort of indulgence and attention. The two most
likely persons were Mr. Falkland and Mr. Forester. The latter I knew to be a
man austere and inexorable toward those whom he deemed vicious. He piqued
himself upon being insensible to those softer emotions, which he believed to
answer no other purpose than to seduce us from our duty. Mr. Falkland on the
contrary was a man of the acutest sensibility; hence arose his pleasures and
his pains, his virtues and his vices. Though he were the bitterest enemy to
whom I could possibly be exposed, and though no sentiments of humanity could
divert or control the bent of his mind, I yet persuaded myself that he was
more likely than his kinsman to visit in idea the scene of my dungeon, and to
feel impelled to alleviate my sufferings.

This conjecture was by no means calculated to serve as balm to my mind. My
thoughts were unavoidably full of irritation against my persecutor. How could I
think kindly of a man, in competition with the gratification of whose ruling
passion my good name or my life was deemed as of no consideration? I saw him
crushing the one and bringing the other into jeopardy, with a quietness and
composure on his part that I could not recollect without horror. I knew not
what were his plans respecting me. I knew not whether he troubled himself so
much as to form a barren wish for the preservation of one, whose future
prospects he had so iniquitously tarnished. I had hitherto been silent as to my
principal topic of recrimination. But I was by no means certain that I should
consent to go out of the world in silence, the victim of this man's obduracy
and art. In every view I felt my heart ulcerated with a sense of his injustice;
and my very soul spurned these pitiful indulgences, at a time that he was
grinding me into dust with the inexorableness of his vengeance.

I was influenced by these sentiments in my reply to the jailor; and I found a
secret pleasure in pronouncing them in all their bitterness. I viewed him with
a sarcastic smile, and said, I was glad to find him of a sudden become so
humane: I was not however without some penetration as to the humanity of a
jailor, and could guess at the circumstances by which it was produced. But he
might tell his employer that his cares were fruitless; I would accept no
favors from a man that held a halter about my neck, and had courage enough to
endure the worst both in time to come and now. -- The jailor looked at me with
astonishment, and, turning upon his heel, exclaimed, Well done, my cock! You
have not had your learning for nothing I see. You are set upon not dying
dunghill. But that is to come, lad: you had better by half keep your courage
till you shall find it wanted.

The assizes, which passed over without influence to me, produced a great
revolution among my fellow prisoners. I lived long enough in the jail to
witness a general mutation of its inhabitants. One of the housebreakers and the
coiner were hanged. Two more were cast for transportation, and the rest
acquitted. The transports remained with us; and, though the prison was thus
lightened of nine of its inhabitants, I left within three as many persons on
the felons' side as I had found there on my first arrival.

The soldier, whose story I have already recorded, died, on the evening of the
very day on which the judges arrived, of a disease the consequence of his
confinement. Such was the justice that resulted from the laws of his country,
to an individual who would have been the ornament of any age, one who of all
the men I ever knew was inexpressibly the kindest, of the most feeling heart,
of the most engaging and unaffected manners, and the most unblemished life. The
name of this man was Brightwel. Were it possible for my pen to consecrate him
to never dying fame, I could undertake no task more grateful to my heart. His
judgment was penetrating and manly, totally unmixed with imbecility and
confusion, while at the same time there was such an uncontending frankness in
his countenance, that a superficial observer would have supposed he must have
been the prey of the first plausible knavery that was practiced against him.
Great reason have I to remember him with affection! He was the most ardent, and
I had almost said the last of my friends. Nor did I remain in this respect in
his debt. There was indeed a great congeniality, if I may presume to say so, in
our characters, except that I cannot pretend to rival the magnitude of his
genius, or to compare with, what the world has scarcely surpassed, the
correctness and untainted purity of his conduct. He heard my story, as far as I
thought proper to disclose it, with interest, he examined it with sincere
impartiality, and, if at first any doubt remained upon his mind, a frequent
observation of me in my most unguarded moments taught him in no long time to
place an unreserved confidence in my innocence.

He talked of the injustice of which we were mutually victims without
bitterness, and predicted that the time would come when the possibility of such
intolerable oppression would be extirpated. But this, he said, was a happiness
reserved for posterity; it was too late for us to reap the benefit of it. It
was some consolation to him, that he could not tell the period in his past
life, which the best judgment of which he was capable would teach him to spend
better. He could say, with as much reason as most men, he had discharged his
duty. But he foresaw that he should not survive his present calamity. This was
his prediction, while yet in his health. He might be said in a certain sense to
have a broken heart. But, if that phrase were in any way applicable to him,
sure never was despair more calm, more full of resignation and serenity.

At no time in the whole course of my adventures was I exposed to a shock more
severe than I received from this man's death. The circumstances of his fate
presented themselves to my mind in their full complication of iniquity. From
him and the execrations with which I loaded the government that could be the
instrument of his tragedy, I turned to myself. I beheld the catastrophe of
Brightwel with envy. A thousand times I longed that my corse had laid in death,
instead of his. I was only reserved, as I persuaded myself, for unutterable
woe. In a few days he would have been acquitted, his liberty, his reputation
restored; mankind perhaps, struck with the injustice he had suffered, would
have shown themselves eager to balance his misfortunes and obliterate his
disgrace. But this man died; and (...) remained alive! I, who, though not less
wrongfully treated than he, had no hope of reparation, must be marked as long I
lived for a villain, and in my death probably held up to the scorn and
detestation of my species!

Such were some of the immediate reflections which the fate of this unfortunate
martyr produced in my mind. Yet my intercourse with Brightwel was not in the
review without its portion of comfort. I said, This man has seen through the
veil of calumny that overshades me; he has understood, and has loved me. Why
should I despair? May I not meet hereafter with men ingenuous like him, who
shall do me justice and sympathise with my calamity? With that consolation I
will be satisfied. I will rest in the arms of friendship, and forget the
malignity of the world. Henceforth I will be contented with tranquil obscurity,
with the cultivation of sentiment and wisdom, and the exercise of benevolence
within a narrow circle. It was thus that my mind became excited to the project
I was about to undertake.

I had no sooner meditated the idea of an escape, than I determined upon the
following method of facilitating the preparations for it. I undertook to
ingratiate myself with my keeper. In the world I have generally sound such
persons as had been acquainted with the outline of my story, regarding me with
a sort of loathing and abhorrence, which made them avoid me with as much care
as if I had been spotted with the plague. The idea of my having first robbed my
master, and then endeavored to clear myself by charging him with subornation
against me, placed me in a class distinct from and infinitely more guilty than
that of common felons. But this man was too good a master of his profession to
entertain aversion against a fellow creature upon such a score. He considered
the persons committed to his custody merely as so many human bodies for whom he
was responsible that they should be forthcoming in time and place; and the
difference of innocence and guilt he looked down upon as an affair beneath his
attention. I had not therefore the prejudices to encounter in recommending
myself to him, that I have found so peculiarly obstinate in many other cases.
Add to which, the same motive, whatever it was, that had made him so profuse in
his offers a little before, had probably its influence on the present occasion.

I informed him of my skill in the profession of a joiner, and offered to make
him half a dozen handsome chairs, if he would facilitate my obtaining the tools
necessary for carrying on my profession in my present confinement; for, without
his consent previously obtained, it would have been in vain for me to expect
that I could quietly exert an industry of this kind, even if my existence had
depended upon it. He looked at me first as asking himself what he was to
understand by this novel proposal, and then, most graciously relaxing, said, he
was glad I was come off a little of my high notions and my buckram, and he
would see what he could do. Two days after he signified his compliance. He said
that, as to the matter of the present I had offered him, he thought nothing of
that, I might do as I pleased in it; but I might depend upon every civility
from him that he could show with safety to himself, if so be as, when he was
civil, I did not offer a second time to snap and take him up short.

Having thus gained my preliminary, I gradually accumulated tools or various
sorts, gimlets, piercers, chissels, et cetera. I immediately set myself to
work. The nights were long, and the sordid eagerness of my keeper
notwithstanding his ostentatious generosity was great; I therefore petitioned
and was indulged with a bit of, candle that I might amuse myself for an hour or
two with my work after I was locked up in my dungeon. I did not however by any
means apply constantly to the work I had undertaken, and my jailor betrayed
various tokens of impatience. Perhaps he was afraid I should not have finished
it before I was hanged. I however insisted upon working at my leisure as I
pleased, and this he did not venture expressly to dispute. In addition to the
advantages thus obtained, I procured secretly from Miss Peggy, who now and then
came into the jail to make her observations of the prisoners, and who seemed to
have conceived some partiality for my person, the implement of an iron crow.

In these proceedings it is easy to trace the vice and duplicity that must be
expected to grow out of injustice. I know not whether my readers will pardon
the sinister advantage I extracted from the mysterious concessions of my
keeper. But I must acknowledge my weakness in that respect; I am writing my
adventures and not my apology: and I was not prepared to maintain the unvaried
sincerity of my manners, at the expense of a speedy close to be put upon my
existence.

My plan was now digested. I believed that by means of the crow I could easily
and without much noise force the door of my dungeon from its hinges, or, if
not, that I could, in case of necessity, cut away the lock. This door led into
a narrow passage, bounded on one side by the range of dungeons, and on the
other by the jailor's and turnkey's apartments, through which was the usual
entrance from the street. This outlet I dared not attempt for fear of
disturbing the persons close to whose very door I should in that case have
found it necessary to pass. I determined therefore upon another door at the
farther end of the pa^^^ge, which was barricaded, and which led to a sort of a
garden in the occupation of the keeper. This garden I had never entered, but I
had had an opportunity of observing it from the window of the felons' day room,
which looked that way, the room itself being immediately over the range of
dungeons. I perceived that it was bounded by a wall of considerable height,
which I was told by my fellow prisoners was the extremity of the jail on that
side, and beyond which was a back-lane of some length that terminated upon the
skirts of the town. Upon an accurate observation and much reflection upon the
subject I found that I should be able, if once I got into the garden, with my
gimblets and piercers inserted at proper distances to make a sort of ladder, by
means of which I could get clear over the wall, and once more take possession
of the sweets of liberty. I preferred this wall to that which immediately
skirted my dungeon, on the other side of which was a populous street.

I suffered about two days to elapse from the period at which I had thoroughly
digested my project, and then in the very middle of the night began to set
about its execution. The first door was attended with considerable difficulty,
but at length this obstacle was happily removed. The second door was fastened
on the inside. I was therefore able with perfect ease to push back the bolts.
But the lock, which of course was depended upon for the principal security, and
was therefore strong, was double-shot, and the key taken away. I endeavored
with my chissel to force back the bolt of the lock, but to no purpose. I then
unscrewed the box of the lock; and, that being taken away, the door was no
longer opposed to my wishes.

Thus far I had proceeded with the happiest success, but close on the other
side of the door there was a kennel with a large mastiff dog, of which I had
not the smallest previous knowledge. Though I stepped along in the most careful
manner, this animal was disturbed and began to ^ark. I was extremely
disconcerted, but immediately applied myself to soothe the animal, in which I
presently succeeded. I then returned along the passage to listen whether any
body had been disturbed by the noise of the dog; resolved, if that were the
case, that I would return to my dungeon, and endeavor to replace every thing
in its former state. But the whole appeared perfectly quiet, and I was
encouraged to proceed in my operation.

I now got to the wall, and had nearly gained half the ascent, when I heard a
voice at the garden door, crying, Holloa! who is there? who opened the door?
The man received no answer, and the night was too dark for him to distinguish
objects at any distance. He therefore returned, as I judged, into the house for
a light. Meantime the dog, understanding the key in which these interrogations
were uttered, began barking again more violently than ever. I had now no
possibility of retreat, and I was not without hopes that I might yet accomplish
my object, and clear the wall. Meanwhile a second man came out, while the other
was getting his lanthorn, and, by that time, I had got to the top of the wall,
was able to perceive me. He immediately set up a shout, and threw a large stone
which grazed me in its flight. Alarmed at my situation, I was obliged to
descend on the other side without taking the necessary precautions, and in my
fall nearly dislocated my ancle.

There was a door in the wall, of which I was not previously apprised; and,
this being opened, the two men with the lanthorn were on the other side in an
instant. They had then nothing to do but to run along the lane to the place
from which I had descended. I endeavored to ri^e after my fall, but the pain
was so intense that I was scarcely able to stand, and, after having limped a
few paces, I twisted my foot under me, and fell down again. I had now no
remedy, and quietly suffered myself to be retaken.

CHAP. V.
I WAS conducted to the keeper's room for that night, and the two men sat up
with me. I was accosted with many interrogatories, to which I gave little
answer, but complained of the hurt in my leg. To this I could obtain no reply
except, Curse you, my lad! if that be all, we will give you some ointment for
that; we will anoint it with a little cold iron. They were indeed excessively
^ulky with me, for having broken their night's rest and given them all this
trouble. In the morning they were as good as their word, fixing a pair of
fetters upon both my legs, regardless of the ancle which was now swelled to a
considerable size, and then fastening me with a padlock to a staple in the
floor of my dungeon. I expostulated with warmth upon this treatment, told them
that I was a man upon whom the law had as yet passed no censure, and who
therefore in the eye of the law was innocent. But they bid me keep such fudge
as that for people who knew no better; that they knew what they did, and would
answer it to any court in England.

The pain of the fetter was intolerable. I endeavored in various ways to
relieve it, and even privily to free my leg; but the more it was swelled, the
more was this rendered impossible. I then resolved to bear it with patience;
still the longer it continued, the worse it grew. After two days and two nights
I entreated the turnkey to go and ask the surgeon who usually attended the
prison to look at it, for, if it continued longer as it was, I was convinced it
would mortify. But he glared ^^^lily at me, and said, Damn my blood! I should
like to see that day. To die of a mortification is too good an end for such a
rascal! At the time that he thus addressed me, the whole mass of my blood was
already fevered by the anguish I had undergone, my patience was wholly
exhausted, and I was silly enough to be irritated beyond bearing by his
impertinence and vulgarity. Look you, Mr. turnkey, said I, there is one thing
that such fellows as you are set over us for, and another thing that you are
not. You are to take care we do not escape, but it is no part of your office to
call us names and abuse us. If I were not chained down to my seat, you dare as
well eat your fingers as use such language; and, take my word for it, you shall
yet live to repent of your insolence.

While I thus spoke, the man stared at me with astonishment. He was so little
accustomed to such retorts that at first he could scarcely believe his ears;
and such was the firmness of my manner that he seemed to forget for a moment
that I was not at large. But, as soon as he had time to recollect himself, he
did not deign even to be angry. His face relaxed into a smile of contempt, he
snapped his fingers at me, and, turning upon his heel, exclaimed, Well said, my
cock, Crow away! Have a care you do not burst! and, as he shut the door upon
me, mimicked the voice of the animal he mentioned.

This rejoinder brought me to myself in a moment, and showed me the impotence
of the resentment I was expressing. But, though he thus put an end to the
violence of my speech, the torture of my body continued as great as ever. I was
determined to change my mode of attack. The same turnkey returned in a few
minutes; and, as he approached me to put down some food he had brought I
slipped a shilling into his hand, saying at the same time, My good fellow, for
God's sake, go to the surgeon: I am sure you do not wish me to perish for want
of assistance. The fellow put the shilling in his pocket, looked hard at me,
and then with one nod of his head, and without uttering a single word, went
away. The surgeon presently after made his appearance; and, finding the part in
a high state of inflammation, ordered certain applications, and gave peremptory
directions that the fetter should not be replaced upon that leg, till a cure
had been effected. It was a full month before the leg was perfectly healed, and
made equally strong and flexible with the other.

The condition in which I was now placed was totally different from that which
had preceded this attempt. I was chained all day in my dungeon, except that the
door was regularly opened for a few hours, at which time some of the prisoners
occasionally came and spoke to me, and particularly one, who, though he could
ill replace my beloved Brightwel, was innocent, guileless and benevolent. This
was no other than the individual whom Mr. Falkland had some months before
dismissed upon an accusation of murder. My manual labors were now at an end;
my dungeon was searched every night, and every kind of tool carefully kept from
me. The straw which has been hitherto allowed me was removed, under pretense
that it was adapted for concealment; and the only conveniences with which I was
indulged were a chair and a blanket.

A prospect of some alleviation in no long time opened upon me; but this my
usual ill fortune rendered abortive. The keeper once more made his appearance,
and with his former unconstitutional and ambiguous humanity. He pretended to be
surprised at my want of every accommodation. He reprehended in strong terms my
attempt to escape, and observed that there must be an end of civility from
people in his situation, if gentlemen after all would not know when they were
well. It was necessary in cases the like of this to let the law take its
course, and it would be ridiculous i^ me to complain, if after a regular trial
things should go hard with me. He was desirous of being in every respect my
friend, if I would let him -- In the midst of this circumlocution and preamble,
he was called away from me for something relating to the business of his
office. In the mean time I ruminated upon his overtures; and, detesting as I
did the source from which I conceived them to ^low, I could not help reflecting
how far it would be possible to extract from them the means of escape. But my
meditations in this case were vain. The keeper returned no more during the
remainder of that day, and on the next an incident occurred which put an end to
all expectations from his kindness.

An active mind, which has once been forced into any particular train, can
scarcely be persuaded to desert it as hopeless. I had studied my chains during
the extreme anguish that I endured from the pressure of the fetter upon the
ancle which had been sprained; and, though from the swelling and acute
sensibility of the part I had ^ound all attempts at relief in that instance
impracticable, I obtained from the closeness of my investigation another and
apparently superior advantage. During the night my dungeon was in a state of
complete darkness; but, when the door was open, the case was somewhat
different. The passage indeed into which it opened was so narrow, and the
opposite dead wall so near, that it was but a glimmering and melancholy light
that entered my apartment, even at full noon, and when the door was as its
widest extent. But my eyes, after a practice of two or three weeks,
accommodated themselves to this circumstance, and I learned to distinguish the
minutest objects. One day, as I was alternately meditating and examining the
objects around me, I chanced to observe a nail trodden into the mud floor at no
great distance from me. I immediately conceived the desire of possessing myself
of this implement; but, for fear of surprise, people passing perpetually to and
fro, I contented myself for the present with remarking its situation so
accurately, that I might easily find it again in the dark. Accordingly, as soon
as my door was shut, I seized upon this new treasure, and, having contrived to
fashion it to my purpose, found that I could unlock with it the padlock that
fastened me to the staple in the floor. This I regarded as no inconsiderable
advantage, separately from the use I might derive from it in relation to my
principal object. My chain permitted me to move only about eighteen inches to
the right or left; and, having borne this confinement for several weeks, my
very heart leaped at the pitiful consolation of being able to range without
constraint, the miserable coop in which I was immured. This incident had
occurred several days previous to the last visit of my keeper.

From this time it had been my constant practice to liberate myself every
night, and not to replace things in their former situation, till I awoke in the
morning, and expected shortly to perceive the entrance of the turnkey. Security
breeds negligence. It was on the morning succeeding my conference with the
jailor that, whether I overslept myself, or the turnkey went his round earlier
than usual, I was roused from my sleep by the noise he made in opening the cell
next to my own; and, though I exerted the utmost diligence, yet having to grope
for my materials in the dark, I was unable to fasten the chain to the staple,
before he entered as usual with his lanthorn. He was extremely surprised to
find me thus disengaged, and immediately summoned the principal keeper. I was
questioned respecting my method of proceeding; and, as I believed concealment
could lead to nothing but a severer search and a more accurate watch, I readily
acquainted them with the exact truth. The illustrious personage whose function
it was to control the inhabitants of these walls, was by this last instance
completely exasperated against me. Artifice and fair speaking were at an end.
His eyes sparkling with fury, he exclaimed, that he was now convinced of the
folly of showing kindness to rascals, the scum of the earth, such as I was;
and, damn him, if any body should catch him at that again toward any one. I
had cured him effectually! He was astonished that the laws had not provided
some terrible retaliation for thieves that attempted to deceive their jailors.
Hanging was a thousand times too good for me!

Having vented his indignation, he proceeded to give such orders as the united
instigations of anger and alarm suggested to his mind. My apartment was
changed. I was conducted to a room called the strong room, the door of which
opened into the middle cell of the range of dungeons. It was underground as
they were, and had over it the day room for felons already described. It was
spacious and dreary. The door had not been opened for years; the air was
putrid; and the walls hung round with damps and mildew. The fetters, the
padlock, and the staple were employed as in the former case, in addition to
which they put on me a pair of hand-cuffs. For my first provision the keeper
sent me nothing but a bit of bread, moldy and black, and some dirty and
stinking water. I know not indeed whether this is to be regarded as gratuitous
tyranny on the part of the jailor; the law having providently directed in
certain cases, that the water to be administered to the prisoners, shall be
taken from "the next sink or puddle nearest to the jail." State Trials, Vol. I.
anno 1615.
It was farther ordered that one of the turnkeys should sleep in the cell that
formed a sort of antichamber to my apartment. Though every convenience was
provided, to render this chamber fit for the reception of a personage, of a
dignity so superior to the felon he was appointed to guard, he expressed much
dissatisfaction at the mandate: but there was no alternative.

The situation to which I was thus removed was apparently the most undesirable
that could be imagined; but I was not discouraged. I had for some time learned
not to judge by appearances. The apartment was dank and unwholesome; but I had
acquired the secret of counteracting* these influences. My door was kept
continually shut, and the other prisoners were debarred access to me. But, if
the intercourse of our fellow men has its pleasures, solitude on the other hand
is not without its advantages* In solitude we can pursue our own thoughts
undisturbed; and I was able to call up at will the most pleasing avocations.
Beside which, to one who meditated such designs as now ^illed my mind, solitude
had peculiar recommendations. I was scarcely left to myself before I tried an
experiment the idea of which I conceived while they were fixing my hand-cuffs;
and, with my teeth only, disengaged myself from this restraint. The hours at
which I was visited by the keepers were regular, and I took care to be provided
for them. Add to which, I had a narrow grated window near the cieling, about
nine inches in perpendicular, and a foot and a half in width, which, though
small, admitted a much stronger light, than that to which I had been accustomed
for several weeks. Thus circumstanced, I scarcely ever found myself in total
darkness, and was better provided against surprises, than I had been in my
preceding situation. Such were the sentiments which this change of abode
immediately suggested.

I had been a very little time removed, when I received an unexpected visit
from Thomas, Mr. Falkland's valet, whom I have already more than once mentioned
in the course of my narrative. A servant of Mr. Forester happened to come to
the town where I was imprisoned, a few weeks before, while I was confined with
the hurt in my ancle, and had called in to see me. The account he gave of what
he observed had been the source of many an uneasy sensation to Thomas. The
former visit was a matter of mere curiosity, but Thomas was of the better order
of servants. He was considerably struck at the sight of me. Though my mind was
now serene, and my health sufficiently good, yet the floridness of my
complexion was gone, and there was a rudeness in my physiognomy, the
consequence of hardship and fortitude, extremely unlike the sleekness of my
better days. Thomas looked alternately in my face, at my hands and my feet; and
then fetched a deep sigh. After a pause:

Lord bless us! said he, in a voice in which commiseration was sufficiently
perceptible, is this you?

Why not, Thomas? You knew I was sent to prison, did not you?

Prison! and must people in prison be shackled and bound of that fashion? --
And where do you lay of nights?

Here.

Here! Why there is no bed!

No, Thomas, I am not allowed a bed. I had straw formerly, but that is taken
away.

And do they take off them there things of nights?

No; I am expected to sleep just as you see.

Sleep! Why I thought this was a Christian country; but this usage is too bad
for a dog.

You must not say so, Thomas. It is what the wisdom of government has thought
fit to provide.

Zounds, how I have been choused! They told me what a fine thing it was to be
an Englishman, and about liberty and property, and all that there; and I find
it is all a flam. Lord, what fools we be! Things are done under our very noses,
and we know nothing of the matter; and a parcel of fellows with grave faces
swear to us that such things never happen but in France, and other countries
the like of that. Why, you have not been tried, have you?

No.

And what signifies being tried, when they do worse than hang a man, and all
beforehand? Well, master Williams, you have been very wicked to be ^ure, and I
thought it would have done me good to see you hanged. But, I do not know how it
is, one's heart melts, and pity comes over one, if we take time to cool. I know
that ought not to be; but, damn it, when I talked of your being hanged, I did
not think of your suffering all this into the bargain.

Soon after this conversation Thomas left me. The idea of the long connection of
our families rushed upon his memory, and he felt more for my sufferings at the
moment than I did for myself. In the afternoon I was surprised to see him
again. He said, that he could not get the thought of me out of his mind, and
therefore he hoped I would not be displeased at his coming once more to take
leave of me. I could perceive that he had something upon his mind, which he did
not know how to discharge. One of the turnkeys had each time come into the room
with him, and continued as long as he staid. Upon some avocation however, a
noise I believe in the passage, the turnkey went as far as the door to satisfy
his curiosity; and Thomas, watching the opportunity, ^^^pt into my hand a
chissel, a file, and a ^aw, exclaiming at the same time with a sorrowful tone.
I know I am doing wrong; but, if they hang me too* I cannot help it: I cannot
do no other. For Christ's sake, get out of this place; I cannot bear the
thoughts of it! -- I received the implements with great joy, and thrust them
into my bosom; and, as soon as he was gone, concealed them in the rushes of my
chair. Meanwhile he had accomplished the object for which he came, and
presently after bade me farewell.

The next day the keepers, I know not for what reason, were more than usually
industrious in their search, saying, though without assigning any ground for
their suspicion, that they were sure I had some tool in my possession that I
ought not; but the depository I had chosen escaped them.

I waited from this time the greater part of a week that I might have the
benefit of a bright moon light. It was necessary that I should work in the
night; it was necessary that my operations should be performed between the last
visit of the keepers at night and their first in the morning, that is, between
nine in the evening and seven. In my dungeon, as I have already said, I passed
fourteen or sixteen hours of the four and twenty undisturbed; but, since I had
acquired a character for mechanical ingenuity, a particular exception with
respect to me was made from the general rules of the prison.

It was ten o'clock when I entered on my undertaking. The room in which I was
confined was secured with a double door. This was totally superfluous for the
purpose of my detention, since there was a sentinel planted on the outside. But
it was very fortunate for my plan, because these doors prevented the easy
communication of sound, and afforded me tolerable satisfaction that with a
little care in my mode of proceeding I might be secure against the danger of
being overheard. I first took off my hand-cuffs. I then filed through my
fetters; and next performed the same service to three of the iron bars that
secured my window, to which I climbed partly by the assistance of my chair and
partly by means of certain irregularities in the wall. All this was the work of
more than two hours. When the bars were filed through, I easily forced them a
little from the perpendicular, and then drew them one by one out of the wall,
into which they were sunk about three inches, perfectly strait, and without any
precaution to prevent their being removed. But the space thus obtained was by
no means wide enough to admit the passing of my body. I therefore applied
myself partly with my chissel, and partly with one of the iron bars, to the
loosening the brick work; and, when I had thus disengaged four or five bricks,
I got down and piled them upon the floor. This operation I repeated three or
four times. The space was now sufficient for my purpose, and having crept
through the opening, I stepped upon a sort of shed on the outside.

I was now in a kind of rude area between two dead walls, that south of the
felons day room the windows of which were at the east end, and the wall of the
prison. But I had not, as formerly, any instruments to assist me in scaling the
wall which was of a considerable height. There was of consequence no resource
for me but that of effecting a practicable breach in the lower part of the
wall, which was of no contemptible strength, being of stone on the outside,
with a facing of brick within. The rooms for the debtors were at right angles
with the building from which I had just escaped; and, as the night was
extremely bright, I was in momentary danger, particularly in case of the least
noise, of being discovered by them, several of their windows commanding the
area. Thus circumstanced, I determined to make the shed answer the purpose of
concealment. It was locked; but, with the broken link of my fetters, which I
had had the precaution to bring with me, I found no great difficulty in opening
the lock. I had now got a sufficient means of hiding my person while I
proceeded in my work, attended with no other disadvantage, than that of being
obliged to leave the door through which I had thus broken, a little open for
the sake of light. After some time I had removed a considerable part of the
brick work of the outer wall; but, when I came to the stone, I found the
undertaking infinitely more difficult. The mortar which bound together the
building, was by length of time nearly petrified, and appeared to my first
efforts one solid rock of the hardest adamant. I had now been six hours
incessantly engaged in incredible labor; my chissel broke in the first attempt
upon this new obstacle, and between fatigue already endured, and the seemingly
invincible difficulty before me, I concluded that I must remain where I was,
and that all I had hitherto effected would prove useless. At the same time the
moon, whose light had till now been of the greatest use to me, set, and I was
left in total darkness.

After a respite of ten minutes however, I returned to the attack with new
vigor. I could not be less than two hours before the first stone was loosened
from the edifice. In one hour more the space was sufficient to admit of my
escape. The pile of bricks I had left in the strong room was considerable. But
it was a mole hill compared with the ruins I had forced from the outer wall. I
am fully assured that the work I had thus performed would have been to a common
labourer with every advantage of tools the business of two or three days.

But my difficulties, instead of being ended, seemed to be only begun. The day
broke before I had completed the opening, and in ten minutes more the keepers
would probably enter my apartment, and perceive the devastation I had left. The
lane, which connected the side of the prison through which I had escaped with
the adjacent country, was formed chiefly by two dead walls, with here and there
a stable, a few warehouses and some mean habitations tenanted by the lower
order of people. My best security lay in clearing the town as soon as possible,
and depending upon the open country for protection. My arms were intolerably
swelled and bruised with my labor, and my strength seemed wholly exhausted
with fatigue. Speed I was nearly unable to exert for any continuance; and, if I
could, with the enemy so close at my heels, speed would too probably have been
useless It appeared as if I were now in almost the same situation, as that in
which I had been placed five or six weeks before, in which after having
completed my escape I was obliged to yield myself up without resistance to my
pursuers. I was not however disabled as then; I was capable of exertion to what
precise extent I could not ascertain; and I was well aware that every instance
in which I should fail of my purpose, would contribute to enhance the
difficulty of any future attempt. Such were the con^iderations that presented
themselves in relation to my escape; and, even if that were effected, I had to
reckon among my difficulties that, at the time I quitted my prison, I was
destitute of every resource, and had not a shilling remaining in the world.

CHAP. VI.
I PASSED along the lane I had described without perceiving or being observed
by a human being. The doors were shut, the window-shutters closed, and all was
still as night. I reached the extremity of the lane unmolested. My pursuers, if
they immediately followed, would know that the likelihood was small of my
having in the interval found shelter in this place; and would proceed without
hesitation, as I on my part was obliged to do, from the end nearest to the
prison to its farthest termination.

The face of the country, in the ^po^ to which I had thus opened myself a
passage, was rude and uncultivated. It was overgrown with brushwood and furze;
the soil was for the most part of a loose ^and; and the surface extremely
irregular. I climbed a small eminence, and could perceive not very remote in
the distance a few cottages thinly scattered. This prospect did not altogether
please me; I conceived that my safety would for the present be extremely
benefited by keeping myself from the view of any human being.

I therefore came down again into the valley, and upon a careful examination
perceived that it was interspersed with cavities, some deeper than others, but
all of them so shallow as neither to be capable of hiding a man, nor of
exciting suspicion as places of possible concealment. Meanwhile the day had but
just begun to dawn; the morning was lowering and drizzly; and, though the depth
of these caverns was of course well known to the neighboring inhabitants, the
shadows they cast were so black and impenetrable as might well have produced
wider expectations in the mind of a stranger. Poor therefore as was the
protection they were able to afford, I thought it right to have recourse to it
for the moment as the best the emergency would supply. It was for my life; and,
the greater was the jeopardy to which it was exposed, the more dear did that
life seem to become to my affections. The recess I chose as most secure was
within little more than a hundred yards of the end of the lane and the extreme
buildings of the town.

I had not stood up in this manner two minutes, before I heard the sound of
feet, and presently saw the ordinary turnkey and another pass by the place of
my retreat. They were so close to me that, if I had stretched out my hand, I
believe I could have caught hold of their clothes without so much as changing
my posture. As no part of the overhanging earth intervened between me and them,
I could see them entire, though the deepness of the shade rendered me almost
completely invisible. I heard them say to each other, in tones of vehement
asperity, Curse the rascal! which way can he be gone? The reply was, Damn him!
I wish we had him but ^ate once again! Never fear! rejoined the first, he
cannot have above half a mile the start of us They were presently out of
hearing; for, as to sight, I dared not advance my body so much as an inch to
look after them, lest I should be discovered by my pursuers in some other
direction. From the very short time that elapsed between my escape and the
appearance of these men, I concluded that they had made their way through the
same outlet as I had done, it being impossible that they could have had time to
come from the gate of the prison and so round a considerable part of the town,
as they must otherwise have done.

I was so alarmed at this instance of diligence on the part of the enemy, that
for some time I scarcely ventured to proceed an inch from my place of
concealment, or almost to change my posture. The morning, which had been bleak
and drizzly, was succeeded by a day of heavy and incessant rain: and the gloomy
state of the air and surrounding objects, together with the extreme nearness of
my prison, and a total want of food, caused me to pass the hours in no very
agreeable sensations. This inclemency of the weather however, which generated a
feeling of stillness and solitude, encouraged me by degrees to change my
retreat, for another of the same nature, but of somewhat greater security. I
hovered with little variation about a single spot as long as the sun continued
above the horizon.

Toward evening the clouds began to disperse, and the moon shone, as on the
preceding night, in full brightness. I had perceived no human creature during
the whole day, except in the instance already mentioned. This had perhaps been
owing to the nature of the day; at all events I considered it as too hazardous
an experiment to venture from my hiding place in so clear and fine a night. I
was therefore obliged to wait for the setting of this luminary, which was not
till near five o'clock in the morning. My only relief during this interval was
to allow myself to sink to the bottom of my cavern, it being scarcely possible
for me to continue any longer on my feet. Here I fell into an interrupted and
unrefreshing doze, the consequence of a laborious night and a tedious,
melancholy day; though I rather sought to avoid sleep, which, cooperating with
the coldness of the season, would tend more to injury than advantage.

The period of darkness which I had determined to use for the purpose of
removing to a greater distance from my prison was in its whole duration
something less than three hours. When I rose from my seat, I was weak with
hunger and fatigue, and, which was worse, I seemed between the dampness of the
preceding day, and the sharp, clear frost of the night, to have lost the
command of my limbs. I stood up and shook myself; I leaned against the side of
the hill, impelling in different directions the muscles of the extremities; and
at length recovered in some degree the sense of feeling. This operation was
attended with an incredible aching pain, and required no common share of
resolution to encounter and prosecute it. Having quitted my retreat, I at first
advanced with weak and tottering steps; but, as I proceeded, increased my pace.
The barren heath which reached to the edge of the town was at least on this
side without a path; but the stars shone, and guiding myself by them I
determined to steer as far as possible from the hateful scene where I had been
so long confined. The line I pursued was of irregular surface, sometimes
obliging me to climb a steep ascent, and at others to go down into a dark and
impenetrable dell. I was often compelled by the dangerousness of the way to
deviate considerably from the direction I wished to pursue. In the mean time I
advanced with as much rapidity, as these and similar obstacles would permit me
to do. The swiftness of the motion and the thinness of the air restored to me
my alacrity. I forgot the inconveniences under which I labored, and my mind
became lively, spirited and enthusiastic.

I had now reached the border of the heath and entered upon what is usually
termed the forest. Strange as it may seem, it is nevertheless true, that,
exhausted as I was with hunger, destitute of all provision for the future, and
surrounded with the most alarming dangers, my mind suddenly became glowing,
animated and cheerful. I thought that by this time the most formidable
difficulties of my undertaking were surmounted; and I could not believe that,
after having effected so much, I should find any thing invincible in what
remained to be done. I recollected the confinement I had undergone and the fate
that had impended over me with horror. Never did man feel more vividly than I
felt at that moment the sweets of liberty. Never did man more strenuously
prefer poverty with independence to the artificial allurements of a life of
slavery. I stretched forth my arms with rapture, I clapped my hands one upon
the other, and exclaimed, Ah, this is indeed to be a man! These wrists were
lately galled with fetters; all my motions, whether I rose up or sat down, were
echoed to with the clanking of chains; I was tied down like a wild beast, and
could not move but in a circle of a few feet in circumference. Now I can run,
fleet as a greyhound; and leap like a young roe upon the mountains. Oh, God!
(if God there be, that condescends to record the lonely beatings of an anxious
heart) thou only can tell with what delight a prisoner, just broke forth from
his dungeon, hugs the blessings of newfound liberty! Sacred and indescribable
moment, when man regains his rights! But lately I held my life in jeopardy,
because one man was unprincipled enough to assert what he knew to be false; I
was destined to suffer an early and inexorable death from the hands of others,
because none of them had penetration enough to distinguish from falsehood what I
uttered with the entire conviction of a full-fraught heart! Strange, that men
from age of age should consent to hold their lives at the breath of another,
merely that each in his turn may have a power of acting the tyrant according to
law! Oh, God! give me poverty! shower upon me all the imaginary hardships of
human life! I will receive them all with thankfulness. Turn me a prey to the
wild beasts of the desert, so I be never again the victim of man dressed in the
gore-dripping robes of authority! Suffer me at least to call life and the
pursuits of life my own! Let me hold it at the mercy of elements, of the hunger
of beasts or the revenge of barbarians, but not of the cold-blooded prudence of
monopolists and kings! -- How enviable was the enthusiasm which could thus
furnish me with energy, in the midst of hunger, poverty and universal desertion!

I had now walked at least six miles. At first I carefully avoided the
habitations that lay in my way, and feared to be seen by any of the persons to
whom they belonged, lest it should in any degree furnish a clue to the
researches of my pursuers. As I went forward, I conceived it might be proper to
relax a part of my precaution. At this time I perceived several persons coming
out of a thicket close to me. I immediately considered this circumstance as
rather favorable than the contrary. It was necessary for me to avoid entering
any of the towns and villages in the vicinity. At the same time it was full
time that I should procure for myself some species of refreshment; and it was
by no means improbable that these men might be in some way assisting to me in
that respect. In my situation it appeared to me indifferent what might be their
employment or profession. I had little to apprehend from thieves, and I
believed that they, as well as honest men, could not fail to have some
compassion for a person under my circumstances. I therefore rather threw myself
in their way than avoided them.

They were thieves. One of the company cried out, Who goes there? stand! I
accosted them. Gentlemen, said I, I am a poor traveller, almost -- While I
spoke, they came round me, and he that had first hailed me said, Damn me, tip
us none of your palaver; we have heard that story of a poor traveller any time
these five years. Come, down with your dust! let us see what you have got! Sir,
I replied, I have not a shilling in the world, and am more than half-starved
beside. Not a shilling! answered my assailant, what, I suppose you are as poor
as a thief? But, if you have not money, you have clothes, and those you must
resign.

My clothes! rejoined I with indignation; you cannot desire such a thing. Is it
not enough that I am pennyless? I have been all night upon the open heath. It
is now the second day that I have not eaten a morsel of bread. Would you strip
me naked to the weather in the midst of this depopulated forest? No, no, you
are men! The same hatred of oppression that arms you against the insolence of
wealth, will teach you to relieve those who are perishing like me. For God's
sake, give me food! do not strip me of the benefits I still possess!

While I uttered this apostrophe, the unpremeditated eloquence of sentiment, I
could perceive by their gestures, though the day had not yet begun to dawn,
that the feelings of one or two of the company appeared to take my part. The
man, who had already undertaken to be their spokesman, perceived the same
thing; and, excited either by the brutality of his temper or the love of
command, hastened to anticipate the disgrace of a defeat. He brushed suddenly
up to me, and by main force pushed me several feet from the place where I
stood. The shock I received drove me upon a second of the gang, not one of
those who had listened to my expostulation; and he repeated the same brutality.
My indignation was strongly excited by this treatment; and, after being thrust
backward and forward two or three times in this manner, I broke through my
assailants, and turned round to defend myself. The first that advanced within
my reach was my original enemy. In the present moment I listened to nothing but
the dictates of passion, and I laid him at his length on the earth. I was
immediately assailed with sticks and bludgeons on all sides, and presently
received a blow that almost deprived me of my senses. The man I had knocked
down was now upon his feet again, and aimed a stroke at me with a cutlass as I
fell, which took place in a deep wound upon my neck and shoulder. He was going
to repeat his blow. The two who had seemed to waver at first in their
animosity, afterward appeared to me to join in the attack, urged either by
animal sympathy or the spirit of imitation. One of them however, as I
afterward understood, seized the ^rm of the man who was going to strike me
(...) second time with his cutlass, and who would otherwise probably have put
an end to my existence. (...) could hear the words, Damn it, enough, enough
(...) that is too bad, Jones! How so? replied a second voice; he will but pine
here upon the forest, and (...) by inches: it is an act of charity in this case
(...) put him out of his pain. -- It will be imagined that I was not
uninterested in this sort of debate. (...) made an effort to speak; my voice
failed me. I stretched out one hand with a gesture of entreaty. You shall not
strike, by G --! said one of the voices; why should we be murderers? -- The
side of forbearance at length prevailed. They therefore contented themselves
with stripping me of my coat and waistcoat, and rolling me into a dry ditch.
They then left me, totally regardless of my distressed condition, and the
plentiful effusion of blood which streamed from my wound.

CHAP. VII.
IN this woeful situation, though extremely weak, I was not deprived of sense. I
tore my shirt from my naked body, and with it endeavored with some success to
make a bandage to stanch the flowing of the blood. I then exerted myself to
crawl up the side of the ditch. I had scarcely effected the latter, when with
equal surprise and joy I perceived a man advancing at no great distance. I
called for help as well as I could. The man came toward me with evident signs
of compassion, and the figure I exhibited was indeed sufficiently calculated to
excite it. I had no hat. My hair was disheveled, and the ends of the locks
clotted with blood. My shirt was wrapped about my neck and shoulder, and was
plentifully stained with red. My body which was naked to my middle was
variegated with streams of blood, nor had my breeches which were of leather by
any means escaped.

For God's sake, my poor fellow! said he, with a tone of the greatest
imaginable kindness, how came you thus? And, saying this, he lifted me up, and
set me on my feet. Can you stand? added he doubtfully. Oh, yes, very well, I
replied. Having received this answer, he quitted me, and began to take off his
own coat, that he might cover me from the cold. I had however overrated my
strength, and was no sooner left to myself, than I reeled, and fell almost at
my length upon the ground. But I broke my fall by stretching out my sound arm,
and again raised myself upon my knees. My benefactor now covered me, raised me,
and bidding me lean upon him, told me he would presently conduct me to a place
where I should be taken care of. Courage is a capricious property; and, though
while I had no one to depend upon but myself, I possessed a mine of seemingly
inexhaustible fortitude, yet no sooner did I find this unexpected sympathy on
the part of another, than my resolution appeared to give way, and I felt myself
ready to saint. My charitable conductor perceived this, and he every now and
then encouraged me in a manner so cheerful, so good humoured and benevolent,
equally free from the harshness of rebuke and the weakness of indulgence, that
I thought myself under the conduct of an angel rather than a man. I could
perceive that his behavior had in it nothing of boorish rudeness, and that he
was thoroughly imbued with the principles of affectionate civility.

We walked about three quarters of a mile, and that not toward the open, but
the most uncouth and unfrequented part of the forest. We crossed a place which
had once been a moat, but which was now in some parts dry and in others
contained a little muddy and stagnated water. Within the enclosure of this
moat, and among the still visible foundations of a larger, ancient building,
was a cottage, or rather two or three cottages irregularly thrown together, not
different from the habitations of the peasantry in general, except that they
were constructed for the most part of materials supplied from this ancient ruin.

My conductor knocked at the door, and was answered by a voice from within,
which for body and force might have been the voice of a man, but which had a
sort of female sharpness and acidity, with the enquiry, Who is there?
Satisfaction was no sooner given in this point, than I heard two bolts pushed
back and the door unlocked. The apartment opened, and we entered. The interior
of the building by no means corresponded with the appearance of my protector,
but on the contrary wore a face of discomfort, carelessness and (...). The only
person I saw within was a woman, rather advanced in life, and whose appearance
had I know not what of extraordinary and loathsome. Her eyes were red and
blood-shot; her hair was pendent in matted and shaggy tresses about her
shoulders; her complexion swarthy, and of the consistency of parchment; her
form spare, and her whole body, her arms in particular, uncommonly vigorous and
muscular. Not the milk of human kindness, but the feverous blood of savage
ferocity seemed to flow from her heart; and her whole figure suggested an idea
of unmitigable energy and an appetite gorged in malevolence. This infernal
Thalestris had no sooner cast her eyes upon us as we entered, than she
exclaimed in a discordant and discontented voice, What have we got here? this
is not one of our people! My conductor, without answering this apostrophe, bid
her push an easy chair which stood in one corner, and set it directly before
the fire. This she did with apparent reluctance, muttering, Ah, you are at your
old tricks; I wonder what such folks as we have to do with charity! It will be
the ruin of us at last, I can see that! Hold your tongue, beldam! said he, with
a stern significance of manner, and fetch one of my best shirts, a waistcoat
and some dressings. Saying this, he at the same time put into her hand a small
bunch of keys. In a word, ^e treated me with as much kindness as if he had been
my father. He examined my wound, washed and dressed it; at the same time that
the old woman by his express order prepared for me such nourishment as he
thought most suitable to my weak and languid condition.

These operations were no sooner completed, than my benefactor recommended to
me to retire to rest, and preparations were making for that purpose, when
suddenly a trampling of feet was heard, succeeded by a knock at the door. The
old woman opened the door with the same precautions as had been employed upon
our arrival, and immediately six or seven persons tumultuously entered the
apartment. Their appearance was different, some having the air of mere rustics,
and others that of a tarnished sort of gentry. All had a feature of boldness,
inquietude and disorder, extremely unlike any thing I had before observed in
such a groupe. But my astonishment was still increased, when upon a second
glance I perceived something in the general air of several of them, and of one
in particular, that persuaded me they were the gang from which I had just
escaped, and this one the antagonist by whose animosity I was so near to the
having been finally destroyed. I instantly imagined they had entered our hovel
with a hostile intention, that my benefactor was upon the point of being
robbed, and I probably murdered.

This suspicion however was soon removed. They addressed my conductor with
respect under the appellation of captain. They were boisterous and noisy in
their remarks and exclamations, but their turbulence was tempered by a certain
deference to his opinion and authority. I could observe in the person who had
been my active opponent some aukwardness and irresolution as he first perceived
me, which he dismissed with a sort of effort, exclaiming, Who the devil is
here? There was something in the tone of this apostrophe that roused the
attention of my protector. He looked at the speaker with a fixed and
penetrating glance, and then said, Nay, Jones, do you know? Did you ever see
the person before? Curse it, Jones! interrupted a third, you are damnably out
of luck. They say dead men walk, and you see there is some truth in it. Truce
with your impertinence, Barton! replied my protector, this is no proper
occasion for a joke. Answer me, Jones, were you the cause of this young man
being left naked and wounded this bitter morning upon the forest?

Mayhap I was. What then?

What provocation could induce you to so cruel a treatment?

Provocation enough. He had no money.

What, did you use him thus without so much as being irritated by any
resistance on his part?

Yes, he did resist. I only hustled him, and he had the impudence to strike me.

Jones! you are an incorrigible fellow.

Pooh, what signifies what I am? You with your compassion and your ^ine
feelings will bring us all to the gallows.

I have nothing to say to you; I have no hopes of you! Comrades, it is for you
to decide upon the conduct of this man as you think proper. You know how
repeated his offenses have been; you know what pains I have taken to mend him.
Our profession is the profession of justice. [It is thus that the prejudices of
men universally teach them to color the most desperate cause, to which they
have determined to adhere.] We undertake to counteract the partiality and
iniquity of public institutions. We, who are thieves without a license, are at
open war with another set of men, who are thieves according to law. If any one
disapprove our proceedings, at least we have this to say for ourselves, we act
not by choice, but only as our wise governors force us to act. If any one
disapprove our proceedings, they have this apology in their favor, we risk our
lives when we adopt them, and stake our all upon their goodness and cogency.
Time will one day decide whether we or our oppressors be the genuine patriots:
for the present we are censured, only because they are the stronger party. With
such a cause then to bear us out, shall we stain it with cruelty, malice and
revenge? For my own part I glory in the name of a thief; and am firmly
persuaded there is not a more gallant and honorable profession upon the face
of the earth, so long as it is exercised with a generous heart. -- A thief is
of course a man living among his equals; I do not pretend therefore to assume
any authority among you; act as you think proper; but so far as relates to
myself* I vote that Jones be expelled from among us as a disgrace to our
society.

This proposition seemed to meet the general sense. It was easy to perceive
that the opinion of the rest coincided with that of their leader;
notwithstanding which a few of them hesitated as to the conduct to be pursued.
In the mean time Jones muttered something in a surly and irresolute way about
taking care how they provoked him. This insinuation instantly roused the
courage of my protector, and his eyes flashed with contempt.

Rascal! said he, do you menace us? Do you think we will be your slaves? No,
no, do your worst! Go to the next justice of the peace and impeach us* I can
easily believe you are capable of it. Sir, when we entered into this gang, we
were not such fools as not to know that we entered upon a service of danger.
One of its dangers consists in the treachery of fellows like you. But we did
not enter at first, to flinch now. Did you believe that we would live in hourly
fear of you, tremble at your threats, and compromise, whenever you should so
please, with your insolence? That would be a blessed life indeed! I would
rather see my flesh torn piecemeal from my bones! Go, sir! I defy you! You dare
not do it! You dare not sacrifice all these gallant fellows to your rage, and
publish yourself to all the world a traitor and a scoundrel! If you do, you
will punish yourself, not us! Begone!

The intrepidity of the leader communicated itself to the rest of the company.
Jones easily saw that there was no hope of bringing them over to a contrary
sentiment. After a short pause, he answered, I did not mean -- No, damn it! I
will not snivel neither. I was always true to my principles, and a friend to
you all. But, since you are resolved to turn me out, why -- good bye to you!

The expulsion of this man produced a remarkable improvement in the whole gang.
Those who were before inclined to humanity, assumed new energy in proportion as
they saw such sentiments likely to prevail. They had before suffered themselves
to be overborne by the boisterous insolence of their antagonists; but now they
adopted and with success a different conduct. Those who envied the ascendancy
of their comrade, and therefore imitated his conduct, began to hesitate in
their career. Stories were brought forward of the cruelty and brutality of
Jones, both to men and animals, which had never before reached the ear of the
leader. These stories I shall not repeat. They could excite only emotions of
abhorrence and disgust, and some of them argued a mind of such a stretch of
depravity as to many readers would appear utterly incredible. And yet this man
had his virtues. He was enterprising, persevering and faithful.

His removal was a considerable benefit to me. It would have been no small
hardship to have been turned adrift immediately under my unfavourable
circumstances, with the additional disadvantage of the wound I had received;
and yet I could scarcely have ventured to remain under the same roof with a man
to whom my appearance was as a guilty conscience, perpetually reminding him of
his own offense and the counteraction of his leader. His profession accustomed
him to a certain degree of indifference to consequences, and indulgence to the
sallies of passion; and he might easily have found his opportunity to insult or
injure me, when I should have had nothing but my own debilitated exertions to
protect me.

Freed from this danger, I found my situation sufficiently fortunate for a man
under my circumstances. It was attended with all the advantages for concealment
my fondest imagination could have hoped; and it was by no means destitute of
the benefits which arise from kindness and humanity. Nothing could be more
unlike than the thieves I had seen in -- gaol, and the thieves of my new
residence. The latter were generally full of cheerfulness and merriment. They
could expatiate freely wherever they thought proper. They could form plans and
execute them. They consulted their own inclinations. They did not impose upon
themselves the task, as is too often the case in human society, of seeming
tacitly to approve that from which they suffered most; or, which is worse, of
persuading themselves that all the wrongs they suffered were right; but were at
open war with their oppressors. On the contrary the imprisoned felons I had
lately seen were shut up like wild beasts in a cage, deprived of activity, and
palsied with indolence. The occasional demonstrations that still remained of
their former enterprising life, were the starts and convulsions of disease, not
the meditated and consistent exertions of a mind in health. They had no more of
hope, of project, of golden and animated dreams, but were reserved to the most
dismal prospects, and forbidden to think upon any other topic. It is true that
these two scenes were parts of one whole, the one the consummation, the hourly
to be expected successor of the other. But the men I now saw were wholly
inattentive to this, and in that respect appeared to have no intercourse with
reflection or reason.

I might in one view, as I have said, congratulate myself upon my present
residence; it answered completely the purposes of concealment. It was the seat
of merriment and hilarity; but the hilarity that characterised it, produced no
correspondent feelings in my bosom. The persons who composed this society, had
each of them cast off all control from established principle; their trade was
terror, and their constant object to elude the vigilance of the community. The
influence of these circumstances was visible in their character. I found among
them benevolence and kindness; they were strongly susceptible of emotions of
generosity. But, as their situation was precarious, their dispositions were
proportionably fluctuating. Inured to the animosity of their species, they were
irritable and passionate. Accustomed to exercise harshness toward the subject
of their depredations, they did not always confine their brutality within that
scope. They were habituated to consider wounds, and bludgeons and stabbing, as
the obvious mode of surmounting every difficulty. Uninvolved in the
debilitating routine of human affairs, they frequently displayed an energy,
which from every impartial observer would have extorted veneration. Energy is
perhaps of all qualities the most invaluable; and a just political system would
possess the means of extracting from it thus circumstanced its beneficial
qualities, instead of consigning it as now to unlimited destruction. We act
like the chemist who should reject the finest ore, and employ none but what was
sufficiently debased to fit it immediately for the vilest uses. But the energy
of these men, such as I beheld it, was in the highest degree misapplied,
unassisted by any liberal and enlightened views, and directed only to the most
narrow and contemptible purposes.

The residence I have been describing might to many persons have appeared
attended with intolerable inconveniences. But, exclusively of its advantages as
a field for speculation, it was Elysium compared with that from which I had
just escaped. Displeasing company, incommodious apartments, filthiness and
riot, lost the circumstance by which they could most effectually disgust, when
I was not compelled to remain with them. All hardships I could patiently
endure, in comparison with the menace of a violent and untimely death. There
was no suffering that I could not persuade myself to consider as trivial,
except that which flowed from the tyranny, the frigid precaution, or the
inhuman revenge of my own species.

My recovery advanced in the most favorable manner. The attention and kindness
of my protector were incessant, and the rest caught the spirit from his
example. The old woman who superintended the household, still retained her
animosity. She considered me as the cause of the expulsion of Jones from the
fraternity; Jones had been the object of her particular partiality; and,
zealous as she was for the public concern, she thought an old and experienced
sinner for a raw probationer but an ^ill exchange. Add to which, that her
habits inclined her to moroseness and discontent, and that persons of her
complexion seem unable to exist without some object upon which to employ the
superfluity of their gall. She lost no opportunity upon the most trifling
occasion of displaying her animosity, and ever and anon eyed me with a furious
glance of canine hunger for my destruction. Nothing was more evidently
mortifying to her than the procrastination of her malice; nor could she bear to
think that a fierceness so gigantic and uncontrollable should show itself in
nothing more terrific than the pigmy spite of a chambermaid. For myself, I had
been accustomed to the warfare of formidable adversaries and the encounter of
alarming dangers; and what I saw of her spleen had not power sufficient to
disturb my tranquillity.

As I recovered, I told my story, except so far as related to the detection of
Mr. Falkland's eventful secret, to my protector. That particular I could not as
yet prevail upon myself to disclose even in a situation like this, which seemed
to preclude the possibility of its being made use of to the disadvantage of my
persecutor. My present auditor however, whose habits of thinking were extremely
opposite to those of Mr. Forester, did not from the obscurity which flowed from
this reserve, deduce any unfavourable conclusion. His penetration was such as
to afford little room for an impostor to hope to mislead him by a fictitious
statement, and he confided in that penetration. So confiding, the simplicity
and integrity of my manner carried conviction to his mind, and insured his good
opinion and friendship.

He listened to my story with eagerness, and commented on the several parts as
I related them. He said that this was only one fresh instance of the tyranny
and perfidiousness exercised by the powerful members of the community against
those who were less privileged than themselves. Nothing could be more clear
than their readiness to sacrifice the human species at large to their meanest
interest or wildest caprice. Who that saw the situation in its true light would
wait till their oppressors thought sit to decree their destruction, and not
take arms in their defense while it was yet in their power? Which was most
meritorious, the unresisting and dastardly submission of a slave, or the
enterprise and gallantry of the man who dared to assert his claims? Since by
the partial administration of our laws innocence, when power was armed against
it, had nothing better to hope for than guilt, what man of true courage would
fail to set these laws at defiance, and, if he must suffer by their injustice,
at least take care that he had first shown his contempt of their yoke? For
himself he should certainly never have embraced his present calling, had he not
been stimulated to it by these cogent and irresistible reasons; and he hoped,
as experience had so forcibly brought a conviction of this sort to my mind,
that he should for the future have the happiness to associate me to his
pursuits. -- It will presently be seen how far these hopes were confirmed by
the event.

Numerous were the precautions exercised by the gang of thieves with whom I now
resided to elude the vigilance of the satellites of justice. It was one of
their rules to commit no depredations but at a considerable distance from the
place of their residence, and Jones had transgressed this regulation, in the
attack to which I was indebted for my present asylum. After having possessed
themselves of any booty, they took care in the sight of the persons whom they
had robbed to pursue a route as nearly as possible opposite to that which led
to their true haunts. The appearance of their place of residence, together with
its environs was peculiarly desolate and forlorn, and it had the reputation of
being haunted. The old woman I have described had long been its inhabitant, and
was commonly supposed to be its only inhabitant; and her person well accorded
with the rural ideas of a witch. Her lodgers never went out or came in but with
the utmost circumspection, and generally by night. The lights which were
occasionally seen from various parts of her habitation were by the country
people regarded with horror as supernatural; and, if the noise of revelry at
any time saluted their ears, it was imagined to proceed from a carnival of
devils. With all these advantages the thieves did not venture to reside here
but by intervals: sometimes they absented themselves for months, and resided in
a different part of the country. The old woman sometimes attended them in these
transportations, and sometimes remained; but in all cases her removal took
place either sooner or later than theirs, so that the nicest observer could
scarcely have traced any connection between her re-appearances and the alarms
of depredation that were frequently given; and the festival of demons seemed to
the terrified rustics indifferently to take place whether she were present or
absent.

CHAP. VIII.
ONE day, while I continued in this situation, a circumstance occurred, which
involuntarily attracted my attention. Two of our people had been sent to a town
at some distance for the purpose of procuring us some things of which we were
in want. After having delivered these to our landlady, they retired to one
corner of the room, and, one of them pulling a printed paper from his pocket,
they mutually occupied themselves in examining its contents. I was sitting in
an easy chair by the fire, being considerably better than I had been, though
still in a weak and languid state. Having read for a considerable time, they
looked at me, and then at the paper, and then at me again. They then went out
of the room together, as if to consult without interruption upon something
which that paper suggested to them. Some time after they returned, and my
protector, who happened to be above stairs, entered the room at the same
instant.

Captain! said one of them with an air of pleasure, look here! we have found a
prize! I believe it is as good as a bank note of a hundred guineas.

Mr. Raymond (that was his name) took the paper and read. He paused for a
moment. He then crushed the paper in his hand; and, turning to the person from
whom he had received it, said with the tone of a man confident in the success
of his reasons,

What use have you for these hundred guineas? Are you in want? Are you in
distress? Can you be contented to purchase them at the price of treachery? of
violating the laws of hospitality?

Faith, captain, I do not very well know. After having violated other laws, I
do not see why we should be frightened at an old saw. We pretend to judge for
ourselves, and ought to be above shrinking from a bugbear of a proverb. Beside,
this is a good deed, and I should think no more harm of being the ruin of such
a thief, than of getting my dinner.

A thief! You talk of thieves! --

Not so fast, if you please. God defend that I should say a word against
thieving as a general occupation! But one man steals in one way, and another in
another. For my part, I go upon the highway, and take from any stranger I meet
what it is a hundred to one he can very well spare. I see nothing to be found
fault with in that. But I have as much conscience as another man. Because I
laugh at assizes and great wigs and the gallows, and because I will not be
frightened from an innocent action when the lawyers say me nay, does it follow
that I am to have a fellow-feeling for pilferers, and rascally servants, and
people that have neither justice nor principle? No: I have too much respect for
the trade, not to be a foe to interlopers and people that so much the more
deserve my hatred because the world calls them by my name.

You are wrong, Wilson! You certainly ought not to employ against people that
you hate, supposing your hatred to be reasonable, the instrumentality of that
law which in your practice you defy. Be consistent. Either be the friend of
law, or its adversary. Depend upon it that, wherever there are laws at all,
there will be laws against such people as you and I. Either therefore we all of
us deserve the vengeance of the law, or law is not the proper instrument of
correcting the misdeeds of mankind. I tell you this, because I would fain have
you aware that an informer or a king's evidence, a man who takes advantage of
the confidence of another in order to betray him, who sells the life of his
neighbor for money, or coward like, upon any pretense calls in the law to do
that for him which he cannot or dares not do for himself, is the vilest of
rascals. But in the present case, if your reasons were the best in the world,
they do not apply.

While Mr. Raymond was speaking, the rest of the gang came into the room. He
immediately turned to them and said,

My friends, here is a piece of intelligence that Wilson has just brought in,
which with his leave I will lay before you.

Then, pulling the paper from his pocket, he continued: This is the description
of a felon with the offer of a hundred guineas for his apprehension. Wilson
picked it up at --. By the time and other circumstances, but particularly by
the minute description of his person, there can be no doubt out the object of
it is our young friend, whose life (...) was a little while ago the instrument
of saving. He is charged here with having taken advantage of the confidence of
his patron and benefactor, to rob him of property to a large amount. Upon this
charge he was committed to the county ^ail, from whence he made his escape
about a fortnight ago without venturing to stand his trial, a circumstance
which is stated by the advertiser (...) tantamount to a confession of his guilt.

(...) friends, I was acquainted with the particulars of this story some time
before. This lad let me into his history at a time that he could not possibly
have foreseen that he should stand in need of that precaution as an antidote
against danger. He is not guilty of what is laid to his charge. Which of you is
so ignorant as to suppose that his escape is any confirmation of his guilt? Who
ever thinks, when he is apprehended for trial, of his innocence or guilt as
being at all material to the issue? Who ever was fool enough to volunteer a
trial, where those who are to decide think more of the horror of the thing of
which he is accused than whether he was the person that did it; and where the
nature of our motives is to be collected from a set of ignorant witnesses that
no wise man would trust for a fair representation of the most indifferent
action of his life?

The poor lad's story is a long one, and I will not trouble you with it now.
But from that story it is as clear as the day, that, because he wished to leave
the service of his master, because he had been perhaps a little too inquisitive
in his master's concerns, and because, as I suspect, he had been trusted with
some important secrets, his master conceived an antipathy against him. This
antipathy gradually proceeded to such a length, as to induce the master to
forge this vile accusation. He seems willing to hang the lad out of the way,
rather than suffer him to go where he pleases or get beyond the reach of his
power. Williams has told me the story with such ingenuousness that I am as sure
that he is guiltless of what they lay to his charge as that I am so myself.
Nevertheless the man's servants who were called in to hear the accusation, and
his relation, who as justice of the peace made out the mittimus, and who had
the folly to think he could be impartial, gave it on his side with one voice,
and thus afforded Williams a sample of what he had to expect in the sequel.

Wilson, who when he received this paper had no previous knowledge of
particulars, was for taking advantage of it for the purpose of earning the
hundred guineas. Are you of that mind, now you have heard them? Will you for so
paltry a consideration deliver up the lamb into the jaws of the wolf? Will you
abet the purposes of this sanguinary rascal who, not contented with driving his
late dependent from house and home, depriving him of character and all the
ordinary means of subsistence, and leaving him almost without a refuge, still
thirsts for his blood? If no other person have the courage to set limits to the
tyranny of courts of justice, shall not we? Shall we, who earn our livelihood
by generous daring, be indebted for a penny to the vile artifices of the
informer? Shall we, against whom the whole species is in arms, refuse our
protection to an individual, more exposed to, but still less deserving of their
persecution than ourselves?

The representation of the captain produced an instant effect upon the whole
company. They all exclaimed, Betray him! No, not for worlds! He is safe. We
will protect him at the hazard of our lives. If fidelity and honor be banished
from thieves, where shall they find refuge upon the face of the earth? Wilson
in particular thanked the captain for his interference, and swore that he would
rather part with his right hand, than injure so worthy a lad, or assist such an
unheard of villainy. Saying this, he took me by the hand, and bade me fear
nothing. Under their roof, no harm should ever befall me; and, even if the
understrappers of the law should discover my retreat, they would to a man die
in my defense, sooner than a hair of my head should be hurt. I thanked him most
sincerely for his good will; but I was principally struck with the fervent
benevolence of my benefactor. I told them, I found that my enemies were
inexorable, and would never be appeased but with my blood; and I assured them
with the most solemn and earnest veracity, that I had done nothing to deserve
the persecution which was exercised against me.

The spirit and energy of Mr. Raymond had been such, as to leave no part for me
to perform in repelling this unlooked-for danger. Nevertheless, it left a very
serious impression upon my mind. I had always placed some confidence in the
returning equity of Mr. Falkland. Though he persecuted me with bitterness, I
could not help believing that he did it unwillingly, and I was persuaded it
would not be for ever. A man, whose original principles had been so full of
rectitude and honor, could not fail at some time or other to recollect the
injustice of his conduct, and to remit his asperity. This idea had been always
present to me, and had in no small degree conspired to instigate my exertions.
I said, I will convince my persecutor that I am of more value than that I
should be sacrificed purely by way of precaution. These expectations on my part
had been encouraged by Mr. Falkland's behavior upon the question of my
imprisonment and by various particulars which had occurred since.

But this new incident gave to the subject a totally different appearance. I
saw him now, not contented with blasting my reputation, confining me for a
period in jail, and reducing me to the situation of a houseless vagabond, but
still continuing his pursuit under these forlorn circumstances with unmitigable
cruelty. Indignation and resentment seemed now for the first time to penetrate
my mind. I knew his misery so well, I was so fully acquainted with its cause,
and so strongly impressed with the idea of its being unmerited, that, while I
suffered so deeply, I still continued to pity, rather than hate my persecutor.
But this incident introduced some change into my feelings. I said, Surely he
might now believe that he had sufficiently disarmed me, and might at length
suffer me to be at peace. At least ought he not to be contented to leave me to
my fate, the perilous and uncertain condition of an escaped felon, instead of
thus whetting the animosity and vigilance of my countrymen against me? Were his
interference on my behalf in opposition to the stern severity of Mr. Forester,
and his various acts of kindness since, a mere part that he played in order to
lull me into patience? Was he perpetually haunted with the fear of an ample
retaliation, and for that purpose did he personate remorse at the very moment
that he was secretly keeping every engine at play that could secure my
destruction? The very suspicion of such a fact filled me with inexpressible
horror, and struck a sudden chill through every fiber of my frame.

Meanwhile my wound was by this time completely healed, and it became
absolutely necessary that I should form some determination respecting the
future. My habits of thinking were such as gave me an uncontrollable repugnance
to the vocation of my hosts. I did not indeed feel all that aversion and
abhorrence to the men that is commonly entertained. I saw and respected their
good qualities and their virtues. I was by no means inclined to believe them
worse men, or more inimical in their dispositions to the welfare of their
species, than the generality of those that look down upon them with most
censure. But, though I did not cease to love them as individuals, my eyes were
perfectly opened to their mistakes. If I should otherwise have been in danger
of being misled, it was my fortune to have studied felons in a jail, before I
studied them in their state of comparative prosperity; and this was an
infallible antidote to the poison. I saw that in this profession were exerted
uncommon energy, ingenuity and fortitude, and I could not help recollecting how
admirably beneficial such qualities might be made in the great theater of human
affairs; while in their present direction they were thrown away upon purposes
that could scarcely in any sense deserve the appellation of useful. Thieves
appeared to me to commit a mistaken treason against the general welfare; at the
same time that they were of all men the most foolish as to their own interests.
The man who risks or sacrifices his life for the public welfare is rewarded
with the testimony of an approving conscience; but persons who wantonly defy
the institutions of their country for no public good, and whose private
interest the least degree of sound judgment might prove to be a thousand times
better promoted in every possible instance by a more legitimate proceeding, are
in the same respect absurd and self-neglectful, as a man would be who should
set himself up as a mark for a file of musketeers to shoot at.

Viewing the subject in this light, I not only determined that I would have no
share in their occupation myself, but thought I could not do less in return for
the benefits I had received from them, than endeavor to dissuade them from an
employment in which they must themselves be the greate^^ sufferers. My
expostulation met with a various reception. All the persons to whom it was
addressed had been tolerably successful in persuading themselves of the
innocence of their calling; and what remained of doubt in their mind was
smothered, and, so to speak, laboriously forgotten. Some of them laughed at my
arguments as a ridiculous piece of missionary quixotism. Others, and
particularly our captain, repelled them with the boldness of a man that knows
he has got the strongest side. But this sentiment of ease and self satisfaction
did not long remain. They had been used to arguments derived from religion and
the venerableness of law. They had long ago shaken these from them as so many
prejudices. But my view of the subject appealed to principles which they could
not contest, and had by no means the air of that customary reproof which is for
ever dinned in our ears, without finding one responsive chord in our hearts.
Finding themselves urged with objections unexpected and cogent, some of those
to whom I addressed them began to grow peevish and impatient of the importunate
remonstrance. But this was by no means the case with Mr. Raymond. He was
possessed of a candor that I have seldom seen equalled. He was surprised to
hear objections so powerful to that which as a matter of speculation he
believed he had examined on all sides. He revolved them with impartiality and
care. He admitted them slowly, but he at length fully admitted them. He had now
but one rejoinder in reserve.

Alas, Williams, said he, it would have been fortunate for me if these views
had been presented to me previously to my embracing my present profession. It
is now too late. Those very laws, which by a perception of their iniquity drove
me to what I am, now preclude my return. God, we are told, judges of men by
what they are at the period of judgment, and, whatever be their crimes, if they
have seen and abjured the folly of those crimes, receives them to favor. But
the institutions of countries that profess to worship this God, admit no such
distinctions. They leave no room for amendment, and seem to have a brutal
delight in confounding the demerits of offenders. It signifies not what is the
character of the individual at the hour of trial. How changed, how spotless,
and how useful avails him nothing. If they discover at the distance of fourteen
Eugene Aram. See Annual Register, for 1759.
or of forty years William Andrew Horn. Ditto, ditto.
an action for which the law ordains that his life shall be the forfeit, though
the interval should have been spent with the purity of a saint and the
devotedness of a patriot, they disdain to enquire into it. What then can I do?
Am I not compelled to go on in folly, having once begun?

CHAP. IX.
I WAS extremely affected by this plea. I could only answer that Mr. Raymond
must himself be the best judge of the course it became him to hold; I trusted
the case was not so desperate as he imagined. This subject was pursued no
(...), and was in some degree driven from my thoughts by an incident of a very
extraordinary nature. I have already mentioned the animosity that was
entertained against me by the infernal portress of this solitary mansion.
Jones, the expelled member of the gang, had been her particular favorite. She
submitted to his exile indeed, because her genius felt subdued by the energy
and inherent greatness of Mr. Raymond; but she submitted with murmuring and
discontent. Not daring to resent the conduct of the principal in this affair,
she collected all the bitterness of her spirit against me. To the unpardonable
offense I had thus committed in the first instance, were added the reasonings I
had lately offered against the profession of robbery. Robbery was a fundamental
article in the creed of this hoary veteran, and she listened to my objections
with the same unaffected astonishment and horror, that an old woman of other
habits would listen to one who objected to the agonies and dissolution of the
Creator of the world, or to the garment of imputed righteousness prepared to
envelope the souls of the elect. Like the religious (...), she was sufficiently
disposed to avenge a hostility against her opinions with the weapons of
sublunary warfare. Meanwhile I had smiled at the impotence of her malice, as an
object of contempt, rather than alarm. She perceived, as I imagine, the slight
estimation in which I held her, and this did not a little increase the
perturbation of her thoughts.

One day I was left alone with no other person in the house than this swarthy
sybil. The thieves had set out upon an expedition about two hours after sunset
on the preceding evening, and had not returned, as they were accustomed to do,
before daybreak the next morning. This was a circumstance that sometimes
occurred, and therefore did not produce any extraordinary alarm. At one time
the scent of prey would lead them beyond the bounds they had prescribed
themselves, and at another the fear of pursuit; the life of a thief is always
uncertain. The old woman had been preparing during the night for the meal to
which they would expect to sit down, as soon as might be after their return.

For myself I had learned from their habits to be indifferent to the regular
return of the different parts of the day, and in some degree to turn day into
night, and night into day. I had been now several weeks in this residence, and
the season was considerably advanced. I had passed some hours during the night
in ruminating on my situation. The character and manners of the men among whom
I lived were disgusting to me. Their brutal ignorance, their ferocious habits,
and their coarse behavior, instead of becoming more tolerable by custom,
hourly added force to my original aversion. The uncommon vigor of their minds
and acuteness of their invention in the business they pursued, compared with
the odiousness of that business and their habitual depravity, awakened in me
sensations too painful to be endured. Moral disapprobation, at least in a mind
unsubdued by philosophy, I found to be one of the most fertile sources of
disquiet and uneasiness. From this pain the society of Mr. Raymond by no means
relieved me. He was indeed eminently superior to the vices of the rest; but I
did not less exquisitely feel how much he was out of his place, how
disproportionably associated, or how contemptibly employed. I had attempted to
counteract the errors under which he and his companions labored; but I had
found the obstacles that presented themselves, much greater than I had imagined.

What was I to do? Was I to wait the issue of this my missionary undertaking,
or was I to withdraw myself immediately? When I withdrew, ought that to be done
privately, or with an open avowal of my design, and an endeavor to supply by
the force of example what was deficient in my arguments? It was certainly
improper, as I declined all participation in the pursuits of these men, did not
contribute with my person to the risk by which they subsisted, and had no
congeniality with their habits, that I should continue to reside with them any
longer than was absolutely necessary. There was one circumstance that rendered
this deliberation particularly pressing. They intended in a few days removing
from their present habitation, to a haunt to which they were accustomed in a
distant county. If I did not propose to continue with them, it would perhaps be
wrong to accompany them in this removal. The state of calamity to which my
inexorable persecutor had reduced me, had made the encounter even of a den of
robbers a very fortunate adventure. But the time that had since elapsed, had
probably been sufficient to relax the keenness of the quest that was made after
me. I sighed for that solitude and obscurity, that retreat from the vexations
of the world and the voice even of common fame, which I had proposed to myself
when I broke my prison.

Such were the meditations which now occupied my mind. At length I grew
fatigued with continued contemplation, and to relieve myself, I pulled out a
pocket Horace, the legacy of my beloved Brightwel! I read with avidity the
epistle in which he so beautifully describes to Fuscus the grammarian, the
pleasures of rural tranquillity and independence. By this time the sun rose
from behind the eastern hills, and I opened my casement to contemplate it. The
day commenced with peculiar brilliancy, and was accompanied with all those
charms, which the poets of nature, as they have been styled, have so much
delighted to describe. There was something in this scene, particularly as
succeeding to the active exertions of intellect, that soothed the mind to
composure. Insensibly a confused reverie invaded my faculties, I withdrew from
the window, threw myself upon the bed, and fell asleep.

I do not recollect the precise images which in this situation passed through
my thoughts, but I know that they concluded with the idea of some person, the
agent of Mr. Falkland, approaching to assassinate me. This thought had probably
been suggested, by the project I meditated of entering once again into the
world, and throwing myself within the sphere of his possible vengeance. I
imagined that the design of the murderer was to come upon me by surprise, that
I was aware of this design, and yet by some fascination had no thought of
evading it. I heard the steps of the murderer as he cautiously approached. I
seemed to listen to his constrained, yet audible breathings. He came up to the
corner where I was placed, and then stopped. The idea became too terrible, I
started, opened my eyes, and beheld the execrable hag before mentioned standing
over me with a butcher's hatchet. I shifted my situation with a speed that
seemed too swift for volition, and the blow already aimed at my scull, sunk
impotent upon the bed. Before she could wholly recover her posture I sprung
upon her, seized hold of the weapon, and had nearly wrested it from her. But in
a moment she resumed her strength and her desperate purpose, and we had a
furious struggle, she impelled by inveterate malice, and I resisting for my
life. Her vigor was truly Amazonian, and at no time had I ever occasion to
contend with a more formidable opponent. Her glance was sudden and exact, and
the shock with which from time to time she impelled her whole frame,
inconceivably vehement. At length I was victorious, took from her her
instrument of death, and threw her upon the ground. Till now the sobriety of
her exertions had curbed her rage; but now she gnashed with her teeth, her eyes
seemed as if starting from their sockets, and her body heaved with
uncontrollable insanity.

Rascal! devil! she exclaimed, what do you mean to do to me?

Till now the scene had passed uninterrupted by a single word.

Nothing, I replied: begone, infernal witch! and leave me to myself.

Leave you! No: I will thrust my fingers through your ribs, and drink your
blood! -- You conquer me! -- Ha, ha! -- Yes, yes! you shall! -- I will sit upon
you, and press you to hell! I will roast you with brimstone, and dash your
entrails into your eyes! -- Ha, ha! -- ha!

Saying this, she sprung up, and prepared to attack me with redoubled fury. I
seized her hands, and compelled her to sit upon the bed. Thus restrained, she
continued to express the tumult of her thoughts by grinning, by certain furious
motions of her head, and by occasional vehement efforts to disengage herself
from my grasp. These contortions and starts were of the nature of those fits,
in which the patients are commonly supposed to need three or four persons to
hold them. But I found by experience that, under the circumstances in which I
was placed, my single strength was sufficient. The spectacle of her emotions
was inconceivably frightful. Her violence at length however began to abate, and
she became persuaded of the hopelessness of the contest.

Let me go! said she. Why do you hold me? I will not be held!

I wanted you gone from the first, replied I. Are you contented to go now?

Yes, I tell you, misbegotten villain! Yes, rascal!

I immediately loosed my hold. She flew to the door, and, holding it in her
hand, said, I will be the death of you yet: you shall not be your own man
twenty-four hours longer! With these words she shut the door, and locked it
upon me. An action so totally unexpected startled me. Whither was she gone?
What was it she intended? To perish by the machinations of such a hag as this,
was a thought not to be endured. Death in any form, brought upon us by
surprise, and for which the mind has had no time to prepare, is inexpressibly
terrible. My thoughts wandered in breathless horror and confusion, and all
within was uproar. I endeavored to break the door, but in vain. I went round
the room in search of some tool to assist me. At length I rushed against it
with a desperate effort, to which it yielded, and had nearly thrown me from the
top of the stairs to the bottom.

I descended with all possible caution and vigilance. I entered the kitchen,
but it was deserted. I searched every other apartment in vain. I went out of
the house; still I discovered nothing of my late assailant. It was
extraordinary: what could be become of her? what was I to conclude from her
disappearance? I reflected on her parting menace. "I should not be my own man
twenty-four hours longer." It was mysterious; it did not seem to be the menace
of assassination.

Suddenly the recollection of the hand bill brought to us by Wilson rushed upon
my memory. Was it possible that she alluded to that in her parting words? Would
she set out upon such an expedition by herself? Was it not dangerous to the
whole fraternity, if without the smallest precaution she should bring the
officers of justice into the midst of them? It was perhaps improbable she would
engage in an undertaking thus desperate. It was not however easy to answer for
the conduct of a person in her state of mind. Should I wait, and risk the
preservation of my liberty upon the issue?

To this question I returned an immediate negative. I had resolved in a very
short time to quit my present situation, and the difference of a little sooner
or a little later could not be very material. It promised to be neither
agreeable nor prudent, for me to remain under the roof with a person who had
manifested such a fierce and inexpiable hostility. But the consideration which
had inexpressibly the most weight with me, belonged to the ideas of
imprisonment, trial and death. The longer they had formed the subject of my
contemplation, the more forcibly was I impelled to avoid them. I had entered
upon a system of action for that purpose; I had already made many sacrifices;
and I believed that I should never miscarry in this project through any neglect
of mine. The thought of what was reserved for me by my prosecutors sickened my
very soul; and the more intimately I was acquainted with oppression and
injustice, the more deeply was I penetrated with the abhorrence to which they
are entitled.

Such were the reasons that determined me, instantly, abruptly, without
leave-taking or acknowledgment for the peculiar and repeated favors I had
received, to quit a habitation to which for six weeks I had apparently been
indebted for protection, from trial, conviction and an ignominious death. I had
come hither pennyless; I quitted my abode with the sum of a few guineas in my
possession, Mr. Raymond having insisted upon my taking a share, at the time
that each man received his dividend from the common stock. Though I had reason
to suppose that the heat of the pursuit against me would be somewhat remitted
by the time that had elapsed, the magnitude of the mischief that in an
unsavourable event might fall on me, determined me to neglect no imaginable
precaution. I recollected the hand bill which was the source of my present
alarm, and conceived that one of the principal dangers that threatened me was
the recognition of my person, either by such as had previously known me, or
even by strangers. It seemed prudent therefore to disguise it as effectually as
I could. For this purpose I had recourse to a parcel of tattered garments that
lay in one corner of our habitation. The disguise I chose was that of a beggar.
Upon this plan I threw off my shirt. I tied a handkerchief about my head, with
which I took care to cover one of my eyes. Over this I drew a piece of an old
woollen nightcap. I selected the worst apparel I could find, and this I reduced
to a still more deplorable condition, by rents that I purposely made in various
places. Thus equipped, I surveyed myself in a looking-glass. I had rendered my
appearance complete, nor would any one have suspected that I was not one of the
fraternity to which I assumed to belong. I said, This is the form in which
tyranny and injustice oblige me to seek for refuge; but better, a thousand
times better is it, thus to incur contempt with the dregs of mankind, than to
trust to the tender mercies of our superiors!

CHAP. X.
THE only rule that I laid down to myself in traversing the forest was to take
a direction as opposite as possible to that which led to the scene of my late
imprisonment. After about two hours walking I arrived at the termination of
this ruder scene, and reached that part of the county which is enclosed and
cultivated. Here I sat down by the side of a brook, and, pulling out a crust of
bread which I had brought away with me, rested and refreshed myself. While I
continued in this place, I began to ruminate upon the plan I should lay down
for my future proceedings; and my propensity now led me, as it had done in a
former instance, to fix upon the capital which I believed, beside its other
recommendations, would prove the safest place for concealment. During these
thoughts I saw a couple of peasants passing at a small distance, and enquired
of them respecting the London road. By their description I understood that the
most immediate way would be to repass a part of the forest, and that it would
be necessary to approach considerably nearer to the county town than I was at
the spot which I had at present reached. I did not imagine that this could be a
circumstance of considerable importance. My disguise appeared to be a
sufficient security against momentary danger; and I therefore took a path,
though not the most direct one, which led toward the point they suggested.

The occurrences of the day were not very remarkable. As I passed along a road
which lay in my way for a few miles, I saw a carriage advancing in the opposite
direction. I debated with myself for a moment, whether I should pass it without
notice, or should take this occasion by voice or gesture of making an essay of
my trade. This idle disquisition was however speedily driven from my mind when
I perceived that the carriage was Mr. Falkland's. The suddenness of the
encounter struck me with terror, though perhaps it would have been difficult
for calm reflection to have discovered any considerable danger. I withdrew from
the road, and skulked behind a hedge till it should have completely gone by. I
was too much occupied with my own feelings to venture to examine whether or no
the terrible adversary of my peace were in the carriage. I persuaded myself
that he was. I looked after the equipage, and exclaimed, There you may see the
luxurious accommodations and appendages of guilt, and here the forlornness that
waits upon innocence! -- I was to blame to imagine that my case was singular in
that respect. I only mention it to show how the most trivial circumstance
contributes to embitter the cup to the man of adversity. The thought however
was a transient one. I had learned this lesson from my sufferings, not to
indulge in the luxury of discontent. As my mind recovered its tranquillity, I
began to enquire whether the phenomenon I had just seen could have any relation
to myself. But though my mind was extremely inquisitive and versatile in this
respect, I could discover no sufficient ground upon which to build any judgment
in the case.

At night I entered a little public house at the extremity of a village, and,
seating myself in a corner of the kitchen, asked for some bread and cheese.
While I was sitting at my repast, three or four laborers came in for a little
refreshment after their work. Ideas respecting the inequality of rank pervade
every order in society; and, as my appearance was meaner and more contemptible
than theirs, I found it expedient to give way to these gentry of a village
alehouse, and remove to an obscurer station. I was surprised and not a little
startled to find them fall almost immediately into conversation about my
history, whom with a slight variation of circumstances they styled the
notorious housebreaker, Kit Williams.

Damn the fellow, said one of them, one never hears of any thing else. OF my
life, I think he makes talk for the whole county.

That is very true, replied another. I was at the market town today to sell
some oats for my master, and there was a hue and cry, some of them thought they
had got him, but it was a false alarm.

That hundred guineas is a fine thing, rejoined the first. I should be glad if
so be as how it fell in my way.

For the matter of that, said the traveller, I should like a hundred guineas as
well as another. But I cannot be of your mind for all that. I should never
think money would do me any good, that had been the means of bringing a
Christian creature to the gallows.

Poh, that is all my granny! Some folks must be hanged to keep the wheels of
our state folks a-going. Beside, I could forgive the fellow all his other
robberies, but that he should have been so hardened as to break the house of
his own master at last, that is too bad.

Lord, lord, replied the other, I see you know nothing of the matter! I will
tell you how it was, as I learned it at the town. I question whether he ever
robbed his master at all. But hark you! you must know as how that squire
Falkland was once tried for murder --

Yes, yes, we know that.

Well, he was as innocent as the child unborn. But I supposes as how he is a
little soft or so. And so Kit Williams -- Kit is a devilish cunning fellow, you
may judge that from his breaking prison no less than five times, -- so, I say,
he threatened to bring his master to trial at the 'sizes all over again, and so
frightened him, and got money from him at diverse times. Till at last one squire
Forester, a relation of the other, found it all out. And he made the hell of a
rumpus, and sent away Kit to prison in a twinky, and I believe he would have
been hanged; for when two squires lay their heads together, they do not much
matter law, you know; or else they twist the law to their own ends, I cannot
exactly say which; but it is much at one, when the poor fellow's breath is out
of his body.

Though this story was very circumstantially told and with a sufficient detail
of particulars, it did not pass unquestioned. Each man maintained the justness
of his own statement, and the dispute was long and obstinately pursued.
Historians and commentators at length withdrew together. The terrors with which
I was seized when this conversation began, were extreme. I stole a side-long
glance to one quarter and another, to observe if any man's attention were
turned upon me. I trembled as if in an ague fit; and at first felt continual
impulses to quit the house and take to my heels. I drew closer in my corner,
held aside my head, and seemed from time to time to undergo a total revolution
of the animal economy.

At length the tide of ideas turned. Perceiving they paid no attention to me,
the recollection of the full security my disguise afforded recurred strongly to
my thoughts, and I began inwardly to exult, though I did not venture to obtrude
myself to examination. By degrees I began to be amused at the absurdity of
their tales, and the variety of the falsehoods I heard asserted around me. My
soul seemed to expand; I felt a pride in the self-possession and lightness of
heart with which I could listen to the scene; and I determined to prolong and
heighten the enjoyment. Accordingly, when they were withdrawn, I addressed
myself to our hostess, a buxom, bluff, good humoured widow, and asked what sort
of a man this Kit Williams might be? She replied that, as she was informed, he
was as handsome, likely a lad, as any in four counties round; and that she
loved him for his cleverness, by which be outwitted all the keepers they could
set over him, and made his way through stone walls, as if they were so many
cobwebs. I observed that the country was so thoroughly alarmed, that I did not
think it possible he should escape the pursuit that was set up after him. This
idea excited her immediate indignation; she said she hoped he was far enough
away by this time, but, if not, she wished the curse of God might light on them
that betrayed so noble a fellow to a fatal end! -- Though she little thought
that the person of whom she spoke was so near her, yet the sincere and generous
warmth with which she interested herself in my behalf, gave me considerable
pleasure. With this sensation to sweeten the fatigues of the day and the
calamities of my situation, I retired from the kitchen to a neighboring barn,
laid myself down upon some straw, and fell into a profound sleep.

The next day about noon as I was pursuing my journey, I was overtaken by two
men on horseback, who stopped me to enquire respecting a person that they
supposed might have passed along that road. As they proceeded in their
description I perceived with astonishment and terror that I was myself the
person to whom their questions related. They entered into a tolerably accurate
detail of the various characteristics by which my person might best be
distinguished. They said, they had good reason to believe that I had been seen
at a place in that county the very day before. While they were speaking, a
third person who had fallen behind came up, and my alarm was greatly increased
upon seeing that this person was the servant of Mr. Forester, who had visited
me in prison about a fortnight before my escape. My best resource in this
crisis was composure and apparent indifference. It was fortunate for me that my
disguise was so complete, that the eye of Mr. Falkland itself could scarcely
have penetrated it. I had been aware for some time before that this was a
refuge which events might make necessary, and had endeavored to arrange and
methodise my ideas upon the subject. From my youth I had possessed a
considerable facility in the art of imitation; and, when I quitted my retreat
under the roof of Mr. Raymond, I adopted along with my beggar's attire a
peculiar slouching and clownish gait to be used whenever there should appear
the least chance of my being observed, together with an Irish brogue which I
had had an opportunity of studying in my prison. Such are the miserable
expedients and so great the studied artifice, which man, who never deserves the
name of manhood but in proportion as he is erect and independent, may find it
necessary to employ, for the purpose of eluding the inexorable animosity and
unfeeling tyranny of his fellow man! I had made use of this brogue, though I
have not thought it necessary to write it down in my narrative, in the
conversation of the village alehouse. Mr. Forester's servant as he came up
observed that his companions were engaged in conversation with me; and,
guessing at the subject, asked whether they had gained any intelligence. He
added to the information at which they had already hinted, that a resolution
was taken to spare neither diligence nor expense for my discovery and
apprehension, and that they were satisfied that, if I were above ground and in
the kingdom, it would be impossible for me to escape them.

Every new incident that had occurred to me, thus tended to impress upon my
mind the extreme danger to which I was exposed. I could almost have imagined
that I was the sole subject of general attention, and that the whole world was
in arms to exterminate me. The very idea tingled through every fiber of my
frame. But, terrible as it appeared to my imagination, it did but give new
energy to my purpose; and I determined that I would not voluntarily resign the
field, that is properly speaking my neck to the cord of the executioner,
notwithstanding the greatest superiority in my assailants. But the incidents
which had befallen me, though they did not change my purpose, induced me to
examine over again the means by which that purpose might be effected. The
consequence of this revisal was to determine me to bend my course to the
nearest seaport on the west side of the island, and transport myself to
Ireland. I cannot now tell what it was that inclined me to prefer this scheme
to that which I had originally formed. Perhaps the latter, which had been for
some time present to my imagination, for that reason appeared the more obvious
of the two; and I found an appearance of complexity, which the mind did not
stay to explain to itself, in substituting the other in its stead.

I arrived without farther impediment at the place from which I intended to
sail, enquired for a vessel which I found ready to put to sea in a few hours,
and agreed with the captain for my passage. Ireland had to me the disadvantage
of being a dependency of the British government, and therefore a place of less
security than most other countries which are divided from it by the ocean. To
judge from the diligence with which I seemed to be pursued in England, it was
not improbable that the zeal of my persecutors might follow me to the other
side of the channel. It was however sufficiently agreeable to my mind that I
was upon the point of being removed one step farther from the danger which was
so grievous to my imagination.

Could there be any peril in the short interval that was to elapse before the
vessel was to weigh anchor, and quit the English shore? Probably not. A very
short time had intervened between my determination for the sea and my arrival
at this place; and, if any new alarm had been given to my persecutors, it
proceeded from the old woman a very few days before. I hoped I had anticipated
their diligence. Meanwhile that I might neglect no reasonable precaution, I
went instantly on board, resolved that I would not unnecessarily, by walking in
the streets of the town, expose myself to any untoward accident.

CHAP. XI.
THE time was now nearly elapsed that was prescribed for our stay, and orders
for weighing anchor were every moment expected, when we were hailed by a boat
from the shore with two other men in it beside those that rowed. They entered
our vessel in an instant. They were officers of justice. The passengers, five
persons beside myself, were ordered upon deck for examination. I was
inexpressibly disturbed at the occurrence of such a circumstance in so
unseasonable a moment. I took it for granted that it was of me that they were
in search. Was it possible that by any unaccountable accident they should have
got an intimation of my disguise? It was infinitely more distressing to
encounter them upon this narrow stage and under these pointed circumstances,
than, as I had before encountered my pursuers, under the appearance of an
indifferent person. My recollection however did not forsake me. I confided in
my conscious disguise and my Irish brogue, as a rock of dependence against all
accidents.

No sooner did we appear upon deck than to my great consternation I could
observe the attention of our guests principally turned upon me. They asked a
few frivolous questions of such of my fellow passengers as happened to be
nearest to them; and then turning to me enquired my name, who I was, whence I
came, and what had brought me there? I had scarcely opened my mouth to reply,
when with one consent they laid hold of me, said I was their prisoner, and
declared that my accent, together with the correspondence of my person, would
be sufficient to convict me before any court in England. I was hurried out of
the vessel into the boat in which they came, and seated between them, as if by
way of precaution lest I should spring overboard and by any means escape them.

I now took it for granted that I was once more in the power of Mr. Falkland,
and the idea was inexpressibly mortifying and afflictive to my imagination.
Escape from his pursuit, freedom from his tyranny, were objects upon which my
whole soul was bent; could no human ingenuity and exertion effect them? Did his
power reach through all space, and his eye penetrate every concealment? Was he
like that mysterious being, to protect us from whose fierce revenge mountains
and hills we are told might fall on us in vain! No idea is more heart-sickening
and tremendous than this. But in my case it was not a subject of reasoning or
of faith; I could derive no comfort either openly from unbelief, or secretly
from the remoteness and incomprehensibility of the conception; it was an affair
of sense; I felt the fangs of the tiger striking deep into my heart.

But, though this impression were at first exceedingly strong, and accompanied
with its usual attendants in dejection and pusillanimity of spirit, yet my mind
soon began as it were mechanically, to turn upon the consideration of the
distance between this seaport and my county prison, and the various
opportunities of escape that might offer themselves in the interval. My first
duty was to avoid betraying myself more than it might afterward appear I was
betrayed already. It was possible that, though apprehended, my apprehension
might have been determined on upon some slight score, and that by my dexterity
I might render my dismission as sudden as my arrest had been. It was even
possible that I had been seized through a mistake, and that the present measure
might have no connection with Mr. Falkland's affair. Upon every supposition it
was my business to gain information, and not to communicate it.

I soon found the benefits of this resolution. In my passage from the ship to
the town I did not utter a word. My conductors commented on my sulkiness, but
remarked that it would avail me nothing, I should infallibly swing, as it was
never known that any body got off; who was tried for robbing his majesty's
mail. It is easy to conceive the lightness of heart which was communicated to
me by these words: I persisted however in the silence I had meditated. From the
rest of their conversation, which was sufficiently voluble, I learned that the
mail from Edinburgh to London had been robbed about ten days before by two
Irishmen, that one of them was already secured, and that I was taken up upon
suspicion of being the other. They had a description of his person which,
though, as I afterward found, it disagreed from mine in several material
articles, appeared to them to tally to the minutest tittle. The intelligence
that the whole proceeding against me was founded in a mistake, took an
oppressive load from my mind. I believed that I should immediately be able to
establish my innocence to the satisfaction of any magistrate in the kingdom;
and, though crossed in my plans, and thwarted in my design of quitting the
island even after I was already at sea, this was but a trifling inconvenience
compared with what I had had but too much reason to fear.

As soon as we came ashore I was conducted to the house of a justice of peace,
a man who had formerly been the captain of a collier, but who, having been
successful in the world, had quitted this wandering life, and for some years
had had the honor to represent his majesty's person. We were detained for some
time in a sort of anti-room, waiting his reverence's leisure. The persons by
whom I had been taken up were experienced in their trade, and insisted upon
employing this interval in searching me, in presence of two of his worship's
servants. They found upon me fifteen guineas and some silver. They required me
to strip myself perfectly naked, that they might examine whether I had bank
notes concealed any where about my person. They took up the detached parcels of
my miserable attire as I threw it from me, and felt them one by one to discover
whether the articles of which they were in search might by any device be sown
up in them. To all this I submitted without murmuring. It might probably come
to the same thing at last, and summary justice was sufficiently coincident with
my views, my principal object being to get as soon as possible out of the
clutches of the respectable persons who now had me in custody.

This operation was scarcely completed, before we were directed to be ushered
into his worship's apartment. My accusers opened the charge, and told him that
they had been ordered to this town upon an intimation that one of the persons
who robbed the Edinburgh mail was to be sound here; and that they had taken me
on board a vessel which was by this time under sail for Ireland. Well, says his
worship, that is your story; now let us hear what account the gentleman gives
of himself. What is your name, ha, sirrah? and from what part of Tipperary are
you pleased to come? I had already taken my determination upon this article;
and, the moment I learned the particulars of the charge against me, resolved,
for the present at least, to lay aside my Irish accent, and speak my native
tongue. This I had done in the very few words I had spoken to my conductors in
the anti-room: they stared at the metamorphosis, but they had gone too far for
it to be possible they should retract in consistence with their honor. I now
told the justice that I was no Irishman, nor had ever been in that country: I
was a native of England. This occasioned a consulting of the deposition in
which my person was supposed to be described, and which my conductors had
brought along with them for their direction. To be sure that required that the
offender should be an Irishman.

Observing his worship hesitate, I thought this was the time to push the matter
a little farther. I referred to the paper, and showed him that the description
neither tallied as to height nor complexion. But then it did as to years and
the color of the hair; and it was not this gentleman's habit, as he informed
me, to squabble about trifles, or to let a man's neck out of the halter for a
pretended flaw of a few inches in his stature. If a man were too short, he
said, there was no remedy like a little stretching. The miscalculation in my
case happened to be the opposite way, but his reverence did not think proper to
lose his jest. Upon the whole he was somewhat at a loss how to proceed.

My conductors observed this, and began to tremble for the reward, which two
hours ago they thought as good as in their own pocket. To retain me in custody
they judged to be a safe speculation; if it turned out a mistake at last, they
felt little apprehension of a suit for false imprisonment from a poor man
accoutred as I was in rags. They therefore urged his worship to comply with
their views. They told him that to be sure the evidence against me did not
prove so strong, as for their part they heartily wished it had, but that there
were a number of suspicious circumstances respecting me. When I was brought up
to them upon the deck of the vessel, I spoke as fine an Irish brogue as one
shall hear in a summer's day; and now all at once there was not the least
particle of it left. In searching me they had sound upon me fifteen guineas;
how should a poor beggar lad, such as I appeared, come honestly by fifteen
guineas? Beside, when they had stripped me naked, though my dress was so
shabby, my skin had all the sleekness of a gentleman. In fine, for what purpose
could a poor beggar, who had never been in Ireland in his life, want to
transport himself to that country? It was as clear as the sun that I was no
better than I should be. This reasoning, together with some significant winks
and gestures between the justice and the plaintiffs, brought him over to their
way of thinking. He said, I must go to Warwick, where it seems the other robber
was at present in custody, and be confronted with him; and if then every thing
appeared fair and satisfactory, I should be discharged.

No intelligence could be more terrible than that which was contained in these
words. That I, who had found the whole country in arms against me, who was
exposed to a pursuit so peculiarly vigilant and penetrating, should now be
dragged to the very center of the kingdom, without power of accommodating
myself to circumstances, and under the immediate custody of the officers of
justice, seemed to my ears almost the same thing as if they had pronounced upon
me a sentence of death! I strenuously urged the injustice of this proceeding. I
observed to the magistrate that it was impossible I should be the person at
whom the description pointed. It required an Irishman; I was no Irishman. It
described a person shorter than I; a circumstance of all others the least
capable of being counterfeited. There was not the slightest reason for
detaining me in custody. I had been already disappointed of my voyage and lost
the money I had paid down through the officiousness of these gentlemen in
apprehending me. I assured his worship that every delay under my circumstances
was of the utmost importance to me. It was impossible to devise a greater
injury to be inflicted on me, than the proposal that, instead of being
permitted to proceed upon my voyage, I should be sent under arrest into the
heart of the kingdom.

My remonstrances were in vain. The justice was by no means inclined to digest
the being expostulated with in this manner by a person in the habiliments of a
beggar. In the midst of my address he would have silenced me for my
impertinence, but that I spoke with an earnestness with which he was wholly
unable to contend. When I had finished, he told me that it was all to no
purpose, and that it might have been better for me if I had shown myself less
insolent. It was clear that I was a vagabond and a suspicious person. The more
earnest I showed myself to get off, the more reason there was he should keep me
fast. Perhaps after all I should turn out to be the felon in question. But, if
I was not that, he had no doubt I was worse; a poacher, or for what he knew a
murderer. He had a kind of a notion that he had seen my face before about some
such affair; out of all doubt I was an old offender. He had it in his choice to
send me to hard labor as a vagrant upon the strength of my appearance and the
contradictions in my story, or to order me to Warwick; and out of the
spontaneous goodness of his disposition he chose the milder alternative. He
could assure me I should not slip through his fingers. It was of more benefit
to his majesty's government to hang one such fellow as he suspected me to be,
than out of misguided tenderness to concern oneself for the good of all the
beggars in the nation.

Finding that it was impossible to work on a man, so fully impressed with his
own dignity and importance and my utter insignificance, in the way I desired, I
claimed that at least the money taken from my person should be restored to me.
This was granted. His worship perhaps suspected that he had stretched a point
in what he had already done, and was therefore the less unwilling to relax in
this incidental circumstance. My conductors did not oppose themselves to this
indulgence, for a reason that will appear in the sequel. The justice however
enlarged upon his clemency in this proceeding. He did not know whether he was
not exceeding the spirit of his commission in complying with my demand. So much
money in my possession could not be honestly come by. But it was his temper to
soften, as far as could be done with propriety, the strict letter of the law.

There were cogent reasons why the gentlemen who had originally taken me into
custody, chose that I should continue in their custody, when my examination was
over. Every man is in his different mode susceptible to a sense of honor; and
they did not choose to encounter the disgrace that would accrue to them if
justice had been done. Every man is in some degree influenced by the love of
power; and they were willing I (...) owe any benefit I received, to their
sovereign grace and benignity, and not to the mere reason of the case. It was
not however an unsubstantial honor and barren power that formed the object of
their pursuit: no, their views were deeper than that. In a word, though they
chose that I should retire from the seat of justice as I had come before it, a
prisoner, yet the tenor of my examination had obliged them in spite of
themselves to suspect, that I was innocent of the charge they alleged against
me. Apprehensive therefore that the hundred guineas that had been offered as a
reward for taking the robber, was completely out of the question in the present
business, they were contented to strike at smaller game. Having conducted me to
an inn, and given directions respecting a vehicle for the journey, they took me
aside, while one of them addressed me in the following manner:

You see, my lad, how the case stands; heigh for Warwick is the word! and, when
we are got there, what may happen then I will not pretend for to say. Whether
you are innocent or no is no business of mine; but you are not such a chicken
as to suppose, if so be as you are innocent, that that will make your game
altogether sure. You say, your business calls you another way, and as how you
are in haste: I have not the heart to cross any man in his concerns, if I can
help it. If therefore you will give us them there fifteen shiners, why snug is
the word. They are of no use to you; a beggar, you know, is always at home. For
the matter of that we could have had them in the way of business as you saw at
the justice's. But I am a man of principle; I loves to do things above board,
and scorns to extort a shilling from any man.

He who is tinctured with principles of moral discrimination, is apt upon
occasion to be run away with by his feelings in that respect, and to forget the
immediate interest of the moment. I confess that the first sentiment excited in
my mind by this overture was that of indignation. I was irresistably impelled
to give utterance to this feeling, and postpone for a moment the consideration
of the future. I replied with the severity which so base a proceeding appeared
to deserve. My bear-leaders were considerably surprised with my firmness, but
seemed to think it beneath them to contest with me the principles I delivered.
He who had made the overture contented himself with replying, Well, well, my
lad, do as you will; you are not the first man that has been hanged rather than
part with a few guineas. His words did not pass unheeded by me. They were
strikingly applicable to my situation, and I was determined not to suffer the
occasion to escape me unimproved.

The pride of these gentlemen however was too great to admit of farther parley
for the present. They left me abruptly; having first ordered an old man, the
father of the landlady, to stay in the room with me while they were absent. The
old man they ordered for security to lock the door and put the key in his
pocket, at the same time mentioning below stairs the station in which they had
left me, that the people of the house might have an eye upon what went forward,
and not suffer me to escape. What was the intention of this maneuver I am
unable certainly to pronounce. Probably it was a sort of compromise between
their pride and their avarice, being desirous for some reason or other to drop
me as soon as convenient, and therefore determining to wait the result of my
private meditations on the proposal they had made.

CHAP. XI.
THEY were no sooner withdrawn than I cast my eye upon the old man, and found
something extremely venerable and interesting in his appearance. His form was
above the middle size. It indicated that his strength had once been
considerable; nor was it at this time by any means annihilated. His hair was in
considerable quantity, and was as white as the driven snow. His complexion was
healthful and ruddy, at the same time that his face was furrowed with wrinkles.
In his eye there was remarkable vivacity, and his whole countenance was
strongly expressive of good nature. The boorishness of his rank in society was
lost, in the cultivation his mind had derived from habits of sensibility and
benevolence.

The view of his figure immediately introduced a train of ideas into my mind
respecting the advantage to be drawn from the presence of such a person. The
attempt to take any step without his consent was hopeless, for, though I should
succeed with regard to him, he could easily give the alarm to other persons who
would no doubt be within call. Add to which, I could scarcely have prevailed on
myself to offer any offense to a person whose first appearance so strongly
engaged my affection and esteem. In reality my thoughts were turned into a
different channel. I was impressed with an ardent wish, to be able to call this
man my benefactor. Pursued by a train of ill-fortune, I could no longer
consider myself as a member of society. I was a solitary being, cut off from
the expectation of sympathy, kindness and the good will of mankind. I was
strongly impelled by the situation in which the present moment placed me, to
indulge in a luxury which my destiny seemed to have denied. I could not
conceive of the smallest comparison between the idea of deriving my liberty
from the spontaneous kindness of a worthy and excellent mind, and that of being
indebted for it to the selfishness and baseness of the worst members of
society. It was thus that I allowed myself in the wantonness of refinement even
in the midst of destruction.

Guided by these sentiments, I requested his attention to the circumstances by
which I had been brought into my present situation. He immediately signified
his assent, and said he would cheerfully listen to any thing I thought proper
to communicate. I told him the persons who had just left me in charge with him,
had come to this town for the purpose of apprehending some person who had been
guilty of robbing the mail; that they had chosen to take me up under this
warrant, and had conducted me before a justice of the peace; that they had soon
detected their mistake, the person in question being an Irishman, and differing
from me both in country and stature; but that by collusion between them and the
justice they were permitted to retain me in custody, and pretended to undertake
to conduct me to Warwick to confront me with my accomplice; that in searching
me at the justice's they had found a sum of money in my possession which
excited their cupidity, and that they had just been proposing to me to give me
my liberty upon condition of my surrendering this sum into their hands. Under
these circumstances I requested him to consider whether he would wish to render
himself the instrument of their extortion. I put myself into his hands, and
solemnly averred the truth of the facts I had just stated. If he would assist
me in my escape, it could have no other effect than to disappoint the base
passions of my conductors. I would upon no account expose him to any real
inconvenience; but I was well assured that the same generosity that prompted
him to a good deed, would enable him effectually to vindicate it when done; and
that those who detained me, when they had lost sight of their prey, would feel
covered with confusion, and not dare to take another step in the affair.

The old man listened to what I related with curiosity and interest. He said
that he had always felt an abhorrence to the sort of people who had me in their
hands, that he had an aversion to the task they had just imposed upon him, but
that he could not refuse some little disagreeable offices to oblige his
daughter and son-in-law. He had no doubt, from my countenance and manner, of
the truth of what I had asserted to him. It was an extraordinary request I had
made, and he did not know what had induced me to think him the sort of person
to whom it might properly be made. In reality however his habits of thinking
were uncommon, and he felt more than half inclined to act as I desired. One
thing at least he would desire of me in return, which was to be faithfully
informed in some degree respecting the person he was asked to oblige. What was
my name?

The question came upon me unprepared. But, whatever might be the consequences,
I could not bear to deceive the person by whom it was put, and in the
circumstances under which it was put. The practice of perpetual falsehood is too
painful a task. I replied that my name was Williams.

He paused His eye was fixed upon me. I saw his complexion alter at the
repetition of that word. He proceeded with visible anxiety.

My christian name?

Caleb.

Good God! it could not be --? He conjured me by every thing that was sacred to
answer him faithfully to one question more. I was not? -- no, it was impossible
-- the person who had formerly lived servant with Mr. Falkland of --?

I told him that, whatever might be the meaning of his question, I would answer
him truly. I was the individual he mentioned.

As I uttered these words, the old man rose from his seat. He was sorry that
fortune had been so unpropitious to him, as for him ever to have set eyes upon
me! I was a monster with whom the very earth groaned!

I entreated that he would suffer me to explain this new misapprehension, as he
had done in the former instance. I had no doubt that I should do it equally to
his satisfaction:

No! no! no! he would upon no consideration admit that his ears should suffer
such contamination. This case and the other were very different. There was no
criminal upon the face of the earth, no murderer, half so detestable, as the
person who could prevail upon himself to utter the charges I had done by way of
recrimination against so generous a master. -- The old man was in a perfect
agony with the recollection.

At length he calmed himself enough to say he should never cease to grieve that
he had held a moment's parley with me. He did not know what was the conduct
that severe justice required of him; but, since he had come into the knowledge
of who I was only by my own confession, it was irreconcilably repugnant to his
feelings to make use of that knowledge to my injury. Here therefore all
relation between us ceased; and indeed it would be an abuse of words to
consider me in the light of a human creature. He would do me no mischief; but
then on the other hand he would not for the world be any way assisting and
abetting me.

I was inexpressibly affected at the abhorrence this good and benevolent
creature expressed against me. I could not be silent; I endeavored once and
again to prevail upon him to hear me. But his determination was unalterable.
Our contest lasted for some time, and he at length terminated it by ringing the
bell, and calling up the waiter. A very little while after this my conductors
entered, and these two other persons withdrew.

It was a part of the singularity of my fate that it hurried me from one
species of anxiety and distress to another, too rapidly to suffer any one of
them to sink deeply into my mind. I am apt to believe in the retrospect that
half the calamities I was destined to endure would infalliby have overwhelmed
and destroyed me. But, as it was, I had no leisure to chew the cud upon cross
accidents as they befell me, but was under the necessity of forgetting them to
guard against peril that the next moment seemed ready to crush me. The
behavior of this incomparable and amiable old man cut me to the heart. It was
a dreadful prognostic for all my future life. But, as I have just observed, my
conductors entered, and another subject called imperiously upon my attention. I
could have been content, mortified as I was at this instant, to have been shut
up in some impenetrable solitude, and to have wrapped myself up in inconsolable
misery. But the grief I endured had not such power over me, as that I could be
content to risk the being led to the gallows. The love of life, and still more
a hatred against oppression, steeled my heart against that species of inertion.
In the scene that had just passed I had indulged, as I have said, in a
wantonness and luxury of refinement. It was time that that indulgence should be
brought to a period. It was dangerous to trifle any more upon the brink of
fate; and, penetrated as I was with sadness by the result of my last attempt, I
was little disposed to any unnecessary circumambulation. I was exactly in the
temper in which the gentlemen who had me in their power, would have desired to
find me. Accordingly we entered upon immediate business; and, after some
chaffering, they agreed to accept eleven guineas as the price of my freedom. To
preserve however the chariness of their reputation, they insisted upon
conducting me with them for a few miles on the outside of a stage coach. They
then pretended that the road they had to travel lay in a cross-country
direction; and, having quitted the vehicle, they suffered me, almost as soon as
it was out of sight, to shake off this troublesome association, and follow my
own inclinations. It may be worth remarking by the way, that these fellows
outwitted themselves at their own trade. They had laid hold of me at first
under the idea of a prize of a hundred guineas: they had since been glad to
accept a composition of eleven; but, if they had retained me a little longer in
their possession, they would have found the possibility of acquiring the sum
that had originally excited their pursuit, upon a different score.

The mischances that had befallen me in my late attempt to escape from my
pursuers by having recourse to the sea, deterred me from the thought of
repeating the same experiment. I therefore once more returned to the suggestion
of hiding myself, at least for the present, amidst the crowds of the
metropolis. Meanwhile I by no means thought proper to venture by the direct
route, and the less so as that was the course which would be steered by my late
conductors; but took my road along the borders of Wales. The only incident
worth relating in this place, occurred in a project I thought proper to adopt
for crossing the Severn in a particular point. The mode of crossing was by a
ferry; and by some strange inadvertence I lost my way so completely that I was
wholly unable that night to reach the ferry, and arrive at the town which I had
destined for my repose.

It was by a singular fatality that this petty disappointment, in the midst of
the overwhelming considerations that might have been expected to engross every
thought of my mind, was borne by me with particular impatience. I was that day
uncommonly fatigued. Previously to the time when I mistook, or at least was
aware of the mistake of the road, the sky had become exceedingly black and
lowering, and soon after the clouds burst down in sheets of rain. I was then in
the midst of a heath, without tree or covering of any sort to shelter me. I was
thoroughly drenched in a moment. In this uncomfortable state I proceeded with a
sort of sullen determination. By and by the rain gave place to a storm of hail.
The hailstones were large and frequent. I was ill defended from them by the
miserable covering I wore, and they seemed to cut me in a thousand directions.
The hailstorm subsided, and was again succeeded by a heavy rain. It was at this
time I perceived that I had totally deviated from my way. I could discover
neither man, nor beast, nor habitation of any kind. I walked on, consulting at
every turn the path it would be proper for me to pursue, and in no instance
able to discern a sufficient reason for rejecting the one and preferring the
other. My mind was in a most disconsolate and repining state. I muttered
imprecations and murmuring, as I passed along. I was full of loathing and
abhorrence against life, and every thing that life carries in its train. After
wandering without any certain direction for two hours, I was overtaken by the
night, and obliged to take up my rest for the present in a solitary shed.

In a corner of the shed which I had chosen for my retreat I found some clean
straw. I threw off my rags, placing them in a situation where they would best
be dried, and buried myself amidst this friendly warmth. Through fatigue of
mind and body it happened in this instance, though in general my repose was
remarkably short, that I slept till almost noon of the next day. When I rose, I
found that I was at no great distance from the ferry, which I crossed, and
entered the town where I intended to have rested the preceding night.

It was market day. As I passed near the cross, I observed two people look at
me with great earnestness, after which one of them exclaimed, I will be damned,
if I do not think that is the very fellow those men were enquiring for, who set
off an hour ago by the coach for --. I was extremely alarmed at this
information; and, quickening my pace, turned sharp down a narrow lane. The
moment I was out of sight I ran with all the speed I could exert, and did not
think myself safe till I was several miles distant from the place where this
information had reached my ears. I have always believed that the men to whom it
related were the very persons who had apprehended me on board the ship in which
I had embarked for Ireland, that by some accident they had met with the
description of my person as published on the part of Mr. Falkland, and that
from putting together the circumstances they had been led to believe that this
was the very individual who had lately been in their custody. Indeed it was a
piece of infatuation in me for which I am now unable to account, that, after
the various indications which had occurred in that affair proving to them that
I was a man in very critical and peculiar circumstances, I should have
persisted in wearing the same disguise without the smallest alteration. My
escape in the present case was eminently fortunate. If I had not lost my way in
consequence of the hail-storm of the preceding night, or if I had not so
greatly overslept myself this very morning, I must almost infallibly have
fallen into the hands of these infernal blood-hunters.

The town they had chosen for their next stage, the name of which I had thus
caught in the marketplace, was the very town to which, but for this
intimation, I should have immediately proceeded. As it was, I determined to
take a road as wide of it as possible. In the first place to which I came, in
which it was practicable to do so, I bought a great coat which I drew over my
beggar's weeds, and a better hat. The hat I slouched over my face, and covered
one of my eyes with a green silk shade. The handkerchief, which I had hitherto
worn about my head, I now tied about the lower part of my visage, so as to
cover my mouth. By degrees I discarded every part of my former dress, and wore
for my upper garment a kind of carman's frock, which, being of the better sort,
made me look like the son of a reputable farmer of the lower class. Thus
equipped, I proceeded on my journey, and, after a thousand alarms, precautions,
and circuitous deviations from the direct path, arrived safely in London.

CHAP. XII.
HERE then was the termination of an immense series of labors, upon which no
man could have looked back without astonishment, or forward without a sentiment
bordering on despair. It was at a price which defies estimation that I had
purchased this resting place; whether we consider the efforts it had cost me to
escape from the walls of my prison, or the dangers and anxieties to which I had
been a prey from that hour to the present.

But why do I call the point at which I was now arrived a resting place? Alas,
it was diametrically the reverse! It was my first and immediate business to
review all the projects of disguise I had hitherto conceived, to derive every
improvement I could invent from the practice to which I had been subjected, and
to manufacture a veil of concealment more impenetrable than ever. This was an
effort to which I could see no end. In ordinary cases the hue and cry after a
supposed offender is a matter of temporary operation; but ordinary cases formed
no standard for the colossal intelligence of Mr. Falkland. For the same reason,
London, which appears an inexhaustible reservoir of concealment to the majority
of mankind, brought no such consolatory sentiment to my mind. Whether life were
worth my accepting on such terms I cannot pronounce. I only know that I
persisted in this exertion of my faculties, through a sort of parental love
that men are accustomed to entertain for their intellectual offspring; the more
thought I had expended in rearing it to its present perfection, the less did I
find myself disposed to abandon it. Another motive not less strenuously
exciting me to perseverance, was the ever-growing repugnance I felt to
injustice and arbitrary power.

The first evening of my arrival in town I slept at an obscure inn at the
borough of Southwark, choosing that side of the metropolis on account of its
lying entirely wide of the part of England from which I came. I entered the inn
in the evening in my countryman's frock; and, having paid for my lodging before
I went to bed, equipped myself next morning as differently as my wardrobe would
allow, and left the house before day. The frock I made up into a small packet;
and, having carried it to a distance as great as I thought necessary, I dropped
it in the corner of an alley through which I passed. My next care was to
furnish myself with another suit of apparel totally different from any to which
I had hitherto had recourse. The exterior which I was now induced to assume was
that of a Jew. One of the gang of thieves upon -- forest had been of that race;
and, by the talent of mimicry, which I have already stated myself to possess, I
could copy their pronunciation of the English language, sufficiently to answer
such occasions as were likely to present themselves. One of the preliminaries I
adopted was to repair to a quarter of the town in which great numbers of this
people reside, and study their complexion and countenance. Having made such
provision as my prudence suggested to me, I retired for that night to an inn on
the side of Mile End and Wapping. Here I accoutred myself in my new
habiliments; and, having employed the same precautions as before, retired from
my lodging at a time least exposed to observation. It is unnecessary to
describe all the particulars of my new equipage. Suffice it to say, that one of
my cares was to discolor my complexion, and give it the dun and sallow hue
which is in most instances characteristic of the tribe to which I assumed to
belong; and that, when my metamorphosis was finished, I could not upon the
strictest examination conceive, that any one could have traced out the person
of Caleb Williams in this new disguise.

Thus far advanced in the execution of my project, I deemed it advisable to
procure a lodging, and change my late wandering life for a stationary one. In
this lodging I constantly secluded myself from the rising to the setting of the
sun; the periods I allowed for exercise and air were few, and those few by
night. I was even careful of so much as approaching the window of my apartment,
though upon the attic story; a principle I laid down to myself was, not
wantonly and unnecessarily to expose myself to risk, however slight that risk
might appear. Thus I had seemingly attained a situation of obscurity, secluded
from the haunts and intercourse of men. It had however little resemblance to
that obscurity to which my imagination had looked forward with delight, while I
was yet in -- jail. There is an immeasurable difference between that rural
solitude, where a man rests his head in the lap of verdure and tranquillity;
and that retirement in the very seat of action, whose constant attendant is
disquietude, and in which a man shrinks with alarm from the eye of his fellow.

I might have thought myself still more secure, if I had been in possession of
money upon which to subsist. The necessity of a man's earning for himself the
means of existence is in most instances a merely imaginary evil; but in mine
certainly tended to thwart the plan of secrecy to which I was condemned.
Whatever labor I adopted, or deemed myself qualified to discharge, it was
first to be considered how I was to be provided with employment, and where I
was to find an employer or purchaser for my commodities. In the mean time I had
no alternative. The little money with which I had escaped from the
blood-hunters was almost wholly expended.

After the minutest consideration I was able to bestow upon this question, I
determined that literature should be the field of my first experiment. I had
read much of money being acquired in this way, and of prices given by the
speculators in this sort of ware to its proper manufacturers. My qualifications
I estimated at a slender valuation. I was not without a conviction that
experience and practice must pave the way to excellent production. But, though
of these I was utterly destitute, my propensities had always led me in this
direction; and my early thirst of knowledge had conducted me to a more intimate
acquaintance with books, than could perhaps have been expected under my
circumstances. If my literary pretensions were slight, the demand I intended to
make upon them was not great. I only desired a subsistence, and I was persuaded
few persons could subsist upon slenderer means than myself. I also considered
that this was a temporary expedient, necessary only till by accident or time I
could place myself in a more eligible situation. The reasons that principally
determined me in my choice, were that this employment called upon me for the
least preparation, and could, as I thought, be exercised with least observation.

There was a solitary woman of middle age, who tenanted a chamber in this house
upon the same floor with my own. I had no sooner determined upon the
destination of my industry, than I cast my eye upon her as the possible
instrument for disposing of my productions. Excluded as I was from all
intercourse with my species in general, I found pleasure in the occasional
exchange of a few words with this inoffensive and good-humoured creature, who
was already of an age to preclude scandal. She lived upon a very small annuity
allowed her by a distant relation, a woman of quality, who, possessed of
thousands herself, had no other anxiety with respect to this person, than that
she should not contaminate her alliance by the exertion of honest industry.
This humble creature was of a uniformly cheerful and active disposition,
unacquainted alike with the cares of wealth, and the pressure of misfortune.
Though her pretensions were small, and her information slender, she was by no
means deficient in penetration. She saw the faults and follies of mankind with
a judging eye; but her temper was of so mild and forgiving a cast, as would
have induced most persons to believe that she perceived nothing of the matter.
Her heart overflowed with the m^^k of kindness. She was sincere and ardent in
her attachments, and never did she omit a service which she perceived herself
able to render to a human being. I found her willing and alert to enter into
(...) I proposed to her. That I might anticipate occasions of suspicion, I
frankly told her that, (...) reasons which I wished to be excused from
relating, but which, if related, I was sure would not deprive me of her good
opinion, I found it necessary for the present to keep myself private. With this
statement she readily acquiesced, and told me that she had no desire for any
farther information than I found it expedient to give.

My first productions were of the poetical kind. After having finished two or
three, I directed this generous friend to take them to the office of a
newspaper; but they were rejected with contempt by the Aristarchus of that
place, who, having bestowed on them a superficial glance, told her that such
matters were not at all in his way. I cannot help mentioning in this place that
the countenance of Mrs. Marney (that was the name of my ambassadress) was in
all cases a perfect indication of her success, and rendered explanation by
words wholly unnecessary. She interested herself so unreservedly in what she
undertook, that she felt either miscarriage or good fortune much more
exquisitely than I did. I had an unhesitating confidence in my own resources,
and, occupied as I was in the meditation of more interesting concerns, regarded
these matters as altogether trivial.

I quietly took the pieces back, and laid them upon my table. Upon revisal I
altered and transcribed one of them, and, joining it with two others,
dispatched them together to the editor of a magazine. He desired they might be
left with him till the day after tomorrow. When that day ^^me, he told my
friend they should be inserted; but, Mrs Marney asking respecting the price, he
replied, it was their constant rule to give nothing for poetical compositions,
the letter-box being always full of writings of that sort; but, if the
gentleman would try his hand in prose, a short essay or a tale, he would see
what he could do for him.

With the requisition of my literary dictated I immediately complied. I
attempted a paper in the style of Addison's Spectators, which was accepted. In
a short time I was upon an established footing in this quarter. I however
distrusted my resources in the way of moral disquisition, and soon turned my
thoughts to his other suggestion, a tale. His demands upon me were now
frequent, and to facilitate my labor I bethought myself of the resource of
translation. I had scarcely any convenience with respect to the procuring of
books; but, as my memory was very retentive, I frequently translated or
modelled my narratives upon a reading of some years before. By a fatality for
which I do not well know how to account, my thoughts frequently led me to the
histories of celebrated robbers; and I retailed from time to time incidents and
anecdotes of Cartouche, Gusman d'Alfarache, and other memorable worthies, whose
career was terminated upon the gallows or the scaffold.

CHAP. XIII.
WHILE I was thus endeavoring to occupy and provide for the intermediate
period till the violence of the pursuit after me might be a little abated, a
new source of danger opened upon me of which I had no previous suspicion.
Jones, the thief who had been expelled from captain Raymond's gang, had
fluctuated during the last years of his life, between the two professions of a
violator and a minister of executive justice. I believe he had originally
devoted himself to the first, and probably his initiation in the mysteries of
thieving qualified him to be peculiarly expert in the profession of a
thief-taker, a profession he had adopted not from choice, but necessity. In
this employment his reputation was great, though perhaps not equal to his
merits; for it happens here, as in all other departments of human society,
that, however the subalterns may furnish wisdom and skill, the principals run
away with the eclat. He was exercising this art in a very prosperous manner,
when it happened by some accident, that one or two of his achievements,
previous to his having shaken off the dregs of unlicensed depredation, were in
danger of becoming subjects of public attention. Having had repeated
intimations of this, he thought it prudent to decamp, and it was during this
period of his retreat that he entered into the -- gang.

Such was the history of this man antecedently to his being placed in the
situation in which I had first encountered him. At the time of that encounter
he was a veteran of Captain Raymond's gang; for, thieves being a short-lived
race, the character of veteran costs the less time in acquiring. Upon his
expulsion from this community he returned once more to his lawful profession,
and by his old comrades was received with congratulation as a lost sheep. In
the vulgar classes of society no length of time is sufficient to expiate a
crime; but among the fraternity of thief-takers it is a rule never to bring one
of their own brethren to a reckoning, when it can with any propriety be
avoided. Another rule observed by those who have passed through the same
gradations as Jones had done, and which was adopted by Jones himself, was
always to reserve such as had been the accomplices of their depredations to the
last, and on no account to assail them without great necessity or powerful
temptation. For this reason Captain Raymond and his confederates were,
according to Jones's system of tactics, safe, as he would have termed it, from
his retaliation.

But, though Jones was in this sense of the term a man of strict honor, my
case unfortunately did not fall within the laws of honor he acknowledged.
Misfortune had overtaken me, and I was on all sides without protection or
shelter. The persecution to which I was exposed was founded upon the
supposition of my having committed felony to an immense amount. But in this
Jones had had no participation; he was careless whether the supposition were
true or false, and hated me as much as if my innocence had been established
beyond the reach of so much as a whisper of suspicion. The blood-hunters who
had taken me into custody at --, related, as usual, among their fraternity a
part of their adventure, and told of the reason which inclined them to suppose,
that the individual who had passed through their custody, was the very Caleb
Williams for whose apprehension a reward had been offered of a hundred guineas.
Jones, whose acuteness was eminent in the way of his profession, by comparing
facts and dates was induced to suspect in his own mind that Caleb Williams was
the person he had hustled and wounded upon -- forest. Against that person he
entertained the bitterest aversion. I had been the innocent occasion of his
being expelled with disgrace from Captain Raymond's gang; and Jones, as I
afterward understood, was intimately persuaded that there was no comparison
between the liberal and manly profession of a robber, from which I had driven
him, and the sordid and mechanical occupation of a blood-hunter, to which he
was obliged to return. He no sooner received the information I have mentioned,
than he vowed revenge. He determined to leave all other objects, and consecrate
every faculty of his mind to the unkenneling me from my hiding place. The
offered reward, which his vanity made him consider as assuredly his own,
appeared as the complete indemnification of his labor and expense. Thus I had
to encounter the sagacity he possessed in the way of his profession, whetted
and stimulated by a sentiment of vengeance in a mind that knew no restraint
from conscience or humanity.

The first step he pursued in execution of his project, was to set out for the
seaport town where I had formerly been apprehended. From thence he traced me
to the banks of the Severn, and from the banks of the Severn to London. It is
scarcely necessary to observe that this is always practicable, unless the
precautions of the fugitive be in the highest degree both judicious in the
conception and fortunate in the execution, -- provided the pursuer have motives
strong enough to excite him to perseverance. Jones indeed in the course of his
pursuit was often obliged to double his steps; and, like the harrier, an apt
emblem of a man engaged in this sanguinary occupation, whenever he was at a
fault, returned to the place where he had last perceived the scent of the
animal whose death he had decreed. He spared neither pains nor time in the
gratification of the passion which choice had made his ruling one.

Upon my arrival in town he for a moment lost all trace of me, London being a
place in which, on account of the magnitude of its dimensions, it might well be
supposed that an individual could remain hidden and unknown. But no difficulty
could discourage this new adversary. He went from inn to inn, reasonably
supposing that there was no private house to which I could immediately repair,
till he found, by the description he gave, and the sentiments he excited, that
I had slept for one night in the borough of Southwark. But he could get no
farther information. The people of the inn had no knowledge what had become of
me the next morning. This however did but render him more eager in his pursuit.
The describing me was now more difficult, on account of the partial change of
my dress I had made the second day of my being in town. But Jones at length
overcame the obstacle from that quarter. Having traced me to my second inn, he
was here furnished with a more copious information. I had been a subject of
speculation for the leisure hours of some of the persons belonging to this inn.
An old woman of a most curious and loquacious disposition who lived opposite to
it, and who that morning rose early to her washing, had espied me from her
window by the light of a large lamp which hung over the inn, as I issued from
the gate. She had but a very imperfect view of me, but she thought there was
something Jewish in my appearance. She was accustomed to hold a conference
every morning with the landlady of the inn, some of the waiters and
chambermaids occasionally assisting at it. In the course of the dialogue of
this morning she asked some questions about the Jew who had slept there the
night before. No Jew had slept there. The curiosity of the landlady was excited
in her turn. By the time of the morning it could be no one but me. It was very
strange! They compared notes respecting my appearance and dress. No two things
could be more dissimilar. The Jew-Christian, upon any dearth of subjects of
intelligence, repeatedly furnished matter for their discourse.

The information thus afforded to Jones, appeared exceedingly material. But the
performance did not for some time keep pace with the promise. He could not
enter every private house into which lodgers were ever admitted, in the same
manner that he had treated the inns. He walked the streets, and examined with a
curious and inquisitive eye the countenance of every Jew about my stature; but
in vain. He repaired to Duke's Place and the synagogues. It was not here that
in reality he could calculate upon finding me; but he resorted to these means
in despair and as a last hope. He was more than once upon the point of giving
up the pursuit; but he was recalled to it by an insatiable and restless
appetite for revenge.

It was during this perturbed and fluctuating state of his mind that he chanced
to pay a visit to a brother of his who was the head-workman of a
printing-office. There was little intercourse between these two persons, their
dispositions and habits of life being extremely dissimilar. The printer was
industrious, sober, and of a propensity to accumulation. He was extremely
dissatisfied with the character and pursuits of his brother, and had made some
ineffectual attempts to reclaim him. But, though they by no means agreed in
their habits of thinking, they sometimes saw each other. Jones loved to boast
of as many of his achievements as he dared venture to mention; and his brother
was one more hearer, in addition to the set of his usual associates. The
printer was amused, with the blunt sagacity of remark and novelty of incident
that characterised Jones's conversation. He was secretly pleased, in spite of
all his sober and church-going prejudices, that he was brother to a man of so
much ingenuity and fortitude.

After having listened for some time upon this occasion to the wonderful
stories which Jones in his rugged way condescended to tell, the printer felt an
ambition to entertain his brother in his turn. He began to retail some of my
stories of Cartouche and Gusman d'Alfarache. The attention of Jones was
excited. His first emotion was wonder; his second was envy and aversion. Where
did the printer get these stories? This question was answered. I will tell you
what, said the printer, we none of us know what to make of the writer of these
articles. He writes poetry and morality and history: I am a printer and
corrector of the press, and may pretend without vanity to be a tolerably good
judge of these matters: he writes them all to my mind extremely fine, and yet
he is no more than a Jew. [To my honest printer this seemed as strange as if
they had been written by a Cherokee chieftain at the falls of the Mississippi.]

A Jew! How do you know? Did you ever see him?

No; the matter is always brought to us by a woman. But my master hates all
mysteries; he likes to see his auth^rs themselves. So he plagues and plagues
the old woman; but he can never get any thing out of her, except that one day
she happened to drop that the young gentleman was a Jew.

A Jew! a young gentleman! a person who did every thing by proxy, and made a
secret of all his motions! Here was abundant matter for the speculations and
suspicions of Jones. He was confirmed in them, without adverting to the process
of his own mind, by the subject of my lucubrations, men who died by the hands
of the executioner. He said little more to his brother, except asking, as if
casually, what sort of an old woman this was? of what age she might be? and
whether she often brought him materials of this kind? and soon after took
occasion to leave him.

It was with vast pleasure that Jones had listened to this unhoped for
information. Having collected from his brother sufficient hints relative to the
person and appearance of Mrs. Marney, and understanding that he expected to
receive something from me the next day, Jones took his stand in the street
early that he might not risk miscarriage by negligence. He waited several
hours, but not without success. Mrs. Marney came; he watched her into the
house; and after about twenty minutes delay saw her return. He dogged her from
street to street; observed her finally enter the door of a private house; and
congratulated himself upon having at length arrived at the consummation of his
labors.

The house she entered was not her own habitation. By a sort of miraculous
accident she had observed Jones following her in the street. As she went home,
she saw a woman who had fallen down in a fainting fit. Moved by the compassion
that was ever alive in her, she approached her in order to render her
assistance. Presently a crowd collected round them. Mrs. Marney having done
what she was able, once more proceeded homewards. Observing the crowd round
her, the idea of pickpockets occurred to her mind; she put her hands to her
sides, and at the same time looked round upon the populace. She had left the
circle somewhat abruptly; and Jones, who had been obliged to come nearer lest
he should lose her in the confusion, was at that moment standing exactly
opposite to her. His visage was of the most extraordinary kind; habit had
written the characters of malignant cunning and dauntless effrontery in every
line of his face; and Mrs. Marney, who was neither philosopher nor
physiognomist, was nevertheless struck. This good woman, like most persons of
her notable character, had a peculiar way of going home, not through the open
streets, but by narrow lanes and alleys, with intricate insertions and sudden
turnings. In one of these by some accident she once again caught a glance of
her pursuer. This circumstance, together with the singularity of his
appearance, awakened her conjectures. Could he be following her? It was the
middle of the day, and she could have no fears for herself. But could this
circumstance have any reference to me? She recollected the precautions and
secrecy I practiced, and had no doubt that I had reasons for what I did. She
recollected that she had always been upon her guard respecting me; but had she
been sufficiently so? She thought that, if she should be the means of any
mischief to me, she should be miserable for ever. She determined therefore by
way of precaution in case of the worst, to call at a friend's house, and send
me word of what had occurred. Having instructed her friend, she went out
immediately upon a visit to a person in the exactly opposite direction, and
desired her friend to proceed upon the errand to me, five minutes after she
left the house. By this prude^^ she completely extricated me from the present
danger.

Meantime the intelligence that was brought me by no means ascertained the
greatness of the danger. For any thing I could discover in it, the circumstance
might be perfectly innocent, and the fear solely proceed from the over caution
and kindness of this benevolent and excellent woman. Yet such was the misery of
my situation, that I had no choice. For this menace or no menace, I was obliged
to desert my habitation at a minute's warning, taking with me nothing but what
I could carry in my hand; to see my generous benefactress no more; to quit my
little arrangements and provision; and to seek once again in some forlorn
retreat new projects and, if of that I could have any rational hope, a new
friend: I descended into the street with a heavy, not an irresolute heart. It
was broad day. I said, Persons are at this moment supposed to be roaming the
street in search of me: I must not trust to the chance of their pursuing one
direction, and I another. I traversed half a dozen streets, and then dropped
into an obscure house of entertainment for persons of small expense. In this
house I took some refreshment, passed several hours of active, but melancholy
thinking, and at last procured a bed. As soon however as it was dark, I went
out (for this was indispensable) to purchase the materials of a new disguise.
Having adjusted it as well as I could during the night, I left this asylum with
the same precautions that I had employed in former instances.

CHAP. XIV.
I PROCURED a new lodging. I became more cautious, and went out seldomer than
ever. By some bias of the mind it may be, gratifying itself with images of
peril, I inclined upon the whole to believe that Mrs. Marney's alarm had not
been without foundation. I was however unable to conjecture through what means
danger had approached me; and had therefore only the unsatisfactory remedy of
redoubling my watch upon all my actions. Still I had the joint considerations
pressing upon me of security and subsistence. I had some small remains of the
produce of my former industry; but this was but small, for my employer was in
arrear with me, and I did not choose in any method to apply to him for payment.
The anxieties of my mind in spite of all my struggles preyed upon my heath. I
did not consider myself as in safety for an instant. My appearance was wasted
to a shadow; and I started at every sound that was unexpected. Sometimes I was
half tempted to resign myself into the hands of the law, and brave its worst;
but resentment and indignation at those times speedily flowed back upon my
mind, and re-animated my perseverance.

I knew no better resource with respect to subsistence, than that I had
employed in the former instance, of seeking some third person to stand between
me and the disposal of my industry. I might find an individual ready to
undertake this office in my behalf, but where should I find the benevolent soul
of Mrs. Marney? The person I fixed upon was a Mr. Spurrel, a man who took in
work from the watch-makers, and had an apartment upon our second floor. I
examined him two or three times with irresolute glances, as we passed upon the
stairs, before I would venture to accost him. He observed this, and at length
kindly invited me into his apartment.

Being seated, he condoled with me upon my seeming bad health, and the solitary
mode of my living, and wished to know whether he could be of any service to me.
From the first moment he saw me, he had conceived an affection for me. In my
present disguise I appeared twisted and deformed, and in other respects by no
means an object of attraction. But it seemed, Mr. Spurrel had lost an only son
about six months before, and I was the very picture of him. If I had put off my
counterfeited ugliness, I should probably have l^st all hold upon his
affections. He was now an old man, as he observed, just dropping into the
grave, and this son had been his only consolation. The poor lad was always
ailing, but he had been a nurse to him; and the more care he required while he
was alive, the more he missed him now he was dead. Now he had not a friend, nor
any body that cared for him in the whole world. If I pleased, I should be
instead of that son to him, and he would treat me in all respects with the same
attention and care.

I expressed my sense of these benevolent offers; but told him that I should be
sorry to be in any way burdensome to him. My ideas at present led me to a
private and solitary life, and my chief difficulty was to reconcile this with
some mode of earning necessary subsistence. If he would condescend to lend me
his assistance in smoothing this difficulty, it would be the greatest benefit
he could confer on me. I told him that my mind had always had a mechanical and
industrious turn, and that I did not doubt of soon mastering any craft to which
I seriously applied myself. I had not been brought up to any trade; but, if he
would favor me with his instructions, I would work with him as long as he
pleased for a bare subsistence. I knew that I was asking of him an
extraordinary kindness, but I was urged on the one hand by extreme and
unmitigable necessity, and encouraged on the other by the persuasiveness of his
friendly professions.

The old man dropped some tears over my apparent distress, and readily
consented to every thing I proposed. Our agreement was soon made, and I entered
upon my functions accordingly. My new friend was a man of a singular turn of
mind. Love of money and a charitable officiousness of demeanor were his
leading characteristics. He lived in the most penurious manner, and denied
himself almost every indulgence. I entitled myself almost immediately, as he
frankly acknowledged, to some remuneration for my labors, and accordingly he
insisted upon my being paid. He did not however, as some persons would have
done under the circumstances I have described, pay me the whole amount of my
earnings, but professed to subtract from them twenty per cent. as an equitable
consideration for instruction and commission-money in procuring me a channel
for my industry. Yet he frequently shed tears over me, was uneasy in every
moment of our indispensable separation, and exhibited perpetual tokens of
attachment and fondness.

I had not been long in this new situation, before an incident occurred which
filled me with greater alarm and apprehension than ever. I was walking out one
evening for an hour's exercise and air, an indulgence in which I now scarcely
ever allowed myself, when my ear was struck with two or three casual sounds
from the mouth of a hawker who was bawling his wares. I stood still to inform
myself more exactly, when to my utter astonishment and confusion I heard him
deliver himself nearly in these words. "Here you have the Most Wonderful and
Surprising History, and Miraculous Adventures of Caleb Williams! you are
informed how he first robbed, and then brought false accusations against his
master; as also of his attempting diverse times to break out of prison, till at
last he effected his escape in the most wonderful and uncredible manner; as
also of his traveling the kingdom in various disguises, and the robberies he
committed with a most desperate and daring gang of thieves; and of his coming
up to London, where it is supposed he now lies concealed; with a true and
faithful copy of the hue and cry printed and published by one of his majesty's
most principal secretaries of state, offering a reward of one hundred guineas
for apprehending him. All for the price of one halfpenny."

Petrified as I was at these amazing and dreadful sounds, I had the temerity to
go up to the man and purchase one of his papers, desperately resolved to know
the exact state of the fact, and what I had to depend upon. I carried it with
me a little way, till, no longer able to endure my impatience, I contrived to
make out the chief part of its contents by the help of a lamp, at the upper end
of a narrow passage. I found it contain a greater number of circumstances than
could have been expected in this species of publication. I was equalled to the
most notorious house-breaker in the art of penetrating through walls and doors,
and to the most accomplished swindler in plausibleness, duplicity and disguise.
The hand-bill which Wilson had first brought to us upon the forest, was printed
at length. All my disguises, previously to the last alarm that had been given
me by the providence of Mrs. Marney, were faithfully enumerated; and the public
was warned to be upon their watch against a person of an uncouth and
extraordinary appearance, and who lived in a recluse and solitary manner. I
also learned from this paper that my former lodgings had been searched on the
very evening of my escape, and that Mrs. Marney had been sent to Newgate upon a
charge of misprision of felony. -- This last circumstance affected me deeply.
It was a most cruel and intolerable idea, if I were not only myself to be an
object of unrelenting persecution, but my very touch were to be infectious, and
every one that succored me to be involved in the common ruin. I could almost
have consented to undergo the utmost malice of my enemies, could I by that
means have saved this excellent woman from an hour's distress. -- I afterward
learned that Mrs. Marney was delivered from confinement by the interposition of
her noble relation.

This paper was the consummation of my misfortune. Nothing could happen beyond
it but the actual apprehension with which I was menaced. Disguise was no longer
of use to me. A numerous class of individuals, through every department, almost
every house of the metropolis, would be induced to look with a suspicious eye
upon every stranger, especially every solitary stranger, that fell under their
observation. The prize of one hundred guineas was held out to excite their
cupidity, and sharpen their penetration. It was no longer Bow-Street, it was a
million of men, in arms against me. Neither had I the refuge, which few men
have been so miserable as to want, of one single individual with whom to repose
my alarms, and who might shelter me from the gaze of indiscriminate curiosity.
I instantly saw that London was no place for my abode, at the same time that I
apprehended increase of peril in any attempt to withdraw from it. I resolved
however that I would no longer submit to this state of terrific alarm. I
resolved that I would not remain quiescent, till mischief should overtake and
devour me. I could scarcely reduce things to a more miserable pass. "To be
worse than this, were not to be at all."

Filled with reflections of this nature, I carefully and deliberately destroyed
the paper I had been reading, by tearing it in a thousand pieces. I did not
return home, but went instantly to the waterside. I found that the cheapest
passage I could procure was in a vessel, moored near the Tower, and which was
to sail in a few days for Middleburg in Holland. I would have gone instantly on
board and endeavored to prevail with the captain to let me remain there till
he sailed; but that unfortunately I had not money enough in my pocket to defray
my passage. It was worse than this. I had not money enough in the world. I
however paid the captain half his demand, and promised to return with the rest.
I knew not in what manner it was to be procured, but I believed that I would
not fail to procure it. I had some idea of borrowing it of Mr. Spurrel. Surely
he would not refuse me? He appeared to love me with parental affection, and I
thought I might trust myself for a moment in his hands.

I approached my own home with a heavy and foreboding heart. Mr. Spurrel was
not at home; and I was obliged to wait for his return. I had work of his in my
trunk, which had been delivered out to me that very morning, to five times the
amount I wanted. I even canvassed for a moment whether I should make use of
this property as if it were my own; but I rejected the idea with disdain. I had
never in the smallest degree merited the reproaches that were cast upon me; and
I was determined I never would merit them. It was extraordinary that Mr.
Spurrel should be abroad at this hour; I had never known it happen before. His
bedtime was between nine and ten. Ten o'clock came, eleven o'clock, but not
Mr. Spurrel. At midnight I heard his knock at the door. Every soul in the house
was in bed. Mr. Spurrel, on account of his regular hours, was unprovided with a
key to open for himself. A gleam of gaiety and the social spirit came over my
heart. I flew nimbly down the stairs, and opened the door to him myself.

I could perceive by the little taper in my hand something extraordinary
written in his countenance. I had not time to speak, before I saw two other men
follow him. At the first glance I was sufficiently assured what sort of persons
they were. At the second I perceived that one of them was no other than Jones
himself. I had understood formerly that he had been of this profession, and I
was not much surprised to find him in it again. Though I had for some hours
made up my mind as it were, to the unavoidable necessity of my once more
falling into the hands of the officers of law, yet I could not see them enter
without feeling my very heart ache in my bosom. I was beside not a little
surprised at the time and manner of their entrance, and desirous to learn
whether Mr. Spurrel could be base enough to have been their introducer.

I was not long held in perplexity. He no sooner saw his two followers properly
within the door, than he exclaimed with convulsive eagerness, There, there,
that is your man! thank God! thank God! Jones looked eagerly in my face, with a
countenance expressive alternately of hope and doubt, and answered, By G --,
and I do not know whether it be or no! I am afraid we are in the wrong box!
then recollecting himself, We will go into the house, and examine farther
however. We all went up stairs into Mr. Spurrel's room; I set down the candle
upon the table. I had hitherto been silent; but now, with a calm and deliberate
manner, in my feigned voice, one of the characteristics of which was lisping, I
asked, And pray, gentlemen, what may be your pleasure with me? Why, said Jones,
our errand is with one Caleb Williams, and a precious rascal he is! I ought to
know the chap well enough; but they say he has as many faces as there are days
in the year. So you please to pull off your face; or if you cannot do that, at
least you can put off your clothes, and let us see what your hump is made of.

I remonstrated, but in vain. I stood detected in part of my artifice; and
Jones, though still uncertain, was every moment more and more confirmed in his
suspicions. Mr. Spurrel perfectly gloted, with eyes that seemed ready to devour
every thing that passed. As my imposture gradually appeared more palpable, he
repeated his exclamation, Thank God! thank God! At last, tired with this scene
of mummery, and disgusted beyond measure with the base and hypocritical figure
I seemed to exhibit, I exclaimed, Well, I am Caleb Williams; conduct me
wherever you please! And now, Mr. Spurrel --! He gave a violent start. The
instant I declared myself his transport had been at the highest, and was, to
any power he was able to exert, absolutely uncontrollable. But the
unexpectedness of my address, and the tone in which I spoke, electrified him.
-- Is it possible, continued I, that you should have been the wretch to betray
me? What had I done to deserve this treatment? Is this the kindness you
professed? the affection that was perpetually in your mouth? to be the death of
me!

My poor boy! my dear creature! cried Spurrel, whimpering, and in a tone of the
humblest expostulation, indeed I could not help it! I would have helped it, if
I could! I hope they will not hurt my darling! I am sure, I shall die if they
do!

Miserable driveller! interrupted I, with a stern voice, do you betray me into
the gore-dripping fangs of the law, and then talk of my not being hurt? I know
my sentence, and am prepared to meet it! You have fixed the halter upon my
neck, and at the same price would have done so to your only son! Go, count your
accursed guineas! My life would have been safer in the hands of one I had never
seen, than in yours, whose mouth and whose eyes for ever ran over with
crocodile affection!

CHAP. XV.
SAYING this, I left him with ineffable contempt, unable to utter a word. Jones
and his companion attended me. It is unnecessary to repeat all the insolence of
this man. He alternately triumphed in the completion of his revenge, and
regretted the loss of the reward to the shrivelled old curmudgeon we had just
quitted, whom however he swore he would cheat of it, if he could. He equally
regretted the imperfect way in which his skill had been cut off; boastfully
recounting how he had ferreted me thus far, and bitterly lamenting that the
whole had not been left to him, which in a day or two he would infallibly have
accomplished.

I paid but little attention to his story. It struck upon my sense, and I was
able to recollect it at my nearest leisure, though I thought not of it at the
time. For the present I was busily employed reflecting on my new situation, and
the conduct to be observed in it. My prospects were particularly gloomy and
discouraging. How much labor had I exerted, first to extricate myself from
prison, and next to evade the diligence of my pursuers; and the result of all,
after months of anxiety and diligence, was, to be brought back to the point
from which I began! I had gained fame indeed, the miserable fame to have my
story bawled forth by hawkers and ballad-mongers, to have my praises as an
active and surprising villain celebrated among footmen and chambermaids; but I
was neither an Erostratus nor an Alexander, to die contented with that species
of eulogium. With respect to all that was solid and desirable, what chance
could I ascribe to new exertions of a similar nature; which, if undertaken at
all, must be undertaken with infinitely more unfavourable auspices?

They were considerations like these that dictated my resolution. My mind had
been gradually weaning from Mr. Falkland, till its feelings rose to something
like abhorrence. I had long cherished a reverence for him, which not even
animosity and persecution on his part could readily destroy. But I now ascribed
a character so inhumanly sanguinary to his mind; I saw something so fiend-like
in the thus hunting me round the world, and determining to be satisfied with
nothing less than my blood, while at the same time he knew my innocence, my
innoxiousness, nay I might add my virtues; that henceforth I trampled reverence
and the recollection of former esteem under my feet. I lost all regard to his
intellectual greatness, and all pity for the torture and agonies of his soul. I
also would abjure forbearance. I would show myself bitter and inflexible as he
had done. Was it wise in him to compel me into extremity and madness? Had he no
fears for his own secret and atrocious offenses?

I went before the magistrates to whose office Jones and his comrade conducted
me, fully determined to publish those astonishing secrets, of which I had
hitherto been the faithful depository; and once for all to turn the tables upon
my accuser. It was time that the real criminal should be the sufferer, and not
that innocence should for ever labor under the oppression of guilt. I had been
obliged to spend the remainder of the night upon which I had been apprehended
in prison. During the interval I had thrown off every vestige of disguise, and
appeared the next morning in my own person. I was of course easily identified;
and, this being the whole with which the magistrates before whom I now stood
thought themselves concerned, they were proceeding to make out an order for my
being conducted back to my own county. I suspended the dispatch of this measure
by observing that I had something to disclose. This is an overture to which men
appointed for the administration of criminal justice never fail to attend.

I said that I had always protested my innocence, and must now repeat the
protest.

In that case, retorted the senior magistrate abruptly, what can you have to
disclose? If you are innocent, that is no business of ours! We act officially.

I always declared, continued I, that I was the perpetrator of no guilt, but
that the guilt wholly belonged to my accuser. He privately conveyed these
effects among my property, and then charged me with the robbery. I now declare
more than that, that this man is a MURDERER, that I detected his criminality,
and that for that reason he is determined to deprive me of life. I presume,
gentlemen, that you do consider it as your business to take this declaration. I
am persuaded you will be by no means disposed actively or passively to
contribute to the atrocious injustice under which I suffer, to the imprisonment
and condemnation of an innocent man in order that a murderer may go free. I
suppressed this story as long as I could. I was extremely averse to be the
author of the unhappiness or the death of a human being. But all patience and
submission have their limits.

Give me leave, sir, rejoined the magistrate with an air of affected
moderation, to ask you two questions. Were you any way aiding, abetting, or
contributing to this murder?

No.

And pray, sir, who is this Mr. Falkland, and what may have been the nature of
your connection with him?

Mr. Falkland is a gentleman of six thousand per annum. I lived with him as his
secretary.

In other words you were his servant?

As you please.

Very well, sir, that is quite enough for me. First I have to tell you as a
magistrate, that I can have nothing to do with your declaration. If you had
been concerned in the murder you talk of, that would alter the case. But it is
out of all reasonable rule for a magtstrate to take an information from a
felon, except against his accomplices. Next I think it right to observe to you
in my own proper person, that you appear to me to be the most impudent rascal I
ever saw. Why, are you such an ass as to suppose, that the sort of story you
have been telling, can be of any service to you, either here, or at the
assizes, or any where else? A fine time of it indeed it would be, if, when
gentlemen of six thousand a year take up their servants for robbing them, those
servants could trump up such accusations as these, and could get any magistrate
or court of justice to listen to them! Whether or no the felony with which you
stand charged would have brought you to the gallows, I will not pretend to say.
But I am sure this story will. There would be a speedy end to all order and
good government, if fellows that trample upon ranks and distinctions in this
atrocious sort, were upon any consideration suffered to get off.

And do you refuse, sir, to attend to the particulars of the charge I allege?

Yes, sir, I do. -- But, if I did not, pray what witnesses have you of the
murder?

This question staggered me.

None. -- But I believe I can make out a circumstantial proof of a nature to
force attention from the most indifferent hearer.

I thought so. -- Officers, take him from the bar.

Such was the success of this ultimate resort on my part, upon which I had
built with such undoubting confidence. Till now I had conceived that the
unfavourable situation in which I was placed was prolonged by my own
forbearance; and I was determined to endure all that human nature could
support, rather than have recourse to this extreme recrimination. That idea
secretly consoled me under all my calamities: a voluntary sacrifice is
cheerfully made. I regarded myself as allied to the army of martyrs and
confessors; I applauded my own fortitude and self-denial; and I pleased myself
with the idea, that I had the power, though I hoped never to employ it, by an
unrelenting display of all my resources to put an end at once to my sufferings
and persecutions.

And this at last was the justice of mankind. A man under certain circumstances
shall not be heard in the detection of a crime, because he has not been a
participator of it! The story of a flagitious murder shall be listened to with
indifference, while an innocent man is hunted like a wild beast to the farthest
corners of the earth! Six thousand a year shall protect a man from accusation;
and the validity of an impeachment shall be superseded, because the author of
it is a servant!

I was conducted back to the very prison from which a few months before I had
made my escape. My prospects were more gloomy, and my situation apparently more
irremediable than ever. I was exposed again, if that were of any account, to
the insolence and tyranny that are uniformly exercised within those walls. Why
should I repeat the loathsome tale of all that was endured by me, and is
endured by every man who is unhappy enough to fall under the government of
these consecrated ministers of national jurisprudence? The sufferings I had
already experienced, my anxieties, my flight, the perpetual expectation of
being discovered, worse than the discovery itself, would perhaps have been
enough to satisfy the most insensible individual in the court of his own
conscience, if I had even been the felon I was pretended to be. But the law has
neither eyes, nor ears, nor bowels of humanity; and it turns into marble the
hearts of all those that are nursed in its principles.

Yet I was not cast down. I resolved that, while I had life, I would never
despair. Oppressed, annihilated I might be; but if I died, I would die
resisting. What use, what advantage, what pleasurable sentiment could arise
from a tame surrender? There is no man that is ignorant, that to humble
yourself at the feet of the law is a bootless task; in her courts there is no
room for amendment and reformation.

My fortitude may to some persons appear above the standard of human nature.
But, if I draw back the veil from my heart, they will readily confess their
mistake. My heart bled at every pore. My resolution was not the calm sentiment
of philosophy and reason. It was a gloomy and desperate purpose; the creature,
not of hope, but of a mind austerely held to its design, that thought itself
satisfied with the naked effort, and prepared to give success or miscarriage to
the winds. It was to this miserable condition, which might awaken sympathy in
the most hardened bosom, that Mr. Falkland had reduced me.

I anticipated the event of my trial. I was determined once more to escape from
my prison, nor did I doubt of my ability to effect at least this first step
toward my future preservation. The assizes, however, were near, and there were
certain considerations, unnecessary to be detailed, that persuaded me there
might be benefit in waiting till my trial should actually be terminated, before
I made my attempt. It stood upon the list as one of the latest to be brought
forward. I was therefore extremely surprised to find it called out of its order
early on the morning of the second day. But, if this were unexpected, how much
greater was my astonishment, when my prosecutor was called, to find neither Mr.
Falkland nor Mr. Forester, nor a single individual of any description appear
against me! The recognizances into which my prosecutors had entered were
ordered to be forfeited, and I was dismissed without further impediment from
the bar.

The effect which this incredible reverse produced upon my mind was as if I had
fallen from the elevation of the most distant planet in the system upon our
earth in a moment. I, who had come to that bar with the sentence of death
already in idea ringing in my ears, to be told that I was free to transport
myself whithersoever I pleased! Was it for this that I had broken through so
many locks, and bolts, and the adamantine walls of my prison; that I had passed
so many anxious days, and sleepless, spectrehaunted nights; that I had racked
my invention for expedients of evasion and concealment; that my mind had been
roused to an energy of which I could scarcely have believed it capable; that my
existence had been enthralled to an ever-living torment such as I could hardly
have supposed it in man to endure? Great God! what is man? Is he thus blind to
the future, thus totally unsuspecting of what is to occur in the next moment of
his existence? I have somewhere read that heaven in mercy hides from us the
future incidents of our life. My own experience does not well accord with this
assertion. In this instance at least I should have been saved from
insupportable labor and undescribable anguish, could I have foreseen the
catastrophe of this most interesting transaction.

CHAP. XVI.
IT was not long before I took my everlasting leave of this detested and
miserable scene. My heart was for the present too full of astonishment and
exultation in this unexpected deliverance, to admit of anxiety about the
future. I withdrew from the town. I rambled with a slow and thoughtful pace,
now bursting with exclamation, and now buried in profound and undefinable
reverie. Accident led me toward the very heath which had first sheltered me,
when upon a former occasion I broke out of my prison. I wandered among its
cavities and its valleys. It was a forlorn and desolate solitude. I continued
here I know not how long. Night at length overtook me unperceived, and I
prepared to return for the present to the town I had quitted.

It was now perfectly dark, when two men whom I had not previously observed
sprung upon me from behind. They seized me by the arms, and threw me upon the
ground. I had no time for resistance or recollection. I could however perceive
that one of them was the diabolical Jones. They blindfolded, gagged me, and
hurried me I knew not whither. As we passed along in silence, I endeavored to
conjecture what could be the meaning of this extraordinary violence. I was
strongly impressed with the idea that, after the event of this morning, the
most severe and painful part of my history was past; nor could I persuade
myself to shrink with alarm at this unexpected attack. It might however be some
new project suggested by the brutal unrelenting temper and animosity of Jones.

I presently found that we were returned into the town I had just quitted. They
led me into a house, and, as soon as they had taken possession of a room, freed
me from the restraints they had before imposed. Here Jones informed me with a
malicious grin, that no harm was intended me, and therefore I should show most
sense in keeping myself quiet. I perceived that we were in an inn; I overheard
company in a room at no great distance from us, and therefore was myself as
thoroughly aware as he could be, that there was at present little reason to
stand in fear of any species of violence, and that it would be time enough to
resist, when they attempted to conduct me from the inn in the same manner that
they had brought me into it. I was not without some curiosity to see the
conclusion that was to follow upon so extraordinary a commencement.

The preliminaries I have described were scarcely completed, before Mr.
Falkland entered the room. I remember Collins, when he first communicated to me
the particulars of our patron's history, observed that he was totally unlike
the man he had once been. I had no means of ascertaining the truth of that
observation. But it was strikingly applicable to the spectacle which now
presented itself to my eyes, though, when I last beheld this unhappy man, he
had been a victim to the same passions, a prey to the same undying remorse as
now. Misery was at that time inscribed in legible characters upon his
countenance. But now he appeared like nothing that had ever been visible in
human shape. His visage was haggard, emaciated, and fleshless. His complexion
was a dun and tarnished red, the color uniform through every region of the
face, and suggested the idea of its being burnt and parched by the eternal fire
that burned within him. His eyes were red, quick, wandering, full of suspicion
and rage. His hair was neglected, ragged, and floating. His whole figure was
thin to a degree that suggested the idea rather of a skeleton than a person
actually alive. Life seemed hardly to be the capable inhabitant of so
woe-begone and ghost-like a figure. The taper of wholesome life was expired;
but passion and fierceness and frenzy were able for the present to supply its
place.

I was to the utmost degree astonished and shocked at the sight of him. -- He
sternly commanded my conductors to leave the room

Well, sir, I have this day successfully exerted myself to save your life from
the gallows. A fortnight ago you did what you were able to bring my life to
that ignominious close.

Were you so stupid and undistinguishing as not to know that the preservation
of your life was the uniform object of my exertions? Did not I maintain you in
prison? Did not I endeavor to prevent your being sent thither? Could you
mistake the bigoted and obstinate conduct of Forester in offering a hundred
guineas for your apprehension for mine?

I had my eye-upon you in all your wanderings. You have taken no material step
through their whole course with which I have not been acquainted. I meditated
to do you good. I have spilled no blood but that of Tyrrell: that was in the
moment of passion, and it has been the subject of my uninterrupted and hourly
remorse. I have connived at no man's ^ate but that of the Hawkinses: they could
no otherwise have been saved than by acknowledging myself a murderer. The rest
of my life has all been spent in acts of benevolence. I meditated to do you
good. For that reason I was willing to prove you. You pretended to act toward
me with consideration and forbearance. If you had persisted in that to the end,
I would yet have found a way to reward you I left you to your own discretion.
You might show the impotent malignity of your own heart, but in the
circumstances in which you were then placed I knew you could not hurt me. Your
forbearance has proved, as I all along suspected, empty and treacherous. You
have attempted to blast my reputation. You have sought to disclose the select
and eternal secret of my soul. Because you have done that, I will never forgive
you. I will remember it to my latest breath. The memory shall survive me, when
my existence is no more. Do you think you are out of the reach of my power,
because a court of justice has acquitted you?

While Mr. Falkland was speaking, a sudden distemper came over his countenance,
his whole frame was shaken by an instantaneous convulsion, and he staggered to
a chair. In about three minutes he recovered.

Yes, said he, I am still alive. I shall live for days and months and years;
the power that made me, of whatever kind it be, can only determine how long. I
live the guardian of my reputation. That, and to endure a misery such as man
never endured, are the only ends to which I live. But, when I am no more, my
fame shall still survive. My character shall be revered, as spotless and
unimpeachable by all posterity, as long as the name of Falkland shall be
repeated in the most distant region of the many-peopled globe.

Having said this, he retu^ned to the discourse which more immediately related
to my future condition and happiness.

There is one condition, said he, upon which you may obtain some mitigation of
your future calamity. It is for that purpose that I have sent for you. Listen
to my proposals with deliberation and sobriety! Remember, that the insanity is
not less to trifle with the resolved determination of my soul, than it would be
to pull a mountain upon your head that hung trembling upon the edge of the
mighty Appenine!

I insist then upon your signing a paper declaring in the most solemn manner
that I am innocent of murder, and that the charge you alleged at the office in
Bow-street is false, malicious and groundless. Perhaps you may scruple out of a
regard to truth. Is truth then entitled to adoration for its own sake, and not
for the sake of the happiness it is calculated to produce? Will a reasonable
man sacrifice to barren truth, when benevolence, humanity and every
consideration that is dear to the human heart require that it should be
superseded! It is probable that I may never make use of this paper, but I
require it as the only practicable reparation to the honor you have assailed.
This is what I had to propose. I expect your answer.

Sir, answered I, I have heard you to an end, and I stand in need of no
deliberation to enable me to answer you in the negative. You took me up a raw
and inexperienced boy, capable of being molded to any form you pleased. But
you have communicated to me volumes of experience in a very short period. I am
no longer irresolute and pliable. What is the power you retain over my fate I
am unable to discover. You may destroy me; but you cannot make me tremble. I am
not concerned to enquire whether what I have suffered flowed from you by design
or otherwise, whether you were the author of my miseries or only connived at
them. This I know, that I have suffered too exquisitely on your account, for me
to feel the least remaining claim on your part to my making any voluntary
sacrifice.

You say that benevolence and humanity require this sacrifice of me. No. It
would only be a sacrifice to your mad and misguided love of fame, to that
passion which has been the source of all your miseries, of the most tragical
calamities to others, and of every misfortune that has happened to me. I have
no forbearance to exercise toward that passion. If you be not yet cured of
this tremendous and sanguinary folly, at least I will do nothing to cherish it.
I know not whether from my youth I was destined for a hero; but I may thank you
for having taught me a lesson of insurmountable fortitude.

What is it that you require of me? That I should sign away my own reputation
for the better maintaining of yours. Where is the equality of that? What is it
that casts me at such an immense distance below you, as to make every thing
that relates to me wholly unworthy of consideration? You have been educated in
the prejudice of birth. I abhor that prejudice. You have made me desperate, and
I utter what that desperation suggests.

You will tell me perhaps that I have no reputation to lose, that, while you
are esteemed faultless and unblemished, I am universally reputed a thief, a
suborner and a calumniator. Be it so. I will never do any thing to countenance
those imputations. The more I am destitute of the esteem of mankind, the more
careful I will be to preserve my own. I will never from fear or any other
mistaken motive do any thing of which I ought to be ashamed.

You are determined to be for ever my enemy. I have in no degree deserved this
eternal abhorrence. I have always esteemed and pitied you. For a considerable
time I rather chose to expose myself to every kind of misfortune, than disclose
the secret that was so dear to you. I was not deterred by your menaces, (What
could you make me suffer more than I actually suffered?) but by the humanity of
my own heart; in which, and not in means of violence, you ought to have reposed
your confidence. What is the mysterious vengeance that you can yet execute
against me? You menaced me before; you can menace no worse now. You are wearing
out the springs of terror. Do with me as you please! You teach me to hear you
with an unshrinking and desperate firmness. Recollect yourself! I did not
proceed to the act with which you reproach me till I was apparently urged to
the very last extremity. I am now sorry that that step was ever adopted. But it
seemed that I was treated with unrelenting rigor; and, urged to exasperation
by unintermitted sufferings, I had no time to cool or to deliberate. Even at
present I cherish no vengeance against you. All that is reasonable, all that
can really contribute to your security, I will readily concede; but I will not
be driven to an act repugnant to all reason, integrity, and justice.

Mr. Falkland listened to me with astonishment and impatience. He had
entertained no previous conception of the firmness I displayed. Several times
he was convulsed with the fury that labored in his breast. Once and again he
betrayed an intention to interrupt; but he was restrained by the collectedness
of my manner, and perhaps by a desire to be acquainted with the entire state of
my mind. Finding that I had concluded, he paused for a moment; his passion
seemed gradually to enlarge, till it was no longer capable of control.

It is well! said he, gnashing his teeth, and stamping upon the ground. You
refuse the composition I offer! I have no power to persuade you to compliance!
You defy me! At least I have a power respecting you, and that power I will
exercise; a power that shall grind you into atoms. I condescend to no more
expostulation. I know what I am, and what I can be. I know what you are, and
what fate is reserved for you!

Saying this he quitted the room.

Such were the particulars of this memorable scene. The impression it has left
upon my understanding is indelible. The figure and appearance of Mr. Falkland,
his death-like weakness and decay, his more than mortal energy and rage, the
words that he spoke, the motives that animated him, produced one compounded
effect upon my mind that nothing of the same nature could ever parallel. The
idea of his misery thrilled through my frame. How weak in comparison of it is
the imaginary hell, which the great enemy of mankind is represented as carrying
every where about with him!

From this consideration my mind presently turned to the menaces he had vented
against myself. They were all mysterious and undefined. He had talked of power,
but had given no hint from which I could collect in what he imagined it to
consist. He had talked of misery, but had not dropped a syllable respecting the
nature of the misery to be inflicted.

I sat still for some time ruminating on these thoughts. Neither Mr. Falkland,
nor any other person appeared, to disturb my meditations. I rose, went out of
the room, and from the inn into the street. No one offered to molest me. It was
strange! What was the nature of this power from which I was to apprehend so
much, yet which seemed to leave me at perfect liberty? I began to imagine that
all I had heard from this dreadful adversary was mere madness and extravagance,
that he was at length deprived of the use of reason, which had long served him
only as a medium of torment. Yet was it likely in that case that he should be
able to employ Jones and his associate, who had just been his instruments of
violence upon my person?

I proceeded along the streets with considerable caution. I looked before me
and behind me, as well as the darkness would allow me to do, that I might not
again be hunted in sight by some man of stratagem and violence without my
perceiving it. I was not as before beyond the limits of the town, but
considered the streets, the houses and the inhabitants as affording some degree
of security. I was still walking with my mind thus full of suspicion and
forecast, when I discovered Thomas, that servant of Mr. Falkland whom I have
already more than once had occasion to mention. He advanced toward me with an
air so blunt and direct, as instantly to remove from me the idea of any thing
insidious in his purpose; beside that I had always felt the character of
Thomas, rustic and uncultivated as it was, to be entitled to a more than common
proportion of esteem.

Thomas, said I, as he advanced, I hope you are willing to give me joy that I
am at length delivered from the dreadful danger which for many months haunted
me so unmercifully.

No, rejoined Thomas roughly, I be not at all willing. I do not know what to
make of myself in this affair. While you were in prison in that miserable
fashion, I felt all at one almost as if I loved you: and, now that that is
over, and you are turned out loose in the world to do your worst, my blood
rises at the very sight of you. To look at you, you are almost that very lad
Williams for whom I could with pleasure as it were have laid down my life; and
yet behind that smiling face there lie robbery* and lying, and every thing that
is ungrateful and murderous Your last action was worse than all the rest How
could you find in your heart to revive that cruel story about Mr. Tyrrel, which
every body had agreed out of regard to the squire never to mention again, and
of which I know and you know he is as innocent as the child unborn? There are
causes and reasons, or else I could have wished from the bottom of my soul
never to have set eyes on you again!

And you still persist in your hard thoughts of me!

Worse! I think worse of you than ever! Before, I thought you as bad as man
could be. I wonder from my soul what you are to do next. But you make good the
old saying, When a man is once in --.

And so there is never to be an end of my misfortunes. What can Mr. Falkland
contrive for me worse than the ill opinion and enmity of all mankind?

Mr. Falkland contrive! He is the best friend you have in the world, though you
are the basest traitor to him. Poor man! it makes one's heart ache to look at
him; he is the very image of grief. And it is not clear to me that it is not
all owing to you. At least you have given the finishing blow in behalf of the
diseasethat already had him in its clutches. There have been the devil and all
to pay between him and squire Forester. The squire is right raving mad with my
master, for having outwitted him in the matter of the trial, and saved your
life. He swears that you shall be taken up and tried all over again at the next
assizes; but my master is so resolute, that I believe he will carry it his own
way. To see him ordering every thing for your benefit, and taking all your
maliciousness as mild and innocent as a lamb, and then to think of your vile
proceedings against him, is a sight one shall not see again, if one was to go
all the world over. For God's sake, repent of your reprobate doings, and make
what little reparation is in your power! Think of your poor soul, before you
awake, as to be sure one of these days you will, in fire and brimstone
everlasting!

Saying this, he held out his hand, and took hold of mine. The action seemed
strange, but I at first thought of it as the unpremeditated result of his
solemn and well-intended adjuration. I felt however that he put something into
my hand. The next moment he quitted his hold, and hastened from me with the
swiftness of an arrow. What he had thus given me was a bank-note of twenty
pounds. I had no doubt that he had been charged to deliver it to me from Mr.
Falkland.

What was I to infer? What light did it throw upon the intentions of my
inexorable persecutor? His animosity against me was as great as ever; that I
had just had confirmed to me from his own mouth. Yet his animosity appeared to
be still tempered with the remains of humanity. He prescribed to it a line wide
enough to embrace the gratification of his views, and within the boundaries of
that line it stopped. But this discovery carried no consolation to my mind. I
knew not what portion of calamity I was fated to endure, before his jealousy of
dishonor and inordinate thirst of fame would deem themselves satisfied.

Another question offered itself. Was I to receive the money which had just
been put into my hands? the money of a man, who had inflicted upon me injuries,
less than those which he had entailed upon himself, but the greatest that one
man can inflict upon another? who had blasted my youth, who had destroyed my
peace, who had held me up to the abhorrence of mankind, and rendered me an
outcast upon the face of the earth? who had forged of me the basest and most
atrocious falseshoods, and urged them with a seriousness and perseverance which
produced universal belief? who an hour before had vowed against me inexorable
enmity, and sworn to entail upon me misery without end? Would not this conduct
on my part betray a base and abject spirit, that crouched under tyranny, and
kissed the hands that were embrued in my blood?

If these reasons appeared strong, neither was the other side without reasons
in reply. I wanted the money: not for any purpose of vice or superfluity, but
for those purposes without which life cannot subsist. Man ought to be able,
wherever placed, to find for himself the means of existence: but I was to open
a new scene of life, to remove to some distant spot, to be prepared against the
illwill of mankind, and the unexplored projects of hostility of a most
accomplished foe. The actual means of existence are the property of all. What
should hinder me from taking that of which I was really in want, when in taking
it I risked no vengeance and perpetrated no violence? The property in question
will be beneficial to me, and the voluntary surrender of it is accompanied with
no injury to its late proprietor; what other condition can be necessary to
render the use of it on my part a duty? He that lately possessed it has injured
me; does that alter its value as a medium of exchange? He will boast perhaps of
the imaginary obligation he has conferred on me: Surely to shrink from a thing
in itself right, from any such apprehension, can be the result only of
pusillanimity and cowardice.

CHAP. XVII.
INFLUENCED by these reasonings, I determined to retain what had thus been put
into my hands. My next care was in regard to the scene I should choose as the
retreat of that life which I had just saved from the grasp of the executioner.
The danger to which I was exposed of forcible interruption in my pursuits was
probably in some respects less now, than it had been previously to this crisis.
Beside, that I was considerably influenced in this deliberation by the strong
loathing I conceived for the situations in which I had lately been engaged. I
knew not in what mode Mr. Falkland intended to exercise his vengeance against
me; but I was seized with so unconquerable an aversion to disguise and the idea
of spending my life in the personating a fictitious character, that I could not
for the present at least reconcile my mind to any thing of that nature. The
same kind of disgust I had conceived for the metropolis, where I had spent so
many hours of artifice and terror. I therefore decided in favor of the project
which had formerly proved amusing to my imagination, of withdrawing to some
distant, rural scene, a scene of calmness and obscurity, where for a few years
at least, perhaps during the life of Mr. Falkland, I might be hidden from the
world, recover the wounds my mind had received in this fatal connection,
methodise and improve the experience which had been accumulated, cultivate the
faculties I in any degree possessed, and employ the intervals of these
occupations in simple industry and the intercourse of guileless, uneducated,
kind-intentioned minds. The menaces of my persecutor seemed to forebode the
inevitable interruption of this system. But I deemed it wise to put these
menaces out of my consideration. I compared them to death, which must
infallibly overtake us, we know not when; but the possibility of whose arrival
next year, next week, tomorrow, must be left out of the calculation of him who
would enter upon any important or wellconcerted undertaking.

Such were the ideas that determined my choice. Thus did my youthful mind
delineate the system of distant years, even when the threats of instant
calamity still sounded in my ears. I was inured to the apprehension of
mischief, till at last the hoarse roarings of the beginning tempest had no
power to disturb my tranquillity. I however thought it necessary, while I was
apparently within the sphere of the enemy, to exert every practicable degree of
vigilance. I was careful not to incur the hazards of darkness and solitude.
When I left the town, it was with the stage-coach, an obvious source of
protection against glaring and enormous violence. Meanwhile I found myself no
more exposed to molestation in my progress, than the man in the world who
should have had the least reason for apprehensions of this nature. As the
distance increased, I relaxed something in my precaution, though still awake to
a sense of danger, and constantly pursued with the image of my foe. I fixed
upon an obscure market town in Wales as the chosen seat of my operations. This
place recommended itself to my observation, as I was wandering in quest of an
abode. It was clean, cheerful, and of great simplicity of appearance. It was at
a distance from any public and frequented road, and had nothing which could
deserve the name of trade. The face of nature around it was agreeably
diversified, being partly wild and romantic, and partly rich and abundant in
production.

Here I solicited employment in two professions; the first that of a
watch-maker, in which though the instructions I had received were but few, they
were eked out and assisted by a mind fruitful in mechanical invention; the
other that of an instructor in mathematics and its practical application,
geography, astronomy, land-surveying and navigation. Neither of these was a
very copious source of emolument in the obscure retreat I had chosen for
myself: but, if my receipts were slender, my disbursements were still fewer. In
this little town I became acquainted with the vicar, the apothecary, the
lawyer, and the rest of the persons who time out of mind had been regarded as
the top gentry of the place. Each of these centred in himself a variety of
occupations. There was little in the appearance of the vicar that reminded you
of his profession except on the recurring Sunday. At other times he
condescended with his evangelical hand to guide the plough, or to drive the
cows from the field to the farm-yard for the milking. The apothecary
occasionally officiated as a barber, and the lawyer was the village
schoolmaster.

By all these persons I was received with kindness and hospitality. Among
people thus remote from the bustle of human life there is an open spirit of
confidence, by means of which, a stranger easily finds access to their
benevolence and good will. My manners had never been greatly debauched, by the
scenes through which I had passed, from the simplicity of rural life; and the
hardships I had endured gave additional mildness to my character. In the
theater upon which I was now placed I had no rival. My mechanical occupation
had hitherto been a non-resident; and the schoolmaster, who did not aspire to
the sublime heights of science I professed to discover, was very willing to
admit me as a partner in the task of civilizing the unpolished manners of the
inhabitants. For the parson, civilisation was no part of his trade; his
business was with the things of a better life, not with the carnal concerns of
this material scene; in truth, his thoughts were principally occupied with his
oatmeal and his cows.

This scene had perhaps a more powerful handle upon my affections, than it
would have had upon those of almost any other person with my degree of
intellectual cultivation. I had had a profound experience, though a short one,
of society such as ranks and regulations have constituted it. The simple scene
of which I was now an inmate, the abode of gross and unsuspecting ignorance,
bore a kind of rude resemblance to that simplicity which seems to be the goal
of elevated and comprehensive reason. I bore with its grossness, the narrowness
of its prospects and the uniformity of its impressions, in behalf of its
freedom from malignity and deceit. How long I should have sat down contented
with these defects in consideration of these advantages I am unable to
pronounce. For the present, sore with persecution and distress, and bleeding at
almost every vein, there was nothing I so much coveted as rest and
tranquillity. It seemed as if my faculties were, at least for the time,
exhausted by the late preternatural and vice-derived intensity of their
exertions, and that they stood indispensably in need of a period of comparative
suspension.

In this state, so grateful to my feelings, week after week glided away without
interruption and alarm. Every day contributed to my progress in the esteem of
my guileless neighbors. At first they looked upon me with wonder as a sort of
non descript; but they were pleased to find upon farther acquaintance that I
fell in for the most part with their habits and manners; and that, though I was
able, if solicited, to inform them upon subjects extremely remote from their
usual occupations, yet my superior knowledge gave me no inclination to dictate
or domineer. The peculiarities in which I differed from them generated no
aversion. My habits were more solitary and sedentary than those of any of my
neighbors: but I state the simple and unornamented fact when I affirm, that my
universal character among them was that of a person of great learning and
knowledge, mild, even-tempered, and that would not hurt so much as a worm.

Thus tranquil, there were moments in which I even forgot there was such a
person as Mr. Falkland in the world. The situation in which I was now placed
was not very different from that in which I had spent my earlier years; and I
began to look back upon the intervening period as upon a distempered and
tormenting dream; or rather perhaps my feelings were like those of a man
recovered from six months raging delirium, from ideas of horror, confusion,
slight, persecution, agony and despair! When I recollected what I had
undergone, it was not without some satisfaction as the recollection of a thing
that was past; every day augmented my hope that it was never to return. Surely
the dark and terrific menaces of Mr. Falkland were rather the perturbed
suggestions of his angry mind, than the final result of a deliberate and
digested system! How happy should I feel beyond what ordinarily falls to the
lot of man, if, after the terrors and alarms I had undergone, I found myself
thus unexpectedly restored to the immunities of a human being!

While I was thus soothing my mind with fond imaginations, it happened that a
few bricklayers and their laborers came over from a distance of five or six
miles, to work upon some additions to one of the better sort of houses in the
town which had changed its tenant. No incident could be more trivial than this,
had it not been for a strange coincidence of time between this circumstance and
a change which introduced itself into my situation. This first manifested
itself in a sort of shyness with which I was treated first by one person and
then another of my new-formed acquaintance. They were backward to enter into
conversation with me, and answered my enquiries with an awkward and embarrassed
air. When they met me in the street or the field, their countenance contracted
a cloud, and they endeavored to shun me. My scholars quitted me one after
another, and I had no longer any employment in my mechanical profession. It is
impossible to describe the sensations which the gradual, but uninterrupted
progress of this revolution produced in my mind. It seemed as if I had some
contagious disease, from which every man shrunk with alarm, and left me to
perish unassisted and alone. I asked one man and another to explain to me the
meaning of these appearances; but every one avoided the task, and answered in
an evasive and ambiguous manner. I sometimes supposed that it was all a
delusion of the imagination; till the repetition of the sensation, and still
more the decay of my projected modes of subsistence, brought the reality too
painfully home to my apprehension. There are few things that give a greater
shock to the mind than a phenomenon in the conduct of our fellow men, of great
importance to our concerns, and for which we are unable to assign any plausible
reason. I was like a tree struck with some fatal blight, from which one branch
falls off after another, and leaves the naked trunk a monument of calamity and
scorn. Incapable of assigning the cause of my disgrace, I was at times half
inclined to believe that the change was not in other men, but that some
alienation of my own understanding generated the horrid vision. I endeavored
to awake from my dream, and return to my former state of enjoyment and
happiness; but in vain. To the same consideration it may be ascribed, that
unacquainted with the source of the evil, observing its perpetual increase, and
finding it so far as I could perceive entirely arbitrary in its nature, I was
unable to ascertain its limits, or the degree in which it would finally
overwhelm me.

In the midst however of the wonderful and seemingly inexplicable nature of
this scene, there was one idea that instantly intruded itself, and that I could
never after banish from my mind. It is Falkland! In vain I struggled against
the seeming improbability of the supposition. In vain I said, Mr. Falkland,
wise as he is and pregnant in resources, acts by human and not by supernatural
means. He may overtake me by surprise and in a manner of which I have no
previous expectation; but he cannot produce a great and notorious effect
without some visible agency, however difficult it may be to trace that agency,
to its absolute author. He cannot, like those invisible personages who are
supposed from time to time to interfere in human affairs, ride in the
whirlwind, shroud himself in clouds and impenetrable darkness, and (...)
destruction upon the earth from his secret habitation. Thus it was that I
bribed my imagination, and endeavored to persuade myself that my present
unhappiness originated in a different source from my former. All evils appeared
trivial to me, in comparison of the recollection and perpetuation of my parent
misfortune. I was little better than distracted between the incoherence of my
ideas as to my present situation excluding from it the machinations of Mr.
Falkland, and the horror I conceived at the bare possibility of again
encountering his animosity, after a suspension of many weeks, a suspension as I
had hoped for ever. An interval of weeks was an age to a person in the
calamitous situation I had so long experienced. But, in spite of all my
efforts, I could not banish from my mind the dreadful idea. My original
conceptions of the genius and the perseverance of Mr. Falkland had been such,
that I could with difficulty think that any thing was impossible to him. I knew
not how to set up my own opinions of material causes and the powers of the
human mind as the limits of existence. Mr. Falkland had always been to my
imagination an object of wonder, and that which excites our wonder we scarcely
ever suppose ourselves competent to analyze.

I was in this state of mind, and had already been compelled by the situation
of my affairs to meditate the removing myself to a different residence, when a
new circumstance occurred, (...) tended in part to dissipate the mist which
(...) over my understanding. In reality, nothing at this time appeared more
necessary to me than information. Without some conception of the cause of my
present misfortune I could not tell whither to remove, nor what precautions my
interest obliged me to adopt. I was saved by the incident to which I allude
(...) the necessity of proceeding entirely at random.

I returned one evening from a pedestrian (...) among the mountain^. It is
probable that my return was somewhat sooner than was usual with me upon similar
occasions. Be that as it will, I found upon entering the house an apartment of
which I occupied, that it was totally deserted of its usual inhabitants. The
woman and her children were gone out to enjoy the freshness of the breeze. The
husband was engaged in his usual without-door occupations. I opened for myself,
and went into the kitchen of the family. Here, as I looked round, my eyes
accidentally glanced upon a paper lying in one corner, which by some
association I was unable to explain, roused in me a strong sensation of
suspicion and curiosity. I eagerly went toward it, caught it up, and found it
to be the very paper of the Wonderful and Surprising History of Caleb Williams,
the discovery of which toward the close of my residence in London had produced
in me such exquisite pain.

This discovery at once cleared up all the mystery that had hung upon my late
transactions. Abhorred and intolerable certainty succeeded to the doubts which
had haunted my mind. It struck me with the rapidity and irresistible effect of
lightning. I was like a man blasted, his head bare and exposed to the fury of
the elements.

Was there no hope that remained to me? Was acquittal useless? Was there no
period, past or in prospect, that could give relief to my sufferings? Was the
odious and atrocious falsehood that had been invented against me destined to
follow me wherever I went, to strip me of character, to deprive me of the
sympathy and good will of mankind, to wrest from me the very bread by which
life must be sustained?

For the space perhaps of half an hour the agony I felt, from this termination
to my late tranquillity, and the expectation it excited of that enmity which
would follow me through every retreat, was so great as to bereave me of all
consistent thinking and of the power of coming to any resolution. As soon as
this hurricane of the mind subsided, and the winds that impelled me this way
and that were still, one stiff and master gale took its turn of ascendancy, and
drove me to an instant desertion of this once-cherished retreat. I had no
patience to enter into remonstrance and explanation with the uninstructed
inhabitants of my present residence. I had seen too much of the reign of
triumphant falsehood to have that sanguine confidence in the effects of my
innocence, which would have suggested itself to the mind of any other person of
my propensities and my age. I could not endure the thought of opposing the
venom that was thus scattered against me, in detail and through its minuter
particles. If ever it should be necessary for me to encounter it, if I were
pursued like a wild beast till I could no longer avoid turning upon my hunters,
I would then turn upon the true author of this unprincipled attack. I would
encounter the calumny in its strong hold, I would rouse myself to an exertion
hitherto unessayed, and, by the firmness, intrepidity and unalterable constancy
I should display, would yet compel mankind to believe that Mr. Falkland was a
suborner and a murderer.

CHAP. XVIII.
I HASTEN to the conclusion of my melancholy story. I began to write soon after
the period to which I have now conducted it. It has served me as a source of
avocation for several years. For some time I had a melancholy consolation in
writing. I was better pleased to repass in my mind the particulars of
calamities that had formerly afflicted me, than to look forward, as at other
times I was too apt to do, to those by which I might hereafter be overtaken. I
conceived that my story faithfully digested would carry in it an impression of
truth that sew men would be able to resist; or at worst that, by leaving it
behind me when! should no longer continue to exist, posterity might be induced
to do me justice, and, seeing in my example what sort of evils are (...) upon
mankind by society as it is at present constituted, might be inclined to turn
their attention upon the fountain from which such bitter waters have been
accustomed to flow. But these motives have diminished in their influence. I
have contracted something too like a loathing for life and all its appendages.
Writing, which was at first a pleasure, is changed into a burden. I shall
compress into a small compass what yet remains to be told.

I found out not long after the period of which I am speaking the precise cause
of the mysterious reverse I had experienced in my residence in Wales, and
included in that cause what it was I had to look for in my future adventures.
Mr. Falkland had taken the infernal Jones into his pay, a man in three respects
most critically qualified for the service in which he was now engaged; by the
unfeeling brutality of his temper, by the habits of his mind at once audacious
and artful, and by the peculiar animosity and vengeance he had conceived
against me. The employment to which this man was hired was that of following me
from place to place for the purpose of blasting my reputation, and preventing
me from the chance, by continuing long in one residence, of acquiring a
character of integrity that might give new weight to any accusation I might at
a future time be induced to prefer. He had come to the seat of my residence
with the bricklayers and laborers I have mentioned; and, while he took care to
keep out of sight so far as related to me, was industrious in disseminating
that which in the eye of the world seemed to amount to a demonstration of the
profligacy and detestableness of my character. It was, no doubt, from him that
the detested scroll had been procured, which I had found in my habitation
immediately prior to my quitting it. In all this Mr. Falkland, reasoning upon
his principles, was only employing a necessary precaution. There was something
in the temper of his mind that impressed him with aversion to the idea of
violently putting an end to my existence; at the same time that unfortunately
he could never deem himself sufficiently secured against my recrimination, so
long as I remained alive. As to the fact of Jones being retained by him for
this tremendous purpose, he by no means desired that it should become generally
known; but then neither did he look upon the possibility of its being known
with terror. It was already too notorious for his wishes, that I had advanced
the most odious charges against him. If he regarded me with abhorrence as the
great adversary of his fame, those persons who had had occasion to be at all
acquainted with our history, did not entertain less abhorrence against me for
my own sake. If they knew all the pains he exerted in causing my evil
reputation to follow me, they would consider it as an act of impartial justice,
perhaps as a generous anxiety to prevent other men from being imposed upon and
injured, as he had been.

What expedient was I to employ for the purpose of counteracting the meditated
and barbarous prudence, which was thus destined in all changes of scene to
deprive me of the benefits and consolations of human society? There was one
expedient against which I was absolutely determined, disguise. I had
experienced so many mortifications and such intolerable restraint when I had
formerly had recourse to it, it was associated in my understanding with
sensations of such acute anguish, that my mind was thus far entirely convinced:
Life was not worth purchasing at so high a price! But, though in this respect I
was wholly resolved, there was another point that did not appear to me so
material, and in which therefore I was willing to accommodate myself to
circumstances. I was contented, if that would insure my peace, to submit to the
otherwise unmanly expedient of passing by a different name.

But the change of my name, the abruptness with which I removed from place to
place, the remoteness and the obscurity which I proposed to myself in the
choice of my abode, were all insufficient to elude the sagacity of Jones, or
the unrelenting constancy with which Mr. Falkland incited my tormentor to
pursue me. Whithersoever I removed myself, it was not long before I had
occasion to perceive this detested adversary in my rear. No words can enable me
to d^ justice to the sensations which this circumstance produced in me. It was
like what has been described of the eye of Omniscience pursuing the guilty
sinner, and darting a ray that awakens him to new sensibility, at every moment
when otherwise exhausted nature would lull him into a temporary oblivio^ of the
reproaches of his conscience. Sleep fled from my eyes. No walls could hide me
from the discernment of this hated foe. Every where his industry was unwearied
to create for me new distress. Rest I had none: relief I had none: never could
I count upon an instant's security: never could I wrap myself for a moment in
the shroud of oblivion. The minutes in which I did not actually perceive him,
were contaminated and blasted with the certain expectation of his speedy
interference. In my first retreat I had passed some weeks of delusive
tranquillity, but never after was I happy enough to attain so much as that
shadowy gratification. I spent some years in this dreadful vicissitude of pain.
My sensations at certain periods partook of insanity.

It has already appeared that I was not of a temper to endure calamity without
endeavoring by every means I could devise to delude and disarm it.
Recollecting, as I was habituated to do, the various projects by which my
situation could be meliorated, the question in one instance occurred to me: Why
should I be harassed by the pursuit of this Jones; why, man to man, may I not
by the powers of my mind attain the ascendancy over him? at present he appears
to be the persecutor and I the persecuted: is not this difference the mere
creature of the imagination? May I not employ my ingenuity to vex him with
difficulties and laugh at the endless labor to which he will be condemned?

Alas, this is a speculation for a mind at ease! It is not the persecution; but
the catastrophe which is annexed to it, that makes the difference between the
tyrant and the sufferer! In mere corporal exertion the hunter perhaps is upon a
level with the miserable animal he pursues! But could it be forgotten by either
of us, that at every stage Jones was to gratify his malignant passions by
disseminating charges of the most infamous nature and exciting against me the
abhorrence of every honest bosom, while I was to sustain the still repeated
annihilation of my peace, my character and my bread? Could I by any refinement
of my reason convert this dreadful series into sport? I had no philosophy that
qualified me for so extraordinary an effort. If under other circumstances I
could even have entertained so strange an imagination, I was restrained in the
present instance by the necessity of providing for myself the means of
subsistence, and the fetters which through that necessity the forms of human
society imposed upon my exertions.

In one of those changes of residence to which my miserable fate repeatedly
compelled me, I met, upon a road which I was obliged to traverse, the friend of
my youth, my earliest and best beloved friend, the venerable Collins. It was
one of those misfortunes which served to accumulate my distress, that this man
had quitted the island of Great Britain only a very few weeks before that fatal
reverse of fortune which had ever since pursued me with unrelenting eagerness.
Mr. Falkland, in addition to the large estate he possessed in England, had a
very valuable plantation in the West Indies. This property had been greatly
mismanaged by the person who had the direction of it on the spot; and, after
various promises and evasions on his part, which, however they might serve to
beguile the patience of Mr. Falkland, had been attended with no salutary
fruits, it was resolved that Mr. Collins should go over in person to rectify
the abuses which had so long prevailed. There had even been some idea of his
residing several years, if not settling finally, upon the plantation. From that
hour to the present I had never received the smallest intelligence respecting
him.

I had always considered the circumstance of his critical absence as one of my
severest misfortunes. Mr. Collins had been one of the first persons even in the
period of my infancy to conceive hopes of me as of something above the common
standard, and had contributed more than any other to encourage and assist my
juvenile studies. He had been the executor of the little property of my father,
who had fixed upon him for that purpose in consideration of the mutual
affection that existed between us; and I seemed on every account to have more
claim upon his protection than upon that of any other human being. I had always
believed that, had he been present in the crisis of my fortune, he would have
felt conviction of my innocence; and, convinced himself, would by means of the
venerableness and energy of his character have interposed so effectually, as to
have saved me the greater part of my subsequent misfortunes.

No sight therefore could give me a purer delight than that which now presented
itself to my eyes. It was some time however before either of us recognized the
person of the other. Mr. Collins looked at least ten years older than he had
none when I last saw him, in addition to which he was in his present appearance
pale, sickly and thin. These unfavourable effects had been produced by the
change of climate, particularly trying to persons in an advanced period of
life. Add to which, I supposed him to be at that moment in the West Indies. I
was probably as much altered in the period that had elapsed as he had been. I
was the first to recollect him. He was on horseback; I on foot. I had suffered
him to pass me. In a moment the full idea of who he was rushed upon my mind: I
ran; I called with an impetuous voice; I was unable to restrain the vehemence
of my emotions.

The ardour of my feelings disguised my usual tone of speaking, which otherwise
Mr. Collins would infallibly have recognized. His sight was already dim; he
pulled up his horse till I should overtake him; and then said, Who are you? I
do not know you.

My father! exclaimed I, embracing one of his ^nees with fervor and delight, I
am your son! once your little Caleb, whom you a thousand times loaded with your
kindness!

The unexpected repetition of my name gave a kind of shuddering emotion to my
friend, which was however checked by his age, and the calm and benevolent
philosophy that formed one of the most conspicuous of his habits.

I did not expect to see you! replied he. -- I did not wish it!

My best, my oldest friend! answered I, respect blending itself with my
impatience, Do not say so! I have not a friend any where in the whole world,
but you! In you at least let me find sympathy and reciprocal affection! If you
knew how anxiously I have thought of you during the whole period of your
absence, you would not thus grievously disappoint me in your return.

How is it, said Mr. Collins gravely, that you have been reduced to this
forlorn condition? Was it not the inevitable consequence of your own actions?

The actions of others, not mine! Does not your heart tell you that I am
innocent?

No. My observation of your early character taught me that you would be
extraordinary. But unhappily all extraordinary men are not good men; that seems
to be a lottery, dependent on circumstances apparently the most trivial.

Will you hear my justification? I am as sure as I am of my existence that I
can convince you of my purity.

Certainly, if you wish it, I will hear you. But that must not be just now. I
could have been glad to decline it wholly. At my age I am not fit for the
storm, and I am not so sanguine as you in my expectation of the result. Of what
would you convince me? That Mr. Falkland is a suborner and a murderer?

I made no answer. My silence was an affirmative to this question.

And what benefit will result from this conviction? I have known you a
promising boy, whose character might turn to one side or the other as events
should decide. I have known Mr. Falkland in his maturer years, and have always
admired him as the living model of liberality and goodness. If you could change
all my ideas, and show me that there was no criterion by which vice might be
prevented from being mistaken for virtue, what benefit would arise from that? I
must part with all my interior consolation, and all my external connections.
And for what? What is it you propose? The death of Mr. Falkland by the hands of
the hangman?

No. I will not hurt a hair of his head, unless compelled to it by a principle
of defense. But surely you owe me justice?

What justice? The justice of proclaiming your innocence? You know what
consequences are annexed to that. But I do not believe I shall find you
innocent. If you even succeed in perplexing my understanding, you will not
succeed in enlightening it. Such is the state of mankind, that innocence when
involved in circumstances of suspicion can scarcely ever make out a
demonstration of its purity, and guilt can often make us feel an insurmountable
reluctance to the pronouncing it guilt. Meanwhile for the purchase of this
uncertainty I must sacrifice all the remaining comforts of my life. I believe
Mr. Falkland to be virtuous, but I know him to be prejudiced. He would never
forgive me even this accidental parley, if by any means he should come to be
acquainted with it.

Oh, argue not the consequences that are possible to result! answered I
impatiently. I have a right to your kindness; I have a right to your assistance!

You have them. You have them to a certain degree; and it is not likely by any
process of examination you can have them entire. You know my habits of
thinking. I regard you as vicious; but I do not consider the vicious as proper
objects of indignation and scorn. I consider you as a machine: you are not
constituted, I am afraid, to be greatly useful to your fellow men; but you did
not make yourself; you are just what circumstances irresistibly compelled you
to be. I am sorry for your ill properties; but I entertain no enmity against
you, nothing but benevolence. Considering you in the light in which I at
present consider you, I am ready to contribute every thing in my power to your
real advantage, and would gladly assist you, if I knew how, in detecting and
extirpating the errors that have misled you. You have disappointed me, but I
have no reproaches to utter: it is more necessary for me to feel compassion for
you, than that I should accumulate your misfortune by my censures.

What could I say to such a man as this? Amiable, incomparable man! Never was
my mind more painfully divided than at that moment. The more he excited my
admiration, the more imperiously did my heart command me, whatever were the
price it should cost, to extort his friendship. I was persuaded that severe
duty required of him, that he should reject all personal considerations, that
he should proceed resolutely to the investigation of the truth, and that, if he
found the result terminating in my favor, he should resign all his advantages,
and, deserted as I was by the world, make a common cause, and endeavor to
compensate the general injustice. But was it for me to force this conduct upon
him, if, now in his declining years, his own fortitude shrunk from it? Alas,
neither he nor I foresaw the dreadful catastrophe that was so closely
impending! Otherwise I am well assured, that no tenderness for his remaining
tranquillity would have withheld him from a compliance with my wishes! On the
other hand, could I pretend to know what evils might result to him from his
declaring himself my advocate? Might not his integrity be brow-beaten and
defeated as mine had been? Did the imbecility of his gray hairs afford no
advantage to my terrible adversary in the contest? Might not Mr. Falkland
reduce him to a condition as wretched and low as mine? After all, was it not
vice in me to desire to involve another man as my champion? If he could protect
me, had I not yet energy and wisdom and conscious purity enough to protect
myself?

Influenced by these considerations, I assented to his views. I assented to be
thought hardly of by the man in the world whose esteem I most ardently desired,
rather than involve him in possible calamity. I assented to the resigning what
appeared to me at that moment as the last practicable comfort of my life, a
comfort upon the thought of which, while I surrendered it, my mind dwelt with
undescribable longings. Mr. Collins was deeply affected with the apparent
ingenuousness with which I expressed my feelings. The secret struggle of his
mind was, Can this be hypocrisy? The individual with whom I am conferring, if
virtuous, is one of the most disinterestedly virtuous persons in the world. We
tore ourselves from each other. Mr. Collins promised, as far as he was able, to
have an eye upon my vicissitudes, and to assist me in every respect that was at
all consistent with a just recollection of consequences. Thus I parted as it
were with my right arm; and voluntarily consented, thus maimed and forlorn, to
encounter all the evils that were yet in store for me.

CHAP. XIX.
HAVING made an experiment of various situations, all of them with one uniform
result, I at length determined to remove myself, if possible, from the reach of
my persecutor, by going into voluntary banishment from my native soil. But it
seemed this slender consolation was to be denied to me by the inexorable
Falkland. At the time that the project was formed by me I was at no great
distance from the east coast of the island, and I determined to take ship at
Harwich, and pass immediately into Holland. I accordingly repaired to that
place, and went almost as soon as I arrived to the port. But there was no
vessel just at that time ready to sail. I left the port, and withdrew to an
inn, where after some time I retired to a chamber. I was scarcely there, before
the door of the room was opened, and the man, whose countenance was of all
others most hateful to my eyes, Jones, entered the apartment. He shut the door
again as soon as he entered.

Youngster, said he, I have a little private intelligence to communicate to
you. I come as a friend, and that I may save you a labour-in-vain trouble. If
you consider what I have to say in that light, it will be the better for you.
It is my business now, do you see, for want of a better, to see that you do not
break out of bounds. Not that I much matter having one man for my employer, or
dancing attendance after another's heels; but I have a special kindness for
you, for some good turns that you wot of, and therefore I do not stand upon
ceremonies! You have led me a very pretty round already; and, out of the love I
bear you, you shall lead me as much farther, if you will. But beware the salt
seas! They are out of my orders. You are a prisoner at present, and I believe
all your life will remain so. Thanks to the milk-and-water softness of your
former master! if I had the ordering of these things, it should go with you in
another fashion. As long as you think proper, you are a prisoner within the
rules; and the rules with which the soft-hearted squire indulges you are all
England, Scotland and Wales. But you are not to go out of these climates. The
squire is determined you shall never pass the reach of his disposal. He has
therefore given orders that, whenever you attempt so to do, you shall be
converted from a prisoner at large to a prisoner in the properer meaning of the
word. A friend of mine followed you just now to the harbor; I was within call;
and, if there had been any appearance of your setting your foot from land, we
should have been with you in a trice, and laid you fast by the heels. I would
advise you for the future to keep at a proper distance from the sea, for fear
of the worst. You see I tell you all this for your good. For my part I should
be better satisfied, if you were in limbo, with a rope about your neck, and a
comfortable bird's eye prospect to the gallows: but I do as I am directed; and
so, good night to you!

The intelligence thus conveyed to me occasioned an instantaneous revolution in
both my intellectual and animal system. I disdained to answer or take the
smallest notice of the fiend by whom it was delivered. It is now three days
since I received it, and from that moment to the present my blood has been in a
perpetual ferment. My thoughts wander from one idea of horror to another with
incredible rapidity. I have had no sleep. I have scarcely remained in one
posture for a minute together. It has been with the utmost difficulty that I
have been able to command myself far enough to add a few pages to my story.
But, uncertain as I am of the events of each succeeding hour, I thought it
right to force myself to the performance of this task. All is not right within
me. How it will terminate God knows. I sometimes fear that I shall be wholly
deserted of my reason.

What -- dark, mysterious, unfeeling, unrelenting tyrant! -- is it come to
this? -- When Nero and Caligula swayed the Roman scepter, it was a fearful
thing to offend these bloody rulers. The empire had already spread itself from
climate to climate, and from sea to sea. If their unhappy victim fled to the
rising of the sun, where the luminary of day seems to us first to ascend from
the waves of the ocean, the power of the tyrant was still behind him. If he
withdrew to the west, to Hesperian darkness, and the shores of barbarian Thule,
still he was not safe from his gore-drenched foe. -- Falkland! art thou the
offspring in whom the lineaments of these tyrants are faithfully preserved? Was
the world with all its climates made in vain for thy helpless, unoffending
victim?

Tremble!

Tyrants have trembled surrounded with whole armies of their Janissaries! What
should make thee inaccessible to my fury? -- No, I will use no dangers! I will
unfold a tale --! I will show thee for what thou art to the world, and all the
men that live shall confess my truth! -- Did thou imagine that I was
altogether passive, a mere worm, organized to feel sensations of pain, but no
emotion of resentment? Did thou imagine that there was no danger in
inflicting on me pains however great, miseries however dreadful? Did thou
believe me impotent, imbecil and idiot-like, with no understanding to contrive
thy ruin, and no energy to perpetrate it?

I will tell a tale --! The justice of the country shall hear me! The elements
of nature in universal uproar shall not interrupt me! I will speak with a voice
more fearful than thunder! -- Why should I be supposed to speak from any
dishonorable motive? I am under no prosecution now! I shall not now appear to
be endeavoring to remove a criminal indictment from myself, by throwing it
back on its author! -- Shall I regret the ruin that will overwhelm thee! Too
long have I been tenderhearted and forbearing! What benefit has ever resulted
from my mistaken clemency? There is no evil thou have scrupled to accumulate
upon me! Neither will I be more scrupulous! Thou have shown no mercy; and thou
shall receive none! -- I must be calm! Bold as a lion, yet collected!

This is a moment pregnant with fate. I know -- I think I know -- that I will
be triumphant, and crush my seemingly omnipotent foe. But should it be
otherwise, at least he shall not be every way successful. His fame shall not be
immortal as he thinks. These papers shall preserve the truth: they shall one
day be published, and then the world shall do justice on us both. Recollecting
that, I shall not die wholly without consolation. It is not to be endured that
falsehood and tyranny should reign for ever.

How impotent are the precautions of man against the eternally-existing laws of
the intellectual world? This Falkland has invented against me every species of
foul accusation? He has hunted me from city to city. He has drawn his lines of
circumvallation round me that I may not escape. He has kept his s^enters of
human prey for ever at my heels. He may hunt me out of the world. -- In vain!
With this engine, this little pen I defeat all his machinations; I stab him in
the very point he was most solicitous to defend!

Collins! I now address myself to you. I have consented that you should yield
me no assistance in my present terrible situation. I am content to die rather
than do any thing injurious to your felicity. -- But, remember, -- you are my
father still! -- I conjure you, by all the love you ever bore me, by the
benefits you have conferred on me, by the forbearance and kindness toward you
that now penetrates my soul, by my innocence -- for, if these be the last words
I shall ever write, I die protesting my innocence! -- by all these or whatever
tie more sacred has influence on your soul, I conjure you, listen to my last
request! Preserve these papers from destruction, and preserve them from
Falkland? It is all I ask! I have taken care to provide a safe mode of
conveying them into your possession; and I have a firm confidence which I will
not suffer to depart from me, that by some means or other they will one day
find their way to the public!

The pen lingers in my trembling fingers! -- Is there any thing I have left
unsaid? -- The contents of the fatal chest from which originated all my
misfortunes I have never been able to ascertain. I once thought it contained
some murderous instrument or relic connected with the fate of the unhappy
Tyrrel. I am now persuaded that the secret it enclosed was a faithful narrative
of that and its concomitant transactions to be reserved in case of the worst,
that, if by any unforeseen event the guilt of Falkland should ever come to be
fully disclosed, it might contribute to redeem the wreck of his reputation. But
it is no matter. If Falkland shall never be detected to the satisfaction of the
world, such a narrative will probably never see the light. In that case this
story of mine may amply, severely perhaps supply its place.

I know not what it is that renders me thus solemn. I have a secret foreboding
as if I should never again be master of myself. If I succeed in what I now
meditate respecting Falkland, my precaution in removing these papers will have
been unnecessary; I shall no longer be reduced to artifice and evasion. If I
fail, the precaution will appear to be wisely chosen.

POSTSCRIPT.
ALL is over. I have carried into execution my meditated attempt. My situation
is totally changed; I now sit down to give an account of it. For several weeks
after the completion of this dreadful business, my mind was in too tumultuous a
state to permit me to write. I think I shall now be able to arrange my thoughts
sufficiently for that purpose. Great God! how wondrous, how terrible are the
events that have intervened since I was last employed in a similar manner! It
is no wonder that my thoughts were solemn, and my mind filled with horrible
forebodings!

Having formed my resolution, I set out from Harwich for the metropolitan town
of the county in which Mr. Falkland resided. Jones I well knew was in my rear.
That was of no consequence to me. He might wonder at the direction I pursued,
but he could not tell with what purpose I pursued it. My design was a secret
carefully locked up in my own breast. It was not without a sentiment of terror
that I entered a town which had been the scene of my long imprisonment. I
proceeded to the house of the chief magistrate the instant I arrived, that I
might give no time to my adversary to counterwork my proceeding.

I told him who I was, and that I was come from a distant part of the kingdom
for the purpose of rendering him the medium of a charge of murder against my
former master. My name was already familiar to him. He answered that he could
not take cognizance of my deposition, that I was an object of universal
execration in that part of the world, and he was determined upon no account to
be the vehicle of my depravity.

I warned him to consider well what he was about. I called upon him for no
favor; I only applied to him in the regular exercise of his function. Would he
take upon him to say that he had a right at his pleasure to suppress a charge
of this complicated nature? I had to accuse Mr. Falkland of repeated murders.
The perpetrator knew that I was in possession of the truth upon the subject;
and, knowing that, I went perpetually in danger of my life from his malice and
revenge. I was determined to go through with the business, if justice were to
be obtained from any court in England. Upon what pretense did he refuse my
deposition? I was in every respect a competent witness. I was of age to
understand the nature of an oath; I was in my perfect senses; I was untarnished
by the verdict of any jury, or the sentence of any judge. His private opinion
of my character could not alter the law of the land. I demanded to be
confronted with Mr. Falkland, and I was well assured I should substantiate the
charge to the satisfaction of the whole world. If he did not think proper to
apprehend him upon my single testimony, I should be satisfied if he only sent
him notice of the charge and summoned him to appear.

The magistrate finding me thus resolute, thought proper a little to lower his
tone. He no longer absolutely refused to comply with my requisition, but
condescended to expostulate with me. He represented to me Mr. Falkland's health
which had for some years been exceedingly indifferent, his having been already
once brought to trial, upon the same accusation, the diabolical malice in which
alone my proceeding must have originated, and the tenfold ruin it would bring
down upon my own head. I should be pilloried for perjury, if not hanged for the
robbery, in relation to which Mr. Falkland had so generously spared me upon a
former occasion. To all these representations my answer was short. I was
determined to go on, and would abide the consequences. A summons was at length
granted, and notice sent to Mr. Falkland of the charge preferred against him.

Three days elapsed before any farther step could be taken in this business.
This interval in no degree contributed to tranquillise my mind. The thought of
preferring a capital accusation against, and hastening the death of such a man
as Mr. Falkland, was by no means an opiate to reflection. At one time I
commended the action, either as just revenge (for the benevolence of my nature
was in a great degree turned to sour), or as necessary self-defence, or as that
which in an impartial and philanthropical estimate included the smallest evil.
At another time I was haunted with doubts. But, spite of these variations of
sentiment, I uniformly determined to persist; I felt as if impelled by an
unconquerable necessity. The consequences were such as might well appal the
stoutest heart. Either the ignominious execution of a man whom I had once so
deeply venerated, and whom now I sometimes suspected not to be without his
claims to veneration; or a confirmation, perhaps an increase, of the calamities
I had so endured. Yet these I preferred to a state of uncertainty. I desired to
know the worst; to put an end to the hope, however faint, which had been so
long my torment; and above all to exhaust and finish the catalogue of
expedients that were within my disposition. My mind was worked up to a state
little short of frenzy. My body was in a burning fever with the agitation of my
thoughts. When I laid my hand upon my bosom or my head, it seemed to scorch
them with the fervency of its heat. I could not sit still for a moment. I
panted with incessant desire that the dreadful crisis I had so eagerly invoked
were come, and were over.

After an interval of three days I met Mr. Falkland in the presence of the
magistrate to whom I had applied upon the subject. I had only two hours notice
to prepare myself, Mr. Falkland seeming as eager as I to have the question
brought to a crisis, and laid at rest for ever. I had an opportunity before the
examination to learn that Mr. Forester was gone upon some business on an
excursion to the continent, and that Collins, whose health when I saw him was
in a very precarious state, was at this time confined with alarming illness.
His constitution had been wholly broken with his West Indian voyage. The
audience I met at the house of the magistrate consisted of several gentlemen
and others selected for the purpose, the plan being to find a medium between
the suspicious air of a private examination, and the indelicacy as it was
styled of an examination exposed to the remark of every accidental spectator.

I can conceive of no shock greater than that I received from the sight of Mr.
Falkland. His appearance on the last occasion on which we met had been haggard,
ghost-like and wild, energy in his gestures and frenzy in his aspect. It was
now the appearance of a corpse. He was brought in in a chair unable to stand,
fatigued and almost destroyed by the journey he had just taken. His visage was
colorless; his limbs destitute of motion, almost of life. His head reclined
upon his bosom, except that now and then he listed it up and opened his eyes
with a languid glance, immediately after which he sunk back into his former
apparent insensibility. He seemed not to have three hours to live. He had kept
his chamber for several weeks; but the summons of the magistrate had been
delivered to him at his bedside; his orders respecting letters and written
papers being so peremptory that no one dared to disobey them. Upon reading the
paper he was seized with a very dangerous fit; but, as soon as he recovered, he
insisted upon being conveyed with all practicable expedition to the place of
appointment. Falkland in the most helpless state was still Falkland, firm in
command, and capable to extort obedience from every one that approached him.

What a sight was this to me! Till the moment that Falkland was presented to my
view, my breast was steeled to pity. I thought that I had coolly entered into
the reason of the case (passion in a state of solemn and omnipotent vehemence
always appears to be coolness to him in whom it domineers); and that I had
determined impartially and justly. I believed that, if Mr. Falkland were
permitted to persist in his schemes, we must both of us be completely wretched.
I believed that it was in my power by the resolution I had formed to throw my
share of this wretchedness from me and that his could scarcely be increased. It
appeared therefore to my mind to be a mere piece of equity and justice, such as
an impartial spectator would desire, that one person should be miserable in
preference to two, that one person rather than two should be incapacitated from
acting his part, and contributing his share to the general good. I thought that
in this business I had risen superior to personal considerations, and judged
with a total neglect of the miserable suggestions of self-regard. It is true
Mr. Falkland was mortal: but, notwithstanding his apparent decay, he might live
long. Ought I to submit to waste the best years of my life in my present
wretched situation? He had declared that his reputation should be for ever
inviolate; this was his ruling passion, the thought that worked his soul to
madness. He would probably therefore leave a legacy of persecution to be
received by me from the hands of Jones or some other villain equally atrocious,
when he should himself be no more. Now or never was the time for me to redeem
my future life from endless woe.

But all these fine-spun reasonings vanished before the object that was now
exhibited to me. Shall I trample upon a man thus dreadfully reduced? Shall I
point my animosity against one whom the system of nature has brought down to
the grave? Shall I poison with sounds the most intolerable to his ears the last
moments of a man like Falkland? It is impossible. There must have been some
dreadful mistake in the train of argument that persuaded me to be the author of
this hateful scene. There must have been a better and more magnanimous remedy
to the evils under which I groaned.

It was too late. The mistake I had committed was now gone past all power of
recall. Here was Falkland solemnly brought before a magistrate to answer a
charge of murder. Here I stood, having already declared myself the author of
the charge, gravely and sacredly pledged to support it. This was my situation;
and, thus situated, I was called upon immediately to act. My whole frame shook.
I would eagerly have consented that that moment should have been the last of my
existence. I however believed that the conduct now most indispensably incumbent
on me, was to lay the emotions of my soul naked before my hearers. I looked
first at Mr. Falkland, and then at the magistrate and attendants, and then at
Mr. Falkland again. My voice was suffocated with agony. I began:

Why cannot I recall the four last days of my life? How was it possible for me
to be so eager, so obstinate in a purpose so diabolical? Oh, that I had
listened to the expostulations of the magistrate that hears me, or submitted to
the well-meant despotism of his authority! Hitherto I have only been miserable;
henceforth I shall account myself base! Hitherto, though hardly treated by
mankind, I stood acquitted at the bar of my own conscience. I had not filled up
the measure of my wretchedness!

Would to God it were possible for me to retire from this scene without
uttering another word! I would brave the consequences -- I would submit to any
imputation of cowardice, falsehood and profligacy, rather than add to the weight
of misfortune with which Mr. Falkland is overwhelmed. But the situation and the
demands of Mr. Falkland himself forbid me. He, in compassion for whose fallen
state I would willingly forget every interest of my own, would compel me to
accuse, that he might enter upon his justification. -- I will confess every
sentiment of my heart.

No penitence, no anguish can expiate the folly and the cruelty of this last
act I have perpetrated. But Mr. Falkland well knows -- I affirm it in his
presence -- how unwillingly I have proceeded to this extremity. I have
reverenced him; he was worthy of reverence: I have loved him; he was endowed
with qualities that partook of divine.

From the first moment I saw him, I conceived for him the most ardent
admiration. He condescended to encourage me; I attached myself to him with all
the fullness of affection. He was unhappy; I exerted myself with youthful
curiosity to discover the secret of his woe. This was the beginning of
misfortune.

What shall I say? -- He was indeed the murderer of Tyrrel; he suffered the
Hawkinses to be executed, knowing that they were innocent, and that he alone
was guilty. After successive surmises, after various indiscretions on my part
and indications on his, he at length confided to me at full the fatal tale!

Mr. Falkland! I most solemnly conjure you to recollect yourself! Did I ever
prove myself unworthy of your confidence? The secret was a most painful burden
to me; it was the extremest folly that led me unthinkingly to gain possession
of it; but I would have died a thousand deaths rather than betray it. It was
the jealousy of your own thoughts, and the weight that hung upon your mind,
that led you to watch my motions, and conceive alarm from every particle of my
conduct.

You began in confidence; why did you not continue in confidence? The evil that
resulted from my original imprudence, would then have been comparatively
little. You threatened me: did I then betray you? A word from my lips at that
time would have freed me from your threats for ever. I bore them for a
considerable period, and at last quitted your service, and threw myself a
fugitive upon the world in silence. Why did you not suffer me to depart? You
brought me back by stratagem and violence, and wantonly accused me of an
enormous felony; did I then mention a syllable of the murder, the secret of
which was in my possession?

Where is the man that has suffered more from the injustice of society than I
have done? I was accused of a villainy that my heart abhorred. I was sent to
jail. I will not enumerate the horrors of my prison, the lightest of which
would make the heart of humanity shudder. I looked forward to the gallows!
Young, ambitious, fond of life, innocent as the child unborn, I looked forward
to the gallows! I believed that one word of resolute accusation against my
master would deliver me, yet I was silent, I armed myself with patience,
uncertain whether it were better to accuse or to die. Did this show me a man
unworthy to be trusted?

I determined to break out of prison. With infinite difficulty and repeated
miscarriages I at length effected my purpose. Instantly a proclamation with a
hundred guineas reward was issued for apprehending me. I was obliged to take
refuge among the scum of mankind, in the midst of a gang of thieves. I
encountered the most imminent peril of my life when I entered into this
retreat, and when I quitted it. Immediately after I traveled almost the whole
length of the kingdom in poverty and distress, in hourly danger of being
retaken and manacled like a felon. I would have fled my country; I was
prevented. I had recourse to various disguises; I was innocent, and yet was
compelled to as many arts and subterfuges as could have been entailed on the
worst of villains. In London I was as much harassed and as repeatedly alarmed,
as I had been in my flight through the country. Did all these persecutions
persuade me to put an end to my silence? No: I suffered them with patience and
submission; I did not make one attempt to retort them upon their author.

I fell at last into the hands of the miscreants that are nourished with human
blood. In this terrible situation I for the first time attempted by turning
informer to throw the weight from myself. Happily for me the London magistrate
listened to my tale with insolent contempt.

I soon and long repented of my rashness and rejoiced in my miscarriage. I
acknowledge that in various ways Mr. Falkland showed humanity toward me during
this period. He would have prevented my going to prison at first; he
contributed to my subsistence during my detention; he had no share in the
pursuit that had been set on foot against me; he at length procured my
discharge when brought forward for trial. But a great part of his forbearance
was unknown to me; I supposed him to be my unrelenting pursuer. I could not
forget that, whoever heaped calamities on me in the sequel, they all originated
in his forged accusation.

The prosecution against me for felony was now at an end. Why were not my
sufferings permitted to terminate then, and I allowed to hide my weary head in
some obscure yet tranquil retreat? Had I not sufficiently proved my constancy
and fidelity? Would not a compromise in this situation have been most wife and
most secure? But the restless and jealous anxiety of Mr. Falkland would not
permit him to repose the least atom of confidence. The only compromise that he
proposed was, that with my own hand I should sign myself a villain. I refused
this proposal, and have ever since been driven from place to place, deprived of
peace, of honest same, even of bread. For a long time I persisted in the
resolution that no emergency should convert me into the assailant. In evil hour
I at last listened to my resentment and impatience, and the hateful mistake
into which I fell has produced the present scene.

I now see that mistake in all its enormity. I am sure that, if I had opened my
heart to Mr. Falkland, if I had told to him privately the tale that I have now
been telling, he could not have resisted my reasonable demand. After all his
precautions, he must ultimately have depended upon my forbearance. Could he be
sure that, if I were at last worked up to disclose every thing I knew, and to
(...) it with all the energy I could exert, I should obtain no credit? If he
must in every case be at my mercy, in which mode ought he to have sought his
safety, in conciliation or in inexorable cruelty?

Mr. Falkland is of a noble nature. Yes; in spite of the catastrophe of Tyrrel,
of the miserable end of the Hawkinses, and of all that I have myself suffered,
I affirm that he has qualities of the most admirable kind. It is therefore
impossible that he could have resisted a frank and fervent expostulation, the
frankness and the fervor in which the whole soul was poured out. I despaired,
while it was yet time to have made the just experiment; but my despair was
criminal, was treason against the sovereignty of truth.

I have told a plain and unadulterated tale. I came hither to curse, but I
remain to bless. I came to (...), but am compelled to applaud. I proclaim to
all the world that Mr. Falkland is a man worthy (...) affection and kindness,
and that I am myself the worst of villains! Never will I forgive myself the
iniquity of this day. The memory will always haunt me, and embitter every hour
of my existence. In thus acting I have been a murderer, a cool, deliberate,
unfeeling murderer. -- I have (...) what my accursed precipitation has obliged
me to say. Do with me as you please! I ask no favor. Death would be a
kindness, compared to what I feel!

Such were the accents dictated by my remorse. I poured them out with
uncontrollable impetuosity, for my heart was pierced, and I was compelled to
give vent to its anguish. Every one that heard me was petrified with
astonishment. Every one that heard me was melted into tears. They could not
resist the ardour with which I praised the great qualities of Falkland; they
manifested their sympathy in the tokens of my penitence.

How shall I describe the feelings of this unfortunate man? Before I began, he
seemed sunk and debilitated, incapable of any strenuous impression. When I
mentioned the murder, I could perceive in him an involuntary shuddering, though
it was counteracted partly by the feebleness of his frame, and partly by the
energy of his mind. This was an allegation he expected, and he had endeavored
to prepare himself for it. But there was much of what I said, of which he had
had no previous conception. When I expressed the anguish of my mind, he seemed
at first startled and alarmed lest this should be a new expedient to gain
credit to my tale. His indignation against me was great for having retained all
my resentment toward him thus, as it might be, in the last hour of his
existence. It was increased, when he discovered me, as he supposed, using a
pretense of liberality and sentiment, to give new edge to my hostility. But, as
I went on, he could no longer resist. He saw my sincerity; he was penetrated
with my grief and compunction. He rose from his seat supported by the
attendants, and -- to my infinite astonishment -- threw himself into my arms!

Williams, said he, you have conquered! I see too late the greatness and
elevation of your mind. I adore the qualities that you now display, though to
those qualities I owe my ruin. I could have resisted any plan of malicious
accusation you might have brought against me. But I see that the artless and
manly story you have told, has carried conviction to every hearer. All my
prospects are concluded. All that I most ardently desired is for ever
frustrated. I have spent a life of the basest cruelty to cover one act of
momentary vice and to protect myself against the prejudices of my species. I
stand now completely detected. My name will be consecrated to infamy, while
your heroism, your patience and your virtues will be for ever admired. You have
inflicted on me the most fatal of all mischiefs, but I bless the hand that
wounds me. And now, -- turning to the magistrate -- and now, do with me as you
please. I am prepared to suffer all the vengeance of the law. You cannot
inflict on me more than I deserve. You cannot hate me more than I hate myself.
I am the most execrable of all villains. I have for years (I know not how long)
dragged on a miserable existence in insupportable pain. I am at last, in
recompense for all my labors and my crimes, dismissed from it, with the
disappointment of my only remaining hope, the destruction of that for the sake
of which alone I consented to exist. It was worthy of such a life, that it
should continue just long enough to witness this final overthrow. If however
you wish to punish me, you must be speedy in your justice; for, as reputation
was the blood that warmed my heart, so I feel that death and infamy must seize
me together.

I record the praises bestowed on me by Falkland, not because I deserve them,
but because they serve to aggravate the baseness of my cruelty. He survived but
three days this dreadful scene. I have been his murderer. It was fit that he
(...) praise my patience, who has fallen a victim (...) and fame, to my
precipitation! It would have been merciful in comparison, if I had planted a
dagger in his heart! He would have thanked me for my kindness. But, atrocious,
execrable wretch that I have been! I wantonly inflicted on him an anguish a
thousand times worse than death. Meanwhile I endure the penalty of my crime.
His figure is ever in imagination before me. Waking or sleeping I still behold
him. He seems mildly to expostulate with me for my unfeeling behavior. I live
the devoted victim of conscious reproach. Alas! I am the same Caleb Williams
that but ten days before boasted, that, however great were the calamities I
endured, I was still innocent.

Such has been the result of a project I formed for delivering myself from the
evils that had so long attended me. I thought that, if Falkland were dead, I
should return once again to all that makes life worth possessing. I thought
that, if the guilt of Falkland were established, fortune and the world would
smile upon my efforts. Both these events are accomplished; and it is only now
that I am truly miserable.

Why should my reflections perpetually center upon myself? self, an overweening
regard to which has been the source of my errors! Falkland, I will think only
of thee, and from that thought will draw ever-fresh nourishment for my sorrows!
One generous, one disinterested tear I will consecrate to thy ashes! A nobler
spirit lived not among the sons of men. Thy intellectual powers were truly
sublime, and thy bosom burned with a godlike ambition. But of what use are
talents and sentiments in the corrupt wilderness of human society? It is a rank
and rotten soil from which every finer shrub draws poison as it grows. All that
in a happier field and a purer air would expand into virtue and germinate into
general usefulness, is thus converted into henbane and deadly nightshade.

Falkland! thou settedst out in thy career with the purest and most laudable
intentions. But thou imbibedst the poison of chivalry with thy earliest youth*
and the base and low-minded envy that met thee on thy return to thy native
seats, operated with this poison to hurry thee into madness. Soon, too soon, by
this fatal coincidence were the blooming hopes of thy youth blasted for ever!
From that moment thou only continuedst to live to the phantom of departed
honor. From that moment thy benevolence was in a great part turned into
rankling jealousy and inexorable precaution. Year after year did thou spend
in this miserable project of imposture; and only at last continuedst to live
long enough to see, by my misjudging and abhorred intervention, thy closing
hope disappointed, and thy death accompanied with the foulest disgrace!

I began these memoirs with the idea of vindicating my own character. I have
now no character that I wish to vindicate: but I will finish them that thy
story may be fully understood; and that, if those errors of thy life be known
which thou so ardently desiredst to conceal, the world may at least not hear
and repeat a half-told and mangled tale.

FINIS.

