AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONVERSION OF AN INDIAN. IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.

Of truth I perceive that God is no respector of persons but in every nation he
that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted of him. THIRD
IMPRESSION.

Burlington Printed: New York Reprinted, by N. BIRDSALL, No. 80.
Cherry-Street. -- 1794 --

PREFACE.
To the Reader,
ALTHOUGH the following account has been published in Europe; It apppears
probable to me that a republication of it here may be useful. Because it
contains an evidence of the reality of the religion of JESUS CHRIST: which at
this time is disbelived and held in contempt by many. From a desire to promote
the interests of piety, I venture to send it forth: earnestly wishing that
every reader may be edified end profited by it.

J. B.
New York, Nov. 29. 1794.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONVERSION OF AN INDIAN, IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
DEAR DRUROW
AS you have been my constant friend for many years, and have some knowledge of
the English tongue, I, in return of friendship, intend giving you some account
of my travels and experience since I left Maryland.

I very fortunately met with captain S --, bound for London, and agreed with
him for my passage; the next day I went on board, at which time the captain was
giving orders to his men to get every thing in readiness for the first fair
wind. They had all their cargo on board, and wished for nothing more than a
speedy departure. I spent that night a very restless manner, my mind being
filled with sorrow at the thoughts of leaving my friends and native country.

The next morning the wind-came about, and stood W. by N. at which joy appeared
in every countenance, except my own. They weighed anchor, and hoisted sail with
the greatest expedition -- at which time tongue could not express the different
emotions of my heart: swarms of thoughts, like these, poured in upon me; "I
must now take my leave of every thing that is dear to me; I may perhaps be
drowned in the sea, or die in my passage, and never see my friends and native
country any more." In answer to this, it returned upon my mind, Those I have
left behind do not want for any thing; and for my part, I have plenty, and
shall be independent till I see my dearest friends again. I shall be respected
by our prince, for the discoveries I may make in matters acted among the
christians.

But this my friend, was uppermost in my mind, to inquire who their God was,
how they worship him; for you know, our father entirely forbade our English
tutor even to speak of him in our hearing. Upon these considerations I was
resolved to banish all thoughts that had tended to make me uneasy, as I did not
conceive why a person of my sphere should indulge that softness too much
practiced among our women. Curiosity now reared its head, and bore the scepter
with majesty. I once more cast my eyes on my native land by way of gratitude,
and then took my leave, entreating Darus, my father's God, to be my protector,
and bring me back, when he thought fit.

The greatest part of our sailors were distinguished by the name of christians;
but my friend, I was greatly surprised when I came upon deck. They called upon
their God, it is true, but in that noisy, blustering, confused manner, as if
each feared the roaring of the waves intercepted his addresses. I thought
within myself, their god must be but a mean god indeed, if he pays any regard
to their wild way of worship: but at last I understood that all their behavior
was an abuse of his goodness, and sprung merely from a disorder in themselves;
for they wanted nothing which persons in their situations could wish for, and
yet, in the midst of plenty, there was not the least appearance of
thankfulness. In working the ship they often called upon God to damn their
eyes, their hands, their feet, and their blood, in short they were more mad
with rage than our Indian soldiers when closely pressed by the enemy in the
field of battle; and seeing he did not destroy their members, when often
entreated to do so, I concluded their god was deaf, or else so compassionate
that be pitied and spared them for his own goodness sake.

By attending to their behavior farther, I found they had another god, with
whom they had a greater intimacy; he did not appear at that distance from them
that the former did; and some of them I may say indeed the greater part of
them, expressed a desire to dwell with him, for they would often call upon him
to come and take them. This, my friend, was the first time I discovered that
the people called christians had two gods.

Within five weeks we made the south-west of Ireland. Our captain had some
thoughts of putting in at one of their sea ports, to take in fresh water, but
the wind being fair, and a smart sea breeze, we resolved to pursue our course.
The next day we made the lands of England, at the sight of which, the sailors
were elated with joy. In three days after we arrived safe in in the Downs,
where we dropped anchor. I returned thanks to Darus, that he had been mindful
of us on the sea, and saved us from the power of the raging waves. After I had
paid my passage, and given orders concerning my things on board, I went in the
boat with the captain, and that night arrived at London.

I put up at an inn, and promised myself great pleasure by being in the
christians' capital. I confess, my friend, I was greatly surprised to see the
largeness of the place, and multitude of inhabitants: but these smaller matters
I shall pass over till I see you; my chief business is, to find out the God who
is supposed to dwell among the christians, and the manner of their worship.
Accordingly, the next sabbath day (for you must know, my friend, in this
christian nation they set apart one day from seven, for the worship of what
they call the true God, and retire from all worldly employs on one of those
days) I went with a guide to a place called a church, at the entrance of which
I was a little surprised at the largeness of the company.

I followed my host till he came to the middle of the place, when I saw a tall
man covered with a long white garment, from his shoulders down to his feet;
and, with an audible voice, he read in a large book that lay open before him.
Many of the people in the place had a small book in their hands, and sometimes
they read aloud, in answer to the man in the white garment; at other times he
and they spoke loud together. After this, the tall man put off the long white
covering, and then from his shoulders down he was blacker than any of us
Indians, Then he ascended several steps, and had a small book in his hand, and,
as I thought, called upon their God; but in a slow, faint, dull manner, quite
different from the manner of the christian sailors. I took particular notice of
the assembly, some of them stood, others sat, and a few were on their knees. In
short, I no longer wondered at christians having two gods; for when I observed
their different positions, I was ready to imagine they had near as many gods as
they were people; as the different position of the body showed different frames
of their minds.

Then the man in black made a long pause. He again took the book into his hand,
for it appeared to me the book was his whole support, and read these words: --
"What is required of thee, O man, but to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly
with thy God?" He told them, in the first place, it was every man's duty to
endeavor for the necessaries of life, in an honest manner; that it was
inconsistent with the christian's plan for any man to defraud his neighbor;
and, in the second place, provided they had more than sufficient for
themselves, it was the strongest proof of their being undoubted christians, and
lovers of mercy, said he, to deal your bread to the hungry, to cover the naked
with a garment, as acts of charity and benevolence are most pleasing in the
sight of God: and, in the third place, to walk humbly with thy God.

He told them that man was formed out of the dust, and ere long must return to
the dust again; and added, Thoughts of this kind should reduce you to a proper
knowledge of yourselves, and the fruit of it should appear by a constant
attendance upon the means of grace. When on a dying bed, it will be a
comfortable support to your feeble mind, to look back on a well-spent life;
such persons, doubtless, God will not disapprove of in the great day, but will
welcome them with a "Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world."

Mean time I could not help taking notice of the behavior of the company
assembled together, some of them were whispering, others sleeping, and and
abundance looking at each other, as if they were admiring the different colors
of their clothes, or the manner of their dress; quite regardless of what the
man in black was speaking, or at least it appeared so to me. After he had done
reading in his little book, he came down, and all the people went out of the
place, many of them walked into the same street where I lodged. So I attended
to their behavior, while passing, some were talking about the newspapers,
informing each other how business was carried on abroad; in short, they were
all busy about the affairs of this life; but not a word did I hear about the
sermon, or the God the man spoke of, unless in a trifling, profane manner. I
was not at all pleased either with the performance of the man that spoke, or
the behavior of the people, for the former did not tell them who God was,
where he was, or how they should find him; and the latter were all confusion.

When I came to my lodgings, my mind was exceedingly uneasy; I rung the bell,
and the landlord came to know what I wanted. I told him, a proper knowledge of
the christian's God: at which he appeared greatly surprised, and declared he
was no scholar, therefore he was not a proper person to give any information. I
then asked him, whether he knew of any one in the neighborhood that could. He
told me, there was one Dr. T -- r. a few doors from him, supposed to be one of
the greatest scholars in the city. The next morning I waited upon this
gentleman; and he received me with all the civility imaginable. I asked pardon
for the freedom I had taken, and desired he would not be surprised at the
strangeness of my business: I then told him I was an Indian, born in the
province of New York, and the chief of my business, in this place, was, in
quest of the christian's God. After a long pause, he made this answer: Your
business, Sir, is of the greatest importance; and to give you proper
directions, is of equal moment, and requires some time for deliberation, If you
please to call upon me tomorrow morning, I shall be glad to spend an hour or
two with you. I did so; but the good Doctor desired to be excused, and told me,
some unexpected business had fallen in his way, that required his attendance
for several days; and added, if you stay in town till the latter end of next
week, I shall be exceedingly glad to see you, and give you all the information
I am capable of. I thanked him, and so we parted. By this time, my friend, I
was ready to wish myself in my native land again, and repented my being so
troublesome to myself and others. But one day, as I was standing in the passage
from my room to the kitchen, I saw in a dark place the end of a large book it
was almost buried in lumber and dirt. I asked the maid what book it was. I do
not know indeed sir, said she, unless it is an old bible put there out of the
way. She took it into her hands, and opened the cover; It is, said she, sure
enough. Good now, we have no time to read in any good book in this place. Pray
said I, is that a book the christians pay any regard to? It is, sir, said she
-- I have often heard my mother say that every one is a good christian who
follows the directions given in that book. I then desired her to take it to the
kitchen, to wipe off the dust, and bring it to my room. I was never better
pleased, than when I found it to be the christians rule respecting doctrine and
practice. I resolved to read it over and over again, and then compare the
manners of the christians with what was contained in this book. -- I spent near
three weeks in the reading and study of it, and found it the most pleasing
piece I ever met with; for though I had read over some part of it several
times, the matter was still new. I compared it to a fountain, of which every
passenger may freely drink, yet it is still overflowing.

In this book, there is an account that God is a spirit, self-existing before
all worlds, from eternity to eternity having neither beginning nor end that
every good thing either dwells in or proceeds from him. It was he that made the
sun, moon and stars, the earth and sea, and all that therein is: it was he that
formed man out of the dust, and gave him an immortal soul that will exist
parrallel with himself. I confess, my friend, the reading of this book had such
an effect upon my mind, as I never felt before. It treated of the fall of man
in his parent Adam, together with the numberless evils entailed upon his
posterity in consequence of the fall; and that those things not only consume
the body, and torment the mind in this life; but it further asserts, that
without pardon here, divine vengeance will be poured on the heads of the guilty
through all eternity.

I began to tremble, and the tears gushed from my eyes in abundance. I laid the
book aside, and began to summon all my reason to the field, if possible to
subdue or make a stand against the confusion I was in; but all I could do, was
not sufficient to stop the rapidity of my thoughts. They recoiled upon me, that
Adam was the father of all the human race; Adam disobeyed the command of his
God; upon this disobedience, his glory left him, and the curse took place. I am
one of his unhappy offspring: I never knew any thing of pardon, therefore the
curse remains upon me. Upon this conclusion, nature was constrained to melt
under a supernatural power; I could no more restrain my tears, than I could
stop the course of the sun, or with my word restain the flowing of the tide.

While in this dejected, miserable condition, diverse passages I had read were
thundering upon my mind, such as these: "We have all sinned, and come short of
the glory of God: the curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: God is
angry with the wicked every day: There is no peace to the wicked, says my God:
The wicked shall be turned into hell," etc. These, put together, were as the
ruin of a dreadful breach crushing the poor person in chains. In this
melancholy condition I continued several days; but one evening, while I was
musing on these things: it was strongly suggested to my mind, "May not the
matter contained in this book be false? Are there not many from the press that
wholly dwell upon supposition? others without a single probability for their
support? and if this is the case, my present distress is without foundation," I
took the book into my hand with a design, if possible, to find out the fallacy,
and attended to the matter I read with all the powers of my mind; but within
twenty minutes reading I was perfectly satisfied this book was founded upon the
Rock of ages; for it not only militated against the practices of the children
of men, but Likewise the words of their lips; described and exposed the
abominable thoughts of the heart. I can truly say, it traced me from my
childhood to mature age, and from that time to this, abundantly more perfectly
than I could, if I had kept a journal of my whole life; and when I turned my
eyes on my poor fellow-sinners, I saw them painted to the life as completely as
myself; for although they are distinguished as far as I can learn, they have no
more regard to the reality of this book, than our poor slaves, who have never
heard of its being in the world. Respecting their manners, they are as vicious
as any people I ever was among. I have taken some pains to travel through every
part of the town; but, alas! I unhappily found every street a standing proof of
the curse levelled upon Adam's rebellious race. There I heard those called
christians blaspheme the name of God, and loudly call upon him for damnation;
others, intoxicated with liquor, were obliged to roll in the dirt, shameless as
the beasts that perish; some fighting till the blood streamed to the ground.
When I returned to my lodgings, I began to reflect on these malancholy scenes;
I opened the christian's book, and found these words: "This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather
than light, because their deeds are evil." I opened it again, and fixed my eyes
on this passage, "Wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there are which go in thereat."

This, my friend, is the melancholy state of the inhabitants of this land, and
I fear of most other places: I went to one of their churches several times, but
seeing the behavior of the people so inconsistent with the whole tenor of
their book, I could look on it as little better than a solemn mockery of God;
but the last time I was there I took a particular notice of one of the people
who sat near me: he appeared to be in great distress of mind, he leaned with
his head upon his hand, and his eyes were fixed on the ground, from whence
tears flowed in abundance: it affected me so much the more, as I had labored
under much trouble from the time of my reading the christian's book; and it was
strongly impressed upon my mind, to inquire into the cause of his tears.

After service was ended, I spoke to the man in the tenderest manner I was
capable of; I desired he would excuse the freedom of a stranger, adding, I
(...) his deportment in the church different from all the rest; and, if it was
a fair question, should be glad to know the cause. In answer to this, he told
me, he made no secret of his present misery; that it did not arise from the
want or absence of any earthly good; but that the absence of God was the cause
of all his troubles: "I have labored, said he, under the burden of a guilty
conscience, and God only knows where it will end." -- By this time we were
retired from the confused noise of passengers, to a place more proper for
conversing freely with a friend. His last words, "the burden of a guilty
conscience, and his fearing it would never end," affected my mind much: I
desired him to explain himself, assuring him, that I had no other motive than a
proper information in the particulars before hnted: that I was a stranger in
this land, and the chief of my business was in quest of the christians' God;
and told him, that all my endeavors had hitherto been fruitless, except the
information given me in the bible, which greatly alarmed my mind; but I did not
understand it as I could wish, and I wanted somebody to explain it. He
answered, "For my part, I am both unworthy and unfit for the arduous task; but
if you please to take a walk with me this evening, you shall hear some part of
it opened and explained in a profitable manner." I consented so to do. But
pray, said I what is it you mean by the burden of a guilty conscience? At which
tears stood in his eyes, and he thus began:

"Sixteen years ago, God was pleased to open the eyes of my understanding by
the preaching of the gospel: I saw myself a lost, undone sinner, without
Christ; I was sensible that all the flood gates of divine justice were ready to
burst upon my guilty head, for my numberess transgressions against the King of
Kings." Pray said I, is the wrath of God upon all mankind? upon this, and all
other nations: said he, "We are all by nature children of wrath, until raised
by the Friend of sinners from a spiritual death to a spiritual life; for the
word of God says, "He that believes not on the Son, has not life, but the
wrath of God abides on him." Pray, said I, who is this Friend of sinners you
speak of? At which question tears stood in his eyes: "It is Jesus Christ, the
savior of the world (he replied), who died upon the cross that all who truly
believe in him, might not perish, but have everlasting life." I was desirous to
hear more of this, but he desired to return to a recital of past experience.
"When God, said he, in the riches of his grace, was pleased to illuminate my
understanding, to inform my judgment, and convert my conscience, I cried to the
Lord for mercy, and he was pleased to lend a gracious ear to my supplications,
so that in a short time I had a clear conviction of my acceptance in the
Beloved. I knew that God, for Christ's sake, had pardoned all my sins, and
embraced me in his tender arms: for some time I walked in the light of his
countenance, and trampled beneath my feet the enemies of my soul. Oh the happy
hours and days that I have enjoyed in sweet communion with my God!" He then
burst into tears again: "How does the remembrance of these things stab my soul!
I fear these blessed opportunities are gone for ever; gone from me; I have
banished myself far from every good; that eternal Sun, which once shone upon my
soul, is now departed, and left me in the darkest shades of night." As soon as
he was able to hear my words, I asked him what was the instrument of his fall?
"Oh! Sir, said he, there are more instruments for our hurt, than there are
stars in the heavens, or than drops in the ocean." But, said I, what do you
suppose to be the first instrument? "My first fall, said he, was
unfaithfulness; this led me to the neglect of private prayer; quickly after
came upon me a trifling spirit; then a swarm of foolish thoughts and evil
desires poured in, like the plagues of Egypt^ Thus I fell from one thing to
another, not without a thousand stripes of conscience, while I was falling; so
that at present I am satisfied I have only one step more, that is, from time,
into all the miseries of eternity.' But, said I, can you contrive no means
whereby you may appease the wrath of God?

Suppose you endeavor, for the future, to follow all the directions given you
in the christians' book Is it not possible to regain that happiness you once
enjoyed? "It is as impossible, said he, to regain it in point of desert or
merit, as it is to pluck the sun from the firmament, or dissolve and make the
earth anew: no, my heart, like a corrupt fountain, is poisoned, and can never
send forth healing streams: every channel of my soul, with every member of my
body, is defiled by sin; so that from the crown of the head, to the sole of the
foot, there is not one sound place, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying
sores." For my part, I could say no more on that head, for I felt the
experimental part in myself, and remember to have read the same words in the
christians' book. I think I never saw a poor creature in greater distress of
mind; and, for my part, I was little better for the recital of his misfortunes,
which raised in me a deep sense of my misery.

When we came to the place where he had promised I should hear the word of God
preached in a profitable manner, there was a large company assembled together.
I was greatly pleased with the behavour of the multitude; for, except at the
door, seriousness sat on every countenance, as if conversing with their own
hearts. Soon after this, I saw a plain looking man pass through the crowd, and
ascend a few steps above the people: he lifted up his eyes as though his heart
was strongly engaged with God; then he stood up, and with an audible voice he
gave out these words: "Come sinners, to the gospel feast!
Let every soul be Jesu's guest."
Hundreds of the people, both men and woman, sang in praise to their God.
Indeed, my friend, I was never more transported with music than at that time
with the seriousness that sat on every countenance: the awfulness of the place,
and the warmth that was in their devotion, all conspired to charm the human
mind.

After this he said, Let us pray. In the former part of which he made an humble
confession of their sins to God and at the end of every sentence there was a
solemn groan: this was done by the whole crowd, as if struggling for a
deliverance from the enemies of their souls. He then entreated God's mercy, for
the sake of his Son, to descend on every heart, and the people closed his
petetions with a loud Amen, as wrestling for the blessings their souls panted
after. I suppose, my friend, in ten minutes time there where thousands of tears
shed; and, for my part I was so agitated, as if my soul were leaving its house
of clay. It was for some time before I could compose myself. The minister,
after prayer, made a long pause; he then said, In the fourth chapter of Amos
and twelfth verse, were these words, "Prepare to meet thy God." He repeated
several passages to the same effect: when he opened the words of text, he told
us, in the first place, that man by nature was altogether unprepared to meet
his God either in death or judgment; being out of Christ, God was a consuming
fire. In the second place, he told what was implied in a gospel preparation.
Under this head, as a wise master builder, he laid the glorious foundation,
Jesus Christ the rock of ages: that what he had done and suffered, had made a
complete satisfaction to all the demands of divine justice, and rendered the
Father attentive to the feeble prayers of poor sinners, that we might come with
boldness to the throne of grace, and obtain grace and mercy to help in time of
need; that Christ was the foundation on which we might build our happiness in
time and through eternity; and though man had no power in himself to help
himself; he had given his blessed Spirit to rouse the sleepy conscience of
sinners, and raise the dead to life. To be prepared, said he, is to repent, to
forsake every known sin, to believe with the heart unto righteousness; to
receive Christ in all his offices, and to press after holiness, without which
no man can see the Lord. In the third place, he showed the difference,
consequences and misery, of all those that neglect a preparation; they may
expect nothing but the phials of the wrath of God upon their guilty heads
whilst eternal ages roll on: and on the opposite side, that the righteous shall
shine in the kingdom of their Father as the stars for ever and ever. In the
last place, he addressed himself to the consciences of the people in the sight
of God. Tongue cannot express nor pen describe what I felt. His word pierced my
heart, and I was ready to roar in the disquietude of my soul. A little before
he concluded, he said, Are there any in this place that see themselves sinners,
that feel the want of Christ? My heart answered, I do; I know I am undone
without his saving benefits. He then raised his voice, and said, "Behold now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation" The silent breathings of my
soul were, Lord, make it so to me; take me into thine arms of mercy, for the
sake of Jesus. Presently the sinner's Friend answered for himself, Go in peace,
and sin no more.

Oh my dear Drurow, where shall I find words to express what I felt! All my
guilt and distress was entirely removed; and the light of the glory of God,
through his well-beloved Son, shone into my soul: the thunders of God's law,
the curses I read in the Christian's book, and which before daily terrified my
mind, were all hushed into a divine silence; and the sweet promises, the charms
of the ever glorious gospel, elevated and captivated my soul: the peace of God
sweetly flowing into my heart, like the swelling stream of jordan overflowing
its banks; every mountain and hill was made low, the crooked was made strait
and rough places made plain. I had a clear sight, by faith, of the dear
Redeemer's sufferings upon Calvary, bearing my sins and my curse in his own
body on the tree; and from a divine sense of forgiving love, I could say with
Thomas, one of his disciples, "My Lord, and my God!" O my dear friend, this God
is the God I adore: had you but a taste of the sweetness I enjoy, you would no
longer pay any regard to Darus, or any other of the gods of our nation.

The people amongst whom I found the precious pearl, are distinguished by the
name of Methodists; and, respecting the essential points, they are all of one
heart and mind, that is, salvation through the name of Jesus, and none other;
and, from a deep sense of his goodness, are pressing forward toward the mark of
the prize. There is a sweetness in this, different from every other thing in
the world. Supposing a man in the enjoyment of all the pleasures, all the
profits, or riches together, with all the airy applauses of mortals, he will
come infinitely short of the real happiness the weakest Christian enjoys: they
will no more balance the happiness I feel at present. than the smallest feather
the largest mountain.

You are expert in war, and having been obliged to engage with our constant
enemies; know the satisfaction of a complete victory; your mind is elated with
joy, whilst laying the spoils of battle at the feet of your friends, and
rejoice with them at your safe return; but the Christian's conquest as far
exceeds this, as the great things of eternity exceeds the small things of time;
for "we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but likewise with principalities and
powers, and wicked spirits in high places; yea, the rulers of the darkness of
this world, and by faith we are more than conquerors, through him that has
loved us."

I went to the same place next sabbath, where God was pleased to shine upon my
soul, and providentially met with my Christian friend, who conducted me thither
at the first; he is now happily restored to the divine favor; for he told me
under the same sermon God was pleased to heal all his backslidings, and to love
him freely.

I could say much more to my friend, but want of time forbids. May the dear
Redeemer, who has been gracious to me, fasten these considerations upon my
friend's heart, and grant us an happy meeting at his right hand in the great
day. I should be glad to hear from you the first opportunity. Mean while I
remain.

Dear Drurow, Your most inviolate friend, LAWRENCE HARLOW.

FINIS.

