THE AMERICAN REMEMBRANCER, AND Universal Tablet of Memory.

THE AMERICAN REMEMBRANCER, AND Universal Tablet of Memory: CONTAINING A LIST
OF THE MOST EMINENT MEN, WHETHER IN ANCIENT OR MODERN TIMES, With the
Achievements for which they have been particularly distinguished: AS ALSO THE
MOST MEMORABLE EVENTS IN HISTORY, From the earliest period till the year 1795,
classed under distinct Heads, with their respective dates.

To which is added, A TABLE, COMPREHENDING THE PERIODS AT WHICH THE MOST
REMARKABLE CITIES AND TOWNS WERE FOUNDED, THEIR PRESENT POPULATION, LATITUDE,
AND LONGITUDE.

The whole being intended to form a comprehensive abridgement of History and
Chronology, particularly of that part which relates to America.

BY JAMES HARDY, A. M.

MULTUM IN PARVO. PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE
STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET. M.DCC.XCV.

Entered according to Act of Congress.

PREFACE.
TO present, at one view, a series of the most remarkable events, transactions,
and accidents which have occurred in ancient and modern times, and to transmit
to posterity the names and achievements of great men, particularly of those by
whose exertions, under Divine Providence, the United States enjoy their present
happy form of government, has been the principal design contemplated in the
present publication.

Through the whole of the following pages, the editor has selected his articles
from historians of the first rank, and from the most authentic Annalists; hence
he hopes, that his performance will be found useful to every class of readers
-- To the student it may frequently save the trouble of turning over a number
of volumes to refresh his memory; and to those whose leisure cannot admit of
the perusal of many books, it may contain both entertainment and instruction.
It will also be a remembrance to those who have forgotten what they have read,
and may serve as an epitome of universal history, particularly of that part
which respects America.

To obviate the confusion which would be occasioned by blending all
transactions, etc. together, the editor has classed the different subjects
under separate heads, each ranged in alphabetical order, which mode of
arrangement he hopes will, in various respects, be found more convenient than
the other.

Through every part of the work, the editor can with confidence assert, that he
has anxiously endeavored to render the information contained as interesting
and accurate as possible. Where he has sailed in either of these respects,
which he hopes has been seldom the case, he solicits the indulgence of a candid
public.

JAMES HARDY.

CONTENTS.
EMINENT men, with the achievements for which they have been particularly
distinguished, Page. 1 Inventions, improvements, and discoveries in the arts,
etc. with the names of those who have obtained patents for inventions and
discoveries in the United States, Page. 48 Memorable events, Page. 83 Religious
institutions, councils, sacred writings, etc. Page. 101 Population, government,
religion, etc. of the different continents, states, empires, kingdoms, etc.
Page. 119 Universities, colleges, and academies founded, Page. 126 Battles,
sieges, etc. Page. 131 Sea Fights, the most remarkable, since the year 1300,
Page. 156 States, empires, kingdoms, etc. founded, Page. 162 Societies,
companies, offices, etc. Page. 185 Earthquakes, famines, inundations, storms,
tempests, frosts, accidental fires, etc. Page. 193 Presidents of Congress,
Page. 223 The present governors of the different states, Page. 224 Memorable
accidents, Page. 225 Remarkable occurrences, Page. 228 European Princes, Page.
231 Miscellaneous articles, Page. 240
ERRATA.
THE reader is requested to correct the following.

Page 6, for Boudinot Elias, read Bowdoin James, -- and for New Brunswick, read
Brunswick, Massachussetts.

EMINENT MEN, WITH The Achievements FOR WHICH THEY HAVE BEEN PARTICULARLY
DISTINGUISHED.
AARON, the first high priest of the Jews, was born 1570, and died 1453 before
Christ.

Abel, born in the third year of the world, killed by Cain his brother 129
ditto.

Abercrombie General, defeated at Ticonderoga with great slaughter 1758.

Abraham, entertained three angels 1897, offered up his son Isaac 871; died
1821 before Christ, aged 175.

Achmet III. Emperor of the Turks, who encouraged printing in Constantinople,
died 1730.

Adam, the first man, died 3074 before Christ.

Adams John, of Massachussetts, was one of those patriots, who subscribed the
declaration of American Independence July 4, 1776: was chosen by Congress to
negociate a treaty of peace with Britain Sept. 25, 1779; appointed minister
Plenipotentiary to the States General, January 1, 1781, with whom he concluded
a treaty of amity and commerce October 8, 1782, subscribed the Provisional
articles of peace, between Britain and the United States at Paris, November 30,
following; and the definitive treaty of peace September 3, 1783: subscribed the
treaty of amity and commerce with Prussia August 5, 1785, being at that time
minister at the court of Britain, where he wrote his defense of the
constitution of the United States. On his return to his country, after so many
important services, he was elected Vice President of the United States April 6,
1789, and now continues in that station.

Adams, the patriotic Samuel, together with John Hancock, was by General Gage
exempted from that pardon which by proclamation he promised to the other
inhabitants of the colonies upon returning to their allegiance under the
British king June 12, 1775: was elected Governor of Massachussetts upon the
death of Governor Hancock 1794.

Addison Joseph, of England; author of the Spectators, Guardians, Poems and
politics, died June 17, 1719.

Alexander Sir William, obtained, a charter for Nova Scotia Sept. 10, 1621, and
afterward sold his right to the French 1630.

Alexander the Great, born 356; succeeded his father Philip 336; founded the
Grecian empire 331; died at Babylon 323 years before Christ.

Alexander III. Pope, who compelled the kings of England and France to hold his
stirrups, died 1181.

Alfred the Great, king of Britain, after subduing the Danish invaders, against
whom he fought 56 battles by sea and land, composed his body of laws, divided
England into counties, etc. and showed himself in every respect to be a wise
and magnanimous prince; he died 899.

Allen, Colonel Ethan, of Vermont, took Ticonderoga May 10, 1775; was taken and
put in irons by Sir Guy Carleton Sept. 25, 1775; published his Oracles of
Reason 1786, and died 1788.

Almagro, created Governor of Chili 1536; quarrelled with Pizzarro 1537; by
whom he was defeated and strangled 1539, aged 75.

Amherst General, took Louisburgh 1758; Crown Point and Ticonderoga 1759.

Ananias and his wife Sapphira, struck dead for falsehood, 33.

Andre Major, taken by three New York militia-men, as he was returning from a
conference with General Arnold at West Point, Sept. 27; and executed as a spy
at Tapaan, Oct. 2, 1780.

Andros, Sir Edmund, Governor of New England, arrived at Massachussetts 1686:
after a tyrannical administration of three years, he was seized by the people
and sent to Britain with 50 of his associates 1689.

Ankerstrom Captain, shot the king of Sweden, March 16, 1792; and was soon
after beheaded.

Anson, the celebrated circumnavigator, died 1762, aged 62.

Antoniette Maria, Queen of France, was beheaded Oct. 16, 1793, aged 38.

Archimedes, the Mathematician, the inventor of the sphere, was killed at
Syracuse 212 years before Christ.

Aristides the Grecian orator, lived 488 before Christ.

Aristotle, the Philosopher, died at Calcide 322 before Christ, aged 63.

Arnold, General Benedict, commanded the American fleet on Lake Champlain, and
was defeated by Sir Guy Carleton, Oct. 11, 1776. He bravely opposed the British
at Ridgefield, Connecticut, April 27, 1777, and relieved fort Schuyler,
deserted to the British Sept. 20, 1780; invaded Virginia, January 5, 1781;
destroyed New London and Groton, took fort Griswold, and put the garrison to
the sword, Sept. 13, 1781.

Ascue Ann, a Protestant, was cruelly tortured by Henry VIII. of England, who
to the disgrace of royalty. put his own hands to the rack, not thinking the
executioners sufficiently expert, 1546.

Ash, Dr. Author of the English Dictionary, Grammar, etc. died April 1775, aged
55.

Ash General, was surprised in Georgia by General Prevost, when 152 of his men
were killed and 162 made prisoners, May 3, 1779.

Attabalipa, Emperor of Quito, defeated his brother, and usurped the empire of
Peru 1532: was seized by Pizarro, who extorted from him an immense sum for his
ransom, and after a sham trial put him to death 1533.

Atterbury Dr. Bishop of Rochester, committed to the Tower Aug. 24, 1722;
exiled May 27, 1723; died Feb. 22, 1732, aged 69.

Augustine, St. Father of the Latin church, born 354; baptized 387; died 431.

BACON Roger, of England, famous for his writings on natural philosophy, died
1292.

Bacon Lord Ver^lam, of London, eminent for his writings on Natural Philosophy
and literature in general, died 1625.

Balchen Admiral, lost in the Victory man of war, Oct. 1744.

Barclay Robert, of Scotland, the author of the apology for the People called
Quakers, catechism, etc. born 1640; died 1690.

Barclay Thomas, appointed to negociate a treaty of peace between the United
States and the Emperor of Morocco, Oct. 11. 1785, concluded the treaty July 16,
1786.

Barlow Joel, of Connecticut, published his epic poem entitled "the Vision of
Columbus," 1786; his Address to the privileged orders of Europe, 1793.

Bar Colonel, made an eloquent speech in the British parliament against the
American Stamp Act, 1764.

Barrow, Rev. Dr. Isaac, of London, who wrote on natural philosophy,
mathematics; and also Sermons, died 1677, aged 46.

Baskerville John, of Birmingham, the celebrated printer of the classics, died
Jan. 18, 1775.

Baxter Andrew, of Old Aberdeen in Scotland, eminent for his writings on
metaphysics and natural philosophy, died 1750.

Bail of France, who wrote the historical and philosophical dictionary, died
1723.

Baylor, Lieutenant Colonel of horse, surprised by the British at old Tapaan,
New Jersey, while his men were asleep, and a most barbarous massacre took place
by order of the British General Gray, Sept. 27, 1778.

Beattie James, L L. D. of Aberdeen, celebrated for his essay on the
immutability of truth, and other metaphysical writings, as also for his poetry,
was alive 1794.

Beccaria Marquis, the author of a work on crimes and punishments, died in
Maryland, Nov. 29, 1794.

Becket Thomas, made Chancellor to Henry II. 1157, Archbishop of Canterbury
1162: impeached 1164; when he retired to France; reconciled to Henry 1170:
murdered in the Cathedral church, Dec. 29, 1170; cannonized by Pope Alexander
III. on Ash Wednesday 1172.

Bid, a Priest of Northumberland, in England, who wrote the history of the
Saxons, Scotch, etc. died 735

Bedford, Duke of, made a Regent of France 1422; died 1435.

Bellarmine, the celebrated defender of the doctrines of the Roman church, born
in Italy 1542; died 1621.

Benedict, St. Founder of the Benedictines, died 546, aged 66 years.

Benezet Anthony, of benevolent memory, was born at St. Quintin in the province
of Picardy in France, Jan. 31, 1713; arrived in Philadelphia Nov. 1731, and for
some time followed mercantile business; relinquished merchandise, and became
schoolmaster 1742: wrote many books against slavery and the African trade, and
spent his last years in instructing the negroes. After a life spent in acts of
constant benevolence, and having, left his fortune to the support of the
African school, he died May 36, 1784.

Bentley Rev. Doctor Richard, of Yorkshire in England, famous for his writings
on classical learning and criticism, was born 1662; and died 1742.

Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne, celebrated for his writings on metaphysics, died
1753, aged 73.

Bertholdus, who discovered gun powder, died 1340.

Beza Theodore, who translated the New Testament into Latin, was born at
Vezelai 1519 and died 1605.

Blackstone, Sir William, Judge of the court of common pleas, London, author of
the Commentaries on the Laws of England, died Feb. 14, 1780.

Blair Hugh, D. D. of Edinburgh, who wrote lectures on rhetoric, and sermons,
was alive 1794.

Boadicea, Queen of the Britons, who burnt London and killed 70,000 of the
inhabitants; poisoned herself, 61.

Boerhaave, the celebrated Physician of Leyden, died Sept. 23, 1738, aged 69.

Boileau, the French poet, who wrote satires, epistles, art of poetry,
translations of Longinus, etc. was born 1630, and died 1712.

Bolinbroke Lord, of Surry in England, who wrote upon philosophy, metaphysics
and politics, died 1751, aged 73.

Boudinot Elias, a member of Congress, gave 1000 l. (2666 dollars) to the
college at New Brunswick 1794.

Boulter, Archbishop of Armagh, in Ireland, who gave 30,000 l. Sterling
(133,200 dollars) to charitable uses, died 1742.

Bowdoin James, Governor of Massachussetts, wrote on philosophy and politics,
and died 1785.

Boyer, the Lexicographer, was born 1664, died 1729.

Boil, the honorable Robert, who wrote on natural and experimental philosophy
and theology, died 1691, aged 65.

Braddoc General, killed at Du Quesne, July 9, 1755.

Brahe Tycho, who invented a new solar system, was born in Denmark 1546, and
died 1601.

Brissot de Warwille, a native of France, traveled through the United States
1788; and so^^ after wrote an account of his travels. In all his writings, he
appears to have been a friend to humanity. He was guillotined Oct. 30, 1794.

Brookey John, of Devonshire in England, was alive in the year 1778, aged 135
years.

Brown Robert, founder of the sect called the Brownists, died 1630, aged 80.

Bruce James, the celebrated traveller and naturalist, who visited the source
of the Nile, and published an account of his travels, died at Kinnaird in
Scotland 1794.

Brutus Junius, by whose means the Roman government was changed from a monarchy
to a republic, died 509 years before Christ.

Buchannan George, of Dumbartonshire in Scotland, who wrote elegantly in latin
the history of Scotland, translated the Psalms of D^vid into Lyric poetry in
the same language, and published a number of essays on politics, etc. was born
1506, and died 1572.

Buffon, Count de, the celebrated naturalist, a native of France, was born 1707
and died April 16, 1788.

Burgoyne, General, surrendered himself and his army as prisoners of war to
General Gates and the American forces, Oct. 17, 1777: died in London, 1793.

Burnet Gilbert, of Edinburgh, Bishop of Sarum, was born 1643, distinguished
himself by his writings on history, biography, divinity, etc. died 1715.

Butler Samuel, of Worcester in England, author of Hudibras, a burlesque poem,
died 1680.

Byng, the British Admiral, accused of misconduct off Minorca, was shot at
Spithead March 14, 1757.

CABOT Sebastian, a native of Venice, who discovered North America in the year
1497, died 1557, aged 70.

Caesar Julius, after fighting fifty pitched battles, slaying upwards of one
milion of men and destroying the liberties of his country, was slain in the
senate house at Rome 44 before Christ.

Calvin, the founder of the Calvinists, was born at Picardy in France 1506, and
died at Geneva May 27, 1564.

Camden, William of England, distinguished by his history and antiquities, died
1623.

Campbell George, D. D. of Aberdeen in Scotland, who wrote a defense of the
miracles of JESUS; translation of the four Gospels, etc. died 1793.

Carleton Sir Guy, was defeated at Longueil by Colonel Warner, Oct. 31, 1775;
defeated Colonel Arnold on Lake Champlain Oct. 11, 1776; took command of the
Royal forces at New York, May 5, 1782; evacuated New York, Nov. 25, 1783, was
afterward created an English peer, under the name of Lord Dorchester, and
appointed Governor of Canada.

Cave Edward, the compiler of the first periodical magazine born 1691; and died
1754.

Caverley Sir Hugh, the first person, who used guns for the service of England,
died 1389.

Caxton William, the first who introduced into England, the art of printing by
fusile types, died 1494, aged 92.

Cervantes Michael, the author of Don Quixotte, etc. was born at Alcala in
Spain, died 1620, aged 69.

Charlemagne, king of France, who began the Empire of Germany, afterward
called the Western Empire 800; gave the present names to the winds and months,
and endeavored to restore learning in Europe, died 813, aged 70.

Charles I. king of England, was beheaded at London, Jan 30. 1649.

Chaucer, of London, commonly styled the Father of English poetry, was born
1328, and died 1400.

Chauncey, Reverend Doctor, of Boston, who wrote a complete view of Episcopacy,
from the Fathers, Salvation for all men, Sermons, etc. died 1787.

Ch^sterfield, Earl of, famous for his letters to his son and other writings,
died 1773, aged 78.

Christiana, Queen of Sweden, resigned the crown June 6, 1654; and died at
Rome, April 9, 1689.

Churchill, Rev. Charles, eminent for his satirical poems, was born 1731; died
1764.

Cibber Colley, born 1671; made Poet Laureat Dec. 1730; wrote 25 tragedies and
comedies, and died 1757.

Cicero, the famous Roman Orator, was born 107: banished 58, and put to death
43 years before Christ aged 64.

Cincinnatus Quintus, when his country was oppressed, was taken from the plough
to be Roman Dictator 458 before Christ: and after having procured peace to
Rome, again returned to his rural employment.

Clar^ndon, See Hyde.

Clarke Colonel, made an expedition into the Indian country 1778; where he took
the Lieutenant Governor of Detroit and the garrison prisoners.

Clarke, Reverend Doctor Samuel, of England, famous for his writings on
mathematics, divinity, etc. died 1729.

Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, killed herself 220 years before Christ, aged 41.

Clinton Sir Henry, arrived at Philadelphia and took command of the Royal
forces May 8, 1778; took Charlestown South Carolina, May 12, 1780; was
superseded by Carleton, May 1782.

Clinton George, the first Governor of New York after the revolution, by his
exertions prevented the disbandment of the American army, through want of bread
1780, continued Governor of that State till the year 1795, when he resigned.

Clive Colonel, defeated the Nabob, June 26, 1757; created a Peer 1762; became
insane, and killed himself Nov. 1774, aged 49.

Clum, Mrs. near Lichfield in England, died Jan. 23, 1772, aged 138, and had
lived 103 years in one house.

Codrus, the last king of the Athenians, voluntarily gave his life for the good
of his country, 1095 before Christ.

Coke, Lord Chief Justice, who wrote on the laws of England, was born 1549, and
died 1634.

Collyer, Sir George, took the American frigate Hancock, July 18, 1778;
accompanied by General Mathews he made a descent on Virginia May 10, 1779;
destroyed the American fleet at Penobscot, August following.

Columbus Christopher, a native of Genoa, after having in vain, made overtures
to most of the European princes, was at last enabled to set out on a voyage of
discoveries by means of Isabella Queen of Spain 1492: set sail Aug. 3, and
discovered the island now called St. Christophers, Oct. 11, 1492, sailed for
Spain Jan. 4, 1493: set out on his second voyage Sept. 25, following;
discovered great part of the West Indies, and returned to Spain 1496; sailed on
his third voyage May 3, 1498, and on Aug. 1, following, discovered the
continent of America. By the machinations of his enemies, he was sent home to
Spain in Irons, Nov. 25, 1500. Having vindicated his conduct, he again set out
on his fourth voyage May 9, 1502; made many important discoveries, and set out
from Hispaniola for Spain, Sept. 12, 1504; died at Valad. ^id May 20, 1506.

Confucius, the Chinese philosopher, born 515, before Christ.

Conway General, opposed, in Parliament, the measures which were taken to tax
the American Colonies 1764: was against the American war, and conde^^^^ it in
the most decisive terms, 1775.

Cook, Captain James, sailed from Plymouth on a voyage of discoveries Aug. 26,
1768; explored many new islands in the Pacific Ocean, and returned to England
June 12, 1771; set out upon his second voyage of discoveries July 13, 1772: and
returned July 30, 1775, having only lost one man out of a crew of 118, during a
voyage of three years and eighteen days; proceeded on his third voyage 1776,
and was killed in an affray by the natives of O'why'hee Feb. 14, 1779.

Copernicus, was born at Thorn in Prussia, 1473; published the Pythagorean, or
true system of the universe, and died 1543.

Cornwallis Lord, surrendered his whole army consisting of 7000 men, to
Generals Washington and Rochambeau at York town Virginia, Oct. 19, 1781, soon
after returned to England, and was appointed Governor of the British
territories in the East Indies.

Cortes Ferdinando, was born in Spain 1485; made his first voyage to America
1504; entered Mexico and was received with great respect by the Emperor
Montezuma, Nov. 8, 1509: commissioned by the king of Spain as Captain General
and Governor of New Spain 1523; discovered the Peninsula of Calefornia 1536;
returned to Spain 1541; and died Dec. 2, 1547.

Cotton Sir Robert, the celebrated Antiquarian, died 1631, aged 60.

Cowley Abraham, of London, who wrote miscellaneous poetry, died 1667.

Coxe Tench, at present commissioner of the revenue of the United States,
published 1794, a much celebrated performance entitled, a View of the United
States.

Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, introduced to king Henry VIII. 1529; burnt
at Oxford March 21, 1556.

Cromwell Oliver, born at Huntingdon in England, April 25, 1599, chosen member
of parliament 1628; made a colonel in the army 1643; declared Protector for
life Dec. 12, 1653; was offered the title of king, which he refused, May 8,
1657: died Sept. 3, 1658.

Cullen Doctor William, of Edinburgh, one of the most eminent Physicians of the
present century, who wrote the Practice of Physic, Materia Medica, etc. died
Feb. 5, 1789.

Curtis Commodore, an English officer, when the floating batteries were on fire
before Gibraltar, at the eminent hazard of his own life, and those of his
gallant crew, heroically rescued from the flames 357 Spaniards, Sept. 13, 1782.

Cyrus, the first king of Persia, died 529 years before Christ.

DACIER Madame, a French lady, who wrote a translation of Homer, Terence, etc.
died August 9, 1720

Damm Thomas, of Leighton in Chester, England, died 1648, aged 154 years.

Daniel, was sent captive to Babylon 606; cast into the lions den 538; foretold
the Persian empire 534, before Christ.

Darius, the Mede, king of Assyria, died 538, before Christ.

David, king of Israel, succeeded Saul 1055; died 1015, before Christ.

Day John, Printer, the first who introduced the Greek and Saxon characters
into England, died 1584.

Deane Silas, appointed commissioner to the court of France, by Congress Sept.
26, 1776; recalled Dec. 8, 1777.

Defoe Daniel, author of Robinson Crusoe and of a number of political and
commercial tracts, died in London, April 1731, aged 68.

Demosthenes, the celebrated Grecian orator, recalled from banishment 322;
poisoned himself 315 before Christ aged 60.

Descartes, the celebrated French philosopher, born at Touraine 1556; died 1650.

Dodd, Reverend Doctor, who had been remarkably assiduous in prom^ting the
different charitable institutions in London, was found guilty of forgery and
executed June 27, 1777.

Doria Andrew, born at Genoa in the year 1468, having rescued his country from
oppression, was offered the sovereignty, which he refused, and gave to the
people a republican government. He died 1561.

Drake, Sir Francis, the first English circumnavigator, set sail on his voyage
round the world 1577; returned 1580; died Jan. 28, 1595, aged 50.

Drinker Edward, was born in 1688, in a cottage where Philadelphia now stands,
and which was then only inhabited by Indians. At his death, Nov. 1782, the city
contained 40,000 inhabitants.

Dryden John, of Northamptonshire, in England, who wrote tragedies, comedies,
satiric poems, and a translation of Virgil, died May 1, 1700.

Dumouri^r, born 1739; commanded a French legion in defense of the liberties of
Poland 1770: sent to Sweden by Lewis XV. to promote the revolution in that
kingdom 1772; appointed minister for foreign affairs March 12, 1792, minister
at war June following. He soon after took command of the French army, and at
first was very successful; but at last forsook the cause of the republic, and
after having in vain endeavored to induce his soldiers to re-establish
monarchy, deserted to the enemy April 1, 1793.

Dunmore Lord, Governor of Virginia, quitted Williamsburgh with his family and
went on board a British man of war July 8, 1775, being the first American
Governor, who relinquished his station on account of the troubles: attempted
without success to burn the town of Hampton Oct. 27, 1775; proclaimed martial
law, and invited slaves and apprentices to join the Royal standard Nov. 7,
following; was defeated at Norfolk by Colonel Woodford Dec. 14, 1775, left
Virginia July 8, and arrived off Staten Island Aug. 14, 1776.

Dwight, Rev. Timothy, of Connecticut, published an Epic poem, entitled "the
conquest of Canaan," 1785.

ELI, the Eleventh Judge of Israel, broke his neck at Shiloh 1116, before
Christ, aged 98.

Elijah, the Prophet, was taken up into Heaven 896, before Christ.

Elliot, the Rev. Mr. styled the Great Indian apostle, translated the Bible and
several other books into the Indian language, 1664.

Elliot General, who bravely withstood the attacks of the French and Spaniards
at Gibraltar, was after the peace of 1783, created Lord Heathfield. He died in
Germany about the year 1789.

Enoch, was translated into Heaven ^87, of the world aged 365.

Erasmus, who wrote colloquies, Praise of Folly, etc. was born at Rotterdam
1467, and died 1536.

Esop, the first Greek fabulist, died 556, before Christ.

Est^ing, Count de, anchored in the Delaware July 8; arrived at Newport, Rhode
Island, July 29, sailed for Boston Aug. 22, proceeded to the West Indies Nov.
3, 1778; took St. Vincent June 18, 1779; and Granada July 3, following;
defeated the British fleet under Admiral Byron July 6, 1779; attacked Savannah
in Georgia, but was repulsed, Sept. 16, 1779.

Euclid, the celebrated mathematician, died about 300 years before Christ, aged
74.

Eugene, Prince, commanded at the battle of Hochstet Aug. 5, 1704; was
victorious at Turin Sept. 7, 1706, at Oudenarde 1708; wounded before Lisle the
same year; defeated the Grand vizier at Peterwarden Aug. 5, 1716; died April
10, 1735, aged 73.

Eusebius, the celebrated writer on church history, flourished 315.

FARQUHAR George, of Londonderry in Ireland, who wrote eight comedies; died
1707.

Faulkner George, the celebrated printer in Dublin, died 1775.

Faust, or Faustus John, claimant of the invention of printing, died 1466.

Faux Guy, one of those principally concerned in the Gunpowder plot, was
executed at London Jan. 31, 1606.

Fayette, the Marquis de la, appointed Major General in the American army July
31, 1777: wounded at the battle of Brandyw^ne Sept. ^^, following; embarked for
France Jan. 7, 1779: came to the American head quarters, with news of the
arrival of the French fleet and troops, May 12, 1780; evacuated Richmond in
Virginia and retreated before Cornwall is, May 27, 1781, after several
skirmishes obliged Lord Cornwallis to retire to his shipping July, 1781; had
permission to return to France Oct, 23, 1781, announced by letters to Congress
a general peace, March 24, 1783; appointed to command the National guards at
Paris July, 1789. Displeased with the deposition of Louis, he left the French
service Aug. 19, 1792; was taken in Liege (then a neutral country) and contrary
to the law of nations made prisoner of war; escaped from confinement Nov. 1794;
and it is hoped he will speedily arrive in America.

Fenelon, Archbishop of Cambray, who wrote Telemac^us, Dialogues of the Dead,
Dialogues on Eloquence Demonstration of the being of God, etc. died 1716.

Ferguson James, of Aberdeenshire in Scotland, the famous astronomer, died Nov.
16, 1776.

Ferguson Major, defeated at kings mountain by the Americans Oct. 1780.

Fielding Henry, the author of Tom Jones, Joseph Andrews etc. was born in
Somersetshire in England, 1707, and died 1754.

Fletcher, Governor, of New York, projected a tax and put it in execution for
building churches and supporting Episcopal ministers 1693.

Foot Samuel, of Cornwall in England, author of a number of plays, died 1777.

Forthon James, died in the island of Granada in the West Indies, aged 127,
Feb. 10, 1773.

Fothergill Dr. John, of Yorkshire in England, eminent for his writings on
Philosophy and medicine, died Dec. 26, 1780.

Fox George, Founder of the society of Friends, commonly called Quakers, was
born in Leicestershire England, July 1624; began to preach 1647, and was
repeatedly sent to prison and otherwise harassed for his religious opinions;
set sail for the West Indies June 12, 1671: arrived at Barbados Aug. 3,
following; went to Jamaica in the Month of Nov. afterward sailed for America
and propagated his doctrines through many parts thereof; sailed for England
March 21, 1673, afterward repeatedly visited different parts of Holland and
Germany; where he gained several converts to his principles; died in London
Nov. 13, 1690.

Fox John, the martyrologist, born 1517; died 1587.

Franklin Doctor Benjamin, was born at Boston Jan. 17, 1706: commenced Printer
in Philadelphia 1728: elected clerk of the General assembly of Pennsylvania
1736, suggested the plan of the Philadelphia library An elegant statue of
Doctor Franklin, presented to the library company by William Bingham, Esquire
decorates the front of the building.
1731, appointed Postmaster 1737; formed the first fire company in
Philadelphia, 1738: invented the stoves which are called by his name 1745,
began his electrical experiments 1747, was appointed Postmaster for the
British colonies 1753; sent commissioner to the Albany Congress, where he
presented a plan for the union of the colonies 1754, was sent agent to Britain
by Pennsylvania 1757; returned 1762; re-appointed agent to Britain 1764;
returned to America and was elected Postmaster by Congress July 26, 1775; sent
as Plenipotentiary to the court of France 1778; signed the Provisional articles
of peace at Paris Nov. 30, 1782: a treaty with Sweden, April 3, 1783; with
Prussia, 1785; returned to Philadelphia, Sept. following; elected President of
Pennsylvania, Oct. 1785: a member of the Federal convention 1787, died at
Philadelphia, April 17, 1790, aged 8^ years and three months.

GAGE General, arrived at Boston, March 13, 1774; seized the powder at
Charlestown, Sept. 1, following sent a detachment of of soldiers to Salem, to
seize some brass cannon, Feb. 26, 1775; issued a proclamation offering a pardon
in the king's name to all who would immediately lay down their arms, except to
Samuel Adams, and John Hancock, June 12, 1775, sailed for England, Oct. 10,
following.

Galen, the Physician, born at Pergamus about 131, died 201.

Galileo, a native of Florence, introduced the use of telescopes, 1610; died
1642, aged 78.

Galvez, Don Barnardo de, Spanish Governor of Louisiana, recognized American
independence, and marched against the British settlements on the Mississipi,
Aug. 19, 1779; took Mobille 1780.

Garrick David, the English Roscius, first appeared on the London stage, 1741,
died January 20, 1779.

Gates, General Horatio, appointed to command the Northern army, June 17, 1776.
superseded by General Schuyler, May 1777; re-appointed by Congress, Aug. 4,
following; took Burgoyne, Oct. 17, 1777; defeated by Cornwallis in Carolina,
Aug. 1780: resigned his command to General Green, Oct. following.

Gaunor Eychan, died Sept. 16, 1786, in Merionethshire England, aged 140.

Gay John, of Exeter in England, who wrote poems, fables, and a number of
dramatic pieces, died 1732.

Genet, Citizen Edmund Charles, first Ambassador from the French republic,
arrived at Charleston, South Carolina, April 8, 1793; at Philadelphia, May 17,
following; differed with the American Executive relative to fitting out
privateers, selling prizes, etc. in consequence of which, he was soon after
superseded by Citizen Fauchet.

George III. king of Great Britain, was born June 4, 1738; succeeded his
grandfather, Oct. 25, 1760; married Charlotte Sophia, a German princess, Sept.
8, 1761, was deranged in his senses from Oct. 1788, to March 1789.

Gerard Sieur, the first Ambassador from the court of France to the United
States, was introduced to Congress, August 6, 1778.

Goldsmith, Dr. Oliver, who wrote poems, histories, essays, etc. died 1774.

Gordon, Lord George, headed the Protestant association at London, June 2,
1780; a few years afterward turned Jew, was imprisoned in Newgate for a
supposed libel against the late Queen of France, where he died 1794.

Gower John, of Wales, the first English poet, died 1402.

Grass Count de, engaged Sir Samuel Hood off Fort Royal, and had a decided
superiority; April 28, 1781; assisted in the reduction of Cornwallis, Oct.
1781; sailed from the Chesapeake for the West Indies, Nov. 5, following,
attacked Sir Samuel Hood unsuccessfully, Jan. 1782; was taken prisoner by
Admiral Rodney, April 12, 1782.

Green, General Nathaniel, born at Warwick, in the State of Rode Island, 1741;
elected by Congress Brigadier-general, June 22, 1775: took command of the
Southern army, Dec. 14, 1780; was obliged to retreat from Camden by Lord
Rawdon, April 25, 1781; was victorious at the battle of the Eu^aw Springs,
Sept. 8, 1781, died in Georgia about the year 1788.

Gregory James, of Aberdeen, celebrated for his writings on mathematics,
geometry, and optics, died 1675, aged 40.

Gunter, Rev. Edmund, the mathematician, invented the scale known by his name,
died 1726, aged 46.

Gustavus, III. the late king of Sweden, was born Jan. 24, 1746; ascended the
throne 1771; effected a revolution in the government without bloodshed, 1772;
was shot by Captain Ankerstrom at a masquerade, March 16, 1792, and died of his
wounds on the 29th, following.

Guy Thomas, bookseller, of London, died Dec. 27, 1774, aged 79; and left
200,000 l. Sterling (888,000 dollars) for maintaining an hospital now known by
his name.

HALLEY, Dr Edmund, who wrote on natural philosophy, astronomy and navigation,
died 1742.

Hamilton Alexander, acted as Aid de Camp to General Washington during a great
part of the American war; and after the peace contributed greatly by his
writings, under the signature of Phocion, to eradicate the animosities which
still remained in the minds of the people. He was the only member from New York
who remained firm at his post during the federal convention, 1787, and
afterward by his essays under the signature of the Federalist; and his
irrefiagable arguments in the state convention, was the happy means of getting
the new constitution ratified by the state of New York. He was appointed
secretary of the treasury, 1789, and after having resigned, Feb. 1. 1795,
retired to private life.

Hancock John, was President of Congress, at the declaration of American
independence, July 4, 1776, elected governor of Massachusetts, Oct. 25, 1780:
again re-elected, April 1788, and died 1794.

Handel George Frederic, died in London, April 12. 1759, aged 74.

Hanway Jonas, the author of travels, miscellanies, etc. died Sept. 1786, aged
74 years.

Harmer, General Josiah, was defeated by the Miami Indians with great loss,
Sept. 30, 1790.

Harris John, author of the Hermes; Philological inquiries, and Philosophical
Arrangement, died in England, Dec. 21, 1780.

Harrison, Mr, inventer of the watch for discovering the longitude, died in
England, March 24, 1776, aged 84.

Harvey Dr. William, of Kent in England, who discovered the circulation of the
blood, died 1657, aged 79.

Hayne, Colonel Isaac, an American officer, was exexcuted as a rebel by order
of Lord Rawdon and Colonel Balfour, at Charleston South Carolina, Aug. 4, 1781.

Helvetius, the learned, died 1772.

Hippocrates, the physician, died 361, before Christ aged 98.

Hoadley Benjamin, Bishop of Winchester, who wrote sermons, etc. died 1761.

Home Henry, Lord Kaims of Scotland, who wrote Elements of Criticism, Sketches
of the History of Man, etc. died 1782.

Homer, the poet, flourished about 907, before Christ.

Hopkins Commodore, commander of the American fleet, took New Providence, March
1777.

Horace, the Roman poet, born 65, died 8, before Christ.

Howard John, of benevolent memory, who wrote an account of the prisons and
Lazarettos, which he had visited etc. died at Cherson in Russia, Jan. 20, 1790.

Huddy Captain John, hanged by a part of refugees, March 4, 1782.

Hume David, of Scotland, author of the History of England and a number of
essays, died Aug. 25, 1776.

Hunt. Captain Thomas, of infamous memory, entered 20 of the New England
Indians on board his ship and carried them to Malaga, where he sold them to the
Spaniards for slaves at 20 l. Sterling each (about 89 Do^lars) 1614.

Hunter Dr. William, of Lanerkshire in Scotland, the celebrated anatomist, died
1783.

Hutchison Doctor Francis, of Airshhire in Scotland, who wrote a system of
moral philosophy, died 1748.

Hutchinson Thomas, chief justice of the supreme court in Massachussetts,
attacked by a mob, who destroyed his house, furniture, and papers, August 26,
1764, published a history of Massachussets 1767; was appointed Governor, April
1771; advocated the supremacy of the British Parliament in his speech to the
General court, which gave great uneasiness, January 1773; left the colony,
April 1775, and his papers which proved his unfriendly disposition to America,
were soon after found and secured.

Hutton John, of the State of New York, died 1794, aged 108.

Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, in England, was born 1612; he wrote the history of
the civil wars in England, and was banished 1667; and died Dec. 7, 1764.

IGNATIUS Loyola, founder of the Jesuits; born 1491; died 1556; canonized by
Pope Paul V. 1609.

Isaac, Abraham's son, died 1717 before Christ, aged 180.

Isaiah, began to prophecy 786, and was put to death 696 before Christ.

JAY John, elected President of Congress, Dec. 10, 1778: appointed to negociate
a treaty with the king of Spain, Oct. 15, 1779: chosen minister for foreign
affairs, May 4, 1784; appointed chief justice of the United States, 1789; sent
as envoy extraordinary to the court of Britain, April 1794, with whom he
concluded a treaty of amity, commerce and navigation.

Jefferson Thomas, a representative in congress at the declaration of American
Independence, July 4, 1776: was sent as ambassador to the court of France 1784;
appointed secretary of State 1789; resigned and retired to private life 1794.
He also wrote notes on Virginia which are much celebrated.

Jenkins Henry, of Yorkshire in England, died 1670, aged 169.

Jenyns Soame, author of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion, and
other pieces, died Dec. 18, 1787.

Jerome, of Prague, burnt May 30, 1416.

Joan de Arc, the maid of Orlean, who repeatedly led her countrymen to victory
over the English, was at last taken and burnt, June 14, 1431.

Job, died 1143 before Christ, aged 189.

John, the Evangelist, died Dec. 27, 99, aged 91.

Johnson Ben, of London, who wrote 53 dramatic pieces; died 1637, aged 32.

Johnson Dr. Samuel, of Lichfield in England, who wrote an English Dictionary,
biography, essays and poetry; died Dec. 13, 1784, aged 75.

Jones Inigo, the celebrated architect, was born 1572; died 1652.

Jones Captain Paul, joined the Americans soon after the commencement of the
late war; landed at Whitehaven in Britain, where he did considerable damage
1778: engaged Captain Pearson off Flamborough head in England; and after a
desperate engagement took him and his ship the Serapis, Sept. 23, 1779; was
honored by the French king with the cross of military honor 1781. Appointed
an Admiral in the Ru^^^an service 1786, and died at Paris 1790.

Jortin, Reverend Dr. of England, who wrote the life of Erasmus, Ecclesiastic
history and sermons; died 1770.

Joseph, sold to the Egyptians 1728: died in Egypt 1635 before Christ, aged 110.

Julian, the Apostate, died 363, aged 31.

Juvenal, the celebrated Roman Satyrist, was born 45; died 127.

KALB Baron de, received eleven wounds in the battle of Cambden, was taken by
the British, and died Aug. 1780. Congress resolved that a monument should be
erected to his memory at Annapolis, Oct. 14th. following.

Keil Dr. John, of Edinburgh, who wrote on mathematics, was born 1671; died
1721.

Kempis Thomas a, who wrote on devotion, died 1471.

Kennicot Doctor Ben^amin, who published the Hebrew bible, etc. died Aug. 24,
1783, aged 83.

Kepler John, the Astronomer, born at Wittemberg in Germany 1571; died 1630.

Kidd, the famous buccaneer, seized at Boston and im^risoned; from whence he
was carried to England 1699.

King Captain, the companion of Captain Cook, died Nov. 1784.

Knox John, the principal person engaged in establishing the Presbyterian
religion in Scotland, was born 1515, and died 1570.

Knox Henry, after twenty years employment in the service of his country, and
several years as secretary at war, retired from public life, Jan. 1, 1795. In
the answer to his letter of resignation, the President of the United States
declared "that he had deserved well of his country."

Kouli Khan, usurped the Persian throne, March 11, 1732; was assassinated by
his sons, June 1747.

LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury, was beheaded Jan. 10. 1645, aged 71.

Laurens Henry, elected President of Congress, Nov. 1, 1777: commissioned to
negociate a treaty with the Dutch 1779; taken on his way to Holland by the
Vestal Frigate, Sept. 3, 1780, and committed to the tower of London on a charge
of high treason, Oct. 4, following; discharged Dec. 31, 1782. He died at
Charleston South Carolina, Dec. 20, 1792, and his body was burnt a few days
after agreeably to his will, in which he stated that he considered his body to
be too valuable to be consumed by worms.

Laurens, Lieutenant Colonel John, chosen special minister to France, Dec. 23,
1780; accomplished his mission and returned, Aug. 25, 1781; received the thanks
of Congress for his good conduct, Sept. 5, following and was mortally wounded
in an engagement with the British near Combaka-ferry, Aug. 25, 1782.

Ledyard, the great traveller, born in Long Island, state of New York, after
having circumnavigated the globe with Captain Cook, and traveled through most
parts of America and Europe, and a great part of Africa, died at Grand Cairo
1788.

Lee Nathaniel, of London, who wrote a number of tragedies, died 1690.

Lee Arthur, appointed commissioner to the court of France, Sept. 26, 1776.

Lee General, taken prisoner by the British, Dec. 13, 1776: put under an arrest
for misconduct, Aug. 12, 1778.

Lee Major, Commandant of horse, attacked the British post at Powles-hook and
took the garrison prisoners, July 19, 1779: defeated the royalists near
Hillsborough in Virginia, Feb. 25. 1781.

Leland, the Reverend Doctor John, of Lancashire in England, who wrote an
answer to Deistical writers, died 1761.

Leslie General, evacuated Charleston South Carolina, Dec. 14, 1782.

Lilly William, the famous Grammarian, died 1553, aged 55.

Linnaeus, the botanist, died at Upsal in Sweden, Jan. 10, 1778, aged 71.

Lincoln General, attacked the British at Stono ferry in South Carolina, June
20, 1779; was repulsed in a joint attack with Count D'Estaing against the
British at Savannah, Oct. 1779; capitulated with Sir Henry Clinton at
Charleston, May, 12, 1780; received the submission of the Royal army at
York-town, Oct. 29, 1781; marched from Boston at the head of the State militia
against the insurgents Jan. 19, 1787, who dispersed in a few days after with
the loss of a very few lives.

Livingston William, elected governor of New Jersey 1776: wrote poems, essays
and politics, and died 1790.

Livius Titus, the Roman historian, born 58 before Christ: died in 18.

Lock John, of Somersetshire in England, born 1632, wrote on philosophy,
government and theology; died Nov. 28, 1704.

Logan James, of Philadelphia, collected a number of rare and curious books,
which at his death he left for the use of the public; the number was afterward
augmented by his son William Logan, who died 1776. These collections are called
the Loganian Library.

Lollard, began to propagate his opinions in opposition to the church of Rome,
1315; was burnt 1351.

Longinus, the Grecian orator, was put to death by Aurelian; 273.

Louis, XVI. late king of France, was born Aug. 23, 1754; married to Maria
Antonietta of Germany, April 19, 1770: abolished torture in France by edict,
Aug. 25, 1780; issued an edict for convening the notables, Dec. 29, 1786;
surrounded the members of the Parliament of Paris with an armed force and sent
the members who opposed his measures to prison, May 1788: declared "that he
would defend the new constitution t^ the last moment of his existence," Feb. 4,
1790; privately departed from Paris, with a view, as was supposed, to join the
enemies of his country, June 20, 1791; was intercepted at Varennes and
reconducted to Paris, on the 25th following; suspended from his office, Aug.
10, 1792: brought to trial, Dec. 11, following, condemned, Jan. 19, 1793, and
beheaded, Jan. 21, following.

Lovat Lord, beheaded for treason in London, 1747.

Luther Martin, born in Saxony 1483: began his opposition to the church of Rome
1518; died 1546.

MAGELLAN, in the service of Spain, discovered the straits between the
continent of South America and Terra del Fuego, which now bear his name, 1518.
He was killed by the inhabitants of the Marianne islands 1520.

Mahomet, born at Mecca, May 5, 570; began to propogate his doctrines 612: fled
from Mecca to Medina, in the 54th year of his age and 10th of his ministry 622:
from which era the Mahometans compute their time and call it the hegira; died
June 18, 1631.

Mandeville Sir John, the celebrated traveller, died 1372.

Massascoit, an Indian chief, visited the Plymouth settlers with 60 attendants,
and entered into a friendly treaty with the English, March 1621, which was
inviolably observed for 50 years.

Marlborough John, Duke of, died June 16, 1722, aged 72.

Martial, of Spain, the epigrammatic poet, died 104.

Mary, Queen of Scots, fled to England, May 16, 1568, was beheaded by order of
Queen Elizabeth, Feb. 8, 1587, aged 44.

Mazarine Cardinal, died 1661, aged 59.

M'Kenzie Sir George, of Dundee, who wrote on the antiquities and laws of
Scotland, died 1691.

M'Laurin Collin, of Argyleshire in Scotland, wrote a system of algebra and a
view of Newton's philosophy; died 1746.

Mead Dr. Richard, of London, wrote on poisons, plague, small pox, and
medicine, died 1754.

Meigs Colonel, made an expedition to Sagg harbor, Long Island, May 23, 1777.
when he burnt 12 vessels laden with stores for the British army; took 90
prisoners, and returned to Guill^r^ from whence he set out, within the space of
25 hours, without losing a man, having by land and water transported his men 90
miles.

Mercer, the American General Congress have allowed his son a pension, of 400
Dollars per annum, till he arrive at the age of 21 years.
, was killed in the battle at Princeton, Jan. 2, 1777.

Methuselah, died 1656, of the world, aged 969.

Middleton, Rev. Dr. Coniers, born 1683, in Yorkshire England, who wrote the
life of Cicero, etc. died 1750.

Mifflin Thomas, elected by Congress Brigadier General, May 16, 1776: elected
Governor of Pennsylvania, Oct. 1788, and continued in that station in 1795.

Milton John, who wrote Paradise Lost; Paradise regained and various other
pieces in verse and prose, died blind 1674.

Mirabeau, one of the greatest orators of the age, and the most influential
leader in the French convention, died April 1792, aged 44.

Moliere, the French writer, was born 1620, died 1672.

Monk General, by whose army Charles II. of England was restored, made Duke of
Albemarle, July 13, 1660: died Jan. 4, 1670.

Monro, Doctor Alexander, of Edinburgh, who wrote on the anatomy of the human
body, etc. died 1751.

Montesquieu, of Bourdeaux, who wrote the spirit of Laws, Grandeur and
Declension of the Roman Empire, etc. died 1755.

Montezuma, Emperor of Mexico, taken by Cortes and stoned to death by his own
subjects, for advising them to surrender to the Spaniards 1521.

Montgomery, General Richard, was born in Ireland 1737. Being fired with the
love of liberty and in some measure naturalized to America by marriage, he
early espoused the Republican cause; took Montreal, Nov. 12, 1775; was killed
in storming Quebec, Dec. 31, following, aged 38 years, A monument was erected
to his memory at St. Paul's church, New York, by order of Congress.

More, Sir Thomas, of England, who wrote on history, politics and divinity, was
beheaded, July 6, 1535.

Morgan General, defeats the British troops at the Cowpens; for which he
received the thanks of Congress, Jan. 17, 1781.

Morris Robert, of Pennsylvania, was a member of Congress at the declaration of
American independence, July 4, 1776, elected financier by Congress, May 26,
1781, in which station he continued during the war, and frequently interposed
his private credit for the service of his country; was a member of the federal
convention 1787, and afterward elected a senator of the United States;
declined any longer continuance in public life 1795.

Moses, born 1571: died 1451, before Christ.

Movat, a surgeon of Dumfries in Scotland, died Feb. 21, 1776, aged 136.

Mugford Captain, took the British ship Hope, in Boston bay, laden with 1500
barrels of powder, and a variety of other military implements, May 17, 1776.

NAPIER John, of Marchestown in Scotland, who discovered the Logarithms, died
1622, aged 67.

Nero, the Roman Emperor, murdered his mother 55: died 68, aged 32.

Newton Sir Isaac, born in Lincolnshire in England, Dec. 25, 1642, wrote on
mathematics, astronomy and optics: died March 20, 1727.

Noah, directed to build the ark 1536, of the world, died 1998, before Christ,
aged 950.

OGLETHORPE General, obtained a charter for Georgia, and commenced a settlement
1732.

Orleans Duke of, first prince of the blood in France, was banished by the king
for opposing the registering a loan of 19 millions sterling (84,360,000
Dollars); as a member of the national assembly, he was among the first who
voted for the king's death, January 19, 1792, beheaded 1793.

Otway Thomas, London, who wrote tragedies, comedies and several other poems,
died 1685.

PARKER, Sir Peter, with a squadron of ships and a body of troops commanded by
General Clinton and Lord Cornwallis, made an unsuccessful attempt against
Charlestown, June 25, 1776.

Parr Thomas, of Shropshire, in England, who lived in 10 different reigns, died
1635, aged 160.

Patrick, St. first Bishop of Ireland, died 491, aged 122.

Pain Thomas, born in Norfolk in England, Jan. 29, 1737: arrived at
Philadelphia in the winter 1774; where he was at first employed as the Editor
of a magazine by Mr. Robert Aitken; published a book entitled "Common Sense,
Jan. 10, 1776: was soon after appointed by Congress Secretary to the committee
for foreign affairs, which office he resigned, Feb. 8, 1779: sailed for France
1786: where he published a number of political tracts; went to England 1789,
and soon after published "The Rights of Man", for which he was afterward
prosecuted; appointed a deputy to the national convention of France, to which
country he removed 1792, and soon after wrote "The Age of Reason."

Paul, St. converted 33: died June 29, 67.

Pearce Zachariah, Bishop of Rochester, who wrote annotations on the New
Testament, etc. died June 29, 1774, aged 84.

Penn William, was born in England 1644; obtained his patent to Pennsylvania
from Charles, II. March 4, 1680; granted a charter to adventurers, May 1682;
died in England 1718.

Penn John, the last proprietor of Pennsylvania, died in Philadelphia, 1795.

Peter, of Russia, visited England School, contributed greatly to the
civilization of his subjects, and took the title of Emperor, Oct. 1721. He died
soon after.

Pharaoh, king of Egypt, ordered all the male children of the Hebrews to be
destroyed 1537; drowned with his whole army, May 11, 1491, before Christ.

Philip, III. of Spain, renounced his crown to his son; on whose death he
resumed the government 1724, died 1726.

Pickens General, pursued the Cherokees, who had violated the peace of the
United States, and in 14 days, burnt 14 villages and took a number of prisoners
without losing a man, 1781.

Pilate Pontius, made governor of Judea 27; slew himself 40.

Pindar, the Grecian lyric poet, died 435, before Christ, aged 80.

Pit William, Earl of Chatham, died May 11, 1778, aged 70.

Pizarro, a Spaniard, with an army of 160 men, after a number of the most
unheard of treacheries and cruelties, subdued the whole country of Peru 1533;
died 1541, aged 63.

Pope Alexander, of London, who wrote poems, letters, and a translation of
Homer, died 1744, aged 55.

Potter Archbishop, author of the Grecian antiquities, died 1747, aged 73.

Powha^^^, the famous Indian, emperor of Virginia, a man of great talents in
all the savage arts of war, died 1618.

Prescot General, taken prisoner by Colonel Barton, July 1777.

Prideaux General, killed by the bursting of a mortar in storming a French fort
near Niagara, which surrendered to Sir John Johnson 1759.

Price, Rev. Doctor Richard, of England, who wrote on morals, providence, civil
liberty, annuities, reversionary payments, sermons, etc. died Feb. 19, 1791,
aged 68.

Priestley, Reverend Doctor Joseph, the celebrated philosopher and divine:
eminent by his writings on the principles of Unitarianism, Chemistry,
Education, etc. etc. had his property destroyed by a mob at Birmingham, July
14, 1791. He afterward removed to America, and arrived at New York, June 1794;
and is now settled at Northumberland in Pennsylvania.

Prior Matthew, of London, who wrote poems and politics, died Sept. 18, 1721,
aged 56.

Puffendorf, of Upper Saxony, who wrote on jurisprudence and history, died 1694.

Putnam General Isaac, born at Salem, Massachussetts 1718; checked the career
of the British at Bunker's-hill, July 16, 1775; died May 29, 1790.

QUIN, the comedian, died 1766, aged 73.

Quintilian, the Roman orator and advocate, died 95.

RAKES, -- of Gloucester, in England, was the first who instituted sunday
schools in that country 1784.

Raleigh, Sir Walter, who obtained a patent for Virginia 1584, beheaded Oct.
29, 1618, aged 65.

Rapin de Thoyras, who wrote the history of England, died May 16, 1725, aged 64.

Ribalt John, with a fleet from France discovered the river St. Mary; built
Fort Charles, and left a colony under Captain Albert 1562; who soon after
mutinied, and were massacred by the Spaniards 1564.

Richardson Samuel, of London, the author of Grandison, Clarissa and Pamela,
died, 1761, aged 72.

Rittenhouse David, of Pennsylvania, when 20 years of age, made a reflecting
telescope of 8 inches focal distance on the Newtonian construction, which, as
far as we know, was the first telescope made in America. In 1769 he executed
his planetarium; a piece of mechanism which reflected great honor on the
inventor; appointed director of the mint of the United States, 1792.

Rochambeau, Count de, arrived at Rhode Island 1780: joined General Washington
with the French troops, July 6, 1781; co-operated with General Washington in
the reduction of Cornwallis, Oct. 1781.

Roll John, married to Pocahontas, daughter of Powhatan the famous Indian
chief of Virginia, April 1613; visited England with his wife 1616; who died at
Gravesend 1617, aged 22 years, and left a daughter, from whom some of the most
respectable families in Virginia have descended.

Rollin, who wrote ancient history, Belles Lettres, etc. died 1741.

Romulus, the founder of the Roman republic, flourished 627 before Christ.

Rooke Sir George, captured Gibraltar from the Spaniards, July 23, 1704; died
1708, aged 47.

Rousseau John James, the French poet, died July 2, 1778, aged 72.

Row Nicholas, made poet Laureat, Aug. 11, 1715, died Dec. 16, 1718, aged 44.

Rush Benjamin, M. D. the present Professor of the institutes of medicine in
the University of Pennsylvania, wrote on education, the impropriety of
sanguinary punishments, medicine, etc.

SAMUEL, the prophet, born 1149; died 1061 before Christ.

Sassacus, the famous Indian chief over all the New England tribes, died 1632.

Savage Richard, the poet, a natural son of Lord Savage and Lady Ma^clesfield,
born School; was persecuted by his mother in a manner, perhaps unprecedented; and
condemned for murder 1727. Notwithstanding the exertions of his mother to the
contrary, he was pardoned by the king soon after; died 1740.

Sail William, appointed Governor of Carolina and settled with a colony, where
Charlestown now stands, 1696.

Scaliger Julius Caesar, the critic, died 1558, aged 75.

Schuyler General, disarms the inhabitants of Tryon county, state of New York,
Jan. 1776; appointed to take command of the American army, May 1777;
relinquished his command, Aug. 4, following.

Scott General, surprised the Wabash Indians, and defeated them 1791.

Shaftesbury, Earl of, in England, who wrote Characteristics, etc. died 1713.

Shakespeare William, of Stratford in England, who wrote 42 tragedies and
comedies, died April 3, 1616.

Sharp, Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, born 1618: shot in his coach,
May 3, 1769.

Shays Daniel, raised an insurrection in Massachussetts, Dec. 1786; attacked
General Shepherd at Springfield, and precipitately retreated with the loss of
three men killed and one wounded, Jan. 25, 1787; petitioned the general court
for a pardon, which was granted, Feb. 1788.

Shepherd, General William, fired at Shays and his party at Springfield in
Connecticut and dispersed them, Jan. 25, 1787.

Sheridan, Rev. Dr. Thomas, of Ireland, author of the English Dictionary, works
on elocution, education, etc. died Aug. 14, 1788.

Sherlock Thomas, Bishop of London, who wrote 69 Sermons, etc. died 1761.

Smollet, Doctor Tobias, of Dumbartonshire in Scotland, who wrote the history
of England, novels and translations, died Sept. 17, 1771.

Solomon, born 1043; succeeded his father David 1015, laid the foundation of
his temple, May 21, 1012: died 975 before Christ.

Summers Sir George, on his way to Virginia ran ashore on one of the Bahama
islands, which circumstance gave them the name of the Summer islands, July 1609.

Spencer Edmund, of London, who wrote the Fairy Queen, and other poems, was
born 1510; and died 1598.

Squanto, an Indian, one of the 20, whom Captain Hunt carried to Malaga, got
from thence to London and came with the Plymouth company to his native land,
where he proved very serviceable to the colony by acting as an interpreter
between them and his brethren, and continued a firm friend until his death,
Nov. 1622.

Steel Sir Richard, of Dublin, who wrote four comedies, a number of papers in
the Tatlers, etc. died Sept. 1, 1721, aged 53.

Stephen, the Martyr, died Sept. 26, 33.

Stern, Rev. Lawrence, who wrote sermons, the Sentimental Journey, and
Tristram Shandy, died 1768.

St. Clair General, evacuated Ticonderoga, July 1777, was the first Governor of
the territory North West of the Ohio. He commanded the army of the United
States, against the Indians, by whom he was surprised and totally defeated with
the loss of upwards of 600 men, his whole baggage and 8 pieces of artillery,
Nov. 4, 1791.

Steuben, the Baron, elected by Congress inspector General of the American
army, May 5, 1778. In consequence of his important services, he was rewarded by
a pension of 2500 Dollars per annum by Congress on the commencement of the new
constitution; died Nov. 17, 1794.

Stuyvesant, the Dutch Governor of New York, surrendered to Colonel Nichols,
Sept. 3, 1664.

Sullivan General, took command of the American army in Canada, May 1776; made
an expedition to Staten Island, Aug. 1777; together with Count D' Estaing
reached Rhode Island, Aug. 5, 1778, and was obliged to retreat; laid waste the
Indian country 1779

Sumpter General, defeated the British in Carolina, and took General Wemuss
prisoner, Nov. 12, 1780; took the garrison at Orangeburgh, May 1781.

Sydenham, Doctor Thomas, of England, who wrote the history of physic, died
Dec. 29, 1689, aged 65.

Swift, Reverend Doctor Jonathan, Dean of St. Patrick's of Dublin, who wrote
poems, politics, letters and sermons, died Oct. 1745, aged 78.

TACITUS, the Roman historian, lived in 97.

Talmage Major, surprised fort George on Long Island and took it, Nov. 1780.

Tamerlane, who conquered Asia, was born 1336; died 1405.

Tarleton Lieutenant Colonel, attacked a party of 300 Americans at the Wachaws
North Carolina, and notwithstanding their entreaties for quarters, killed by
far the greatest part of them, 1780: defeated by General Morgan at the Cowpens,
Jan. 1781.

Tell William, who laid the foundation of Helvetic liberty, shot Grisler the
Austrian governor 1317.

Theodore, king of Corsica, abdicated his kingdom 1737: died in an obscure
lodging in London 1757.

Thomas General, took command of the American army in Canada, May 1776; died a
few days after and was succeeded by General Thoms^n.

Thomson General, defeated and taken prisoner at the Three rivers, June 10,
1776.

Tillotson John, Arhbishop of Canterbury, who wrote 254 sermons, died 1694,
aged 63.

Torquato Tasso, of Italy, who wrote Jerusalem Delivered, an epic p^em, and
Aminta a pastoral poem, died 1595.

Trumbul John, of New England, published an epic poem called M, Fingal 1782.

Tyler Wat, who almost overturned the English Government, killed 1381.

ULYSSES, flourished 1149, before Christ.

Useling William, a merchant of Sweden, gave a charter to a company called the
West India company, of an extensive tract of land lying on each side the river
now called Delaware 1626.

Usher, Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland, who wrote on divinity and chronology,
died 1656.

VASCO di Gama, a Portuguese, who first sailed from Europe to the East Indies,
by the Cape of Good Hope, died 1524.

Vauban Marshall, the celebrated engineer, died 1707, aged 74.

Vernon Admiral, took Porto Bello 1739; died 1757, aged 73.

Virgil, the Roman poet, born at Andes near Mantua, in 63; died at Brundusium
in Italy, 18 before Christ.

Voltaire M de, the celebrated French writer, died 1778, aged 85.

WALLER Edmund, of England, who wrote poems, speeches, letters, etc. died 1687,
aged 81.

Walpole Sir Robert, earl of Oxford, born 1674; committed to the tower 1712;
took his seat in the house of Peers, Feb. 11, 1742; died 1745.

Warner Colonel, defeated by Colonel Fraser at Hubarnton, July 1777.

Warburton William, Bishop of Gloucester, author of the divine ^egation of
Moses and various other works, died June 11, 1779.

Warren Doctor Joseph, elected President of the Provisional Congress in
Massachussetts, Dec. 1774: appointed Major General of the Massachussetts
forces, June 14, 1775; fell in the battle of Bunker's hill universally
lamented, June 17, 1775 A monument was erected to the memory of General Warren
by the Free Masons of Charlestown, Massachussets, Jan. 17, 1794."
.

WASHINGTON General George, the father of his country and the friend of
mankind, was born in Virginia, Feb. 22, 1732; commanded a party of about 400
Americans and defeated the French at Fort du Quesne 1754; after Braddoc's
defeat and death, July 9, 1755, covered the retreat and saved the wreck of the
American army with great abilities and prudence; unanimously elected commander
in chief of the American forces by Congress, June 16, 1775; arrived at
Cambridge and took command of the army, July 2, following; continued as
commander in chief till Dec. 23, 1783; when having by acts of the greatest
wisdom and fortitude, vanquished the enemies of his country and thus procured
for it the blessings of liberty and independence, he delivered his commission
to the President of Congress at Annapolis; unanimously elected President of the
federal convention, which sat at Philadelphia from May 25, to Sept. 17, 1787;
unanimously elected President of the United States, April 6, 1789: again
unanimously re-elected 1793.

Washington, Lieutenant Colonel, reduced the British post at Clermont in South
Carolina, Dec. 4, 1780.

Wayne, General Anthony, was surprised in the night by General Gray in a wood,
and sustained great loss, Sept. 21, 1777; took Stony point, July 1779; took
possession of Savannah after it was evacuated by the British, July 11, 1782,
defeated the enemy near Savannah, May 24, following; appointed commander in
chief of the army against the Indians 1792, whom he defeated with great loss,
Aug. 20, 1794

West Sir Thomas, Lord De la War, appointed General of the Virginia colony
1609; received a patent and was constituted Governor and Captain General the
year following.

Wesley the Rev. John, born in England, June 26, 1703, elected fellow of
Lincoln's Inn College, Oxford 1724; ordained a clergyman of the church of
England 1725, sailed for Georgia, Oct. 14, 1735; returned to England, Feb. 1,
1738, where he soon after established the classes, bands, etc. and after a life
spent in the most indefatigable labors to propagate Christianity, died March
2, 1791.

Whitefield Rev. George, Father of the Methodists, preached in the fields 1735,
was excluded the church, May 10, 1739: founded the Orphan house in Georgia
1740, and after having traveled through great part of Europe and America
propagating his doctrines, died at Newburyport Rhode Island, aged 56.

White John, appointed Governor of Virginia, arrived at Hatteras, July 22,
1587; left 150 adventurers at Roanoke and returned to England; set out to
Virginia to recruit his colony 1590: but none were to be found, as they had all
either perished by famine or been killed by the Indians.

Wickliffe, who opposed the Pope's supremacy, died 1385.

Willet Colonel, defeats the British at Mohawk river, Oct. 24, 1781.

Wilson Samuel, of London, bequeathed 20,000 l. Sterling (88,800 dollars) to be
lent out in small sums to industrious tradesmen 1771.

Wilson Thomas, Bishop of the Island of Man, who was so distinguished for
piety, that the French court during a war with England prohibited their
privateers from committing any depredations on that island, died 1755.

Wingate Edward, the Arithmetician, died Dec. 16, 1656, aged 62.

Witherspoone John, D. D. born near Haddington in Scotland 1722; was taken
prisoner by the Scotch rebels 1745; chosen President of Prince on college New
Jersey, and came to America 1769; was member of Congress at the declaration of
American independence 1776. He wrote essays on various subjects, sermons, etc.
and died Nov. 19, 1794.

Wolf, General, a brave officer in the British service, was killed in the
battle on the plains of Abraham near Quebec, Sept. 13, 1759, aged 33.

Wollaston William, of Staffordshire in England, the author of the religion of
nature delineated, died 1724.

Wolsey, Minister to Henry VIII. of England 1513; made Archbishop of York 1514;
cardinal 1515, Chancellor Dec. 24, following; legate 1518; resigned the seals
Oct. 18, 1529, and was soon after stripped of all his possessions; died Nov.
18, 1530, aged 59.

Woster General, mortally wounded in the Danbury expedition, April 27, 1777;
died a few days after.

Wren, Sir Christopher, who built St. Paul's Cathedral, London, died 1725, aged
91.

YOUNG Dr. Edward, the author of the Night Thoughts, died 1765, aged 81.

ZINZENDORFF, Count Nicholas Lewis, founder of the Herenhutters or Moravians,
died June 9, 1760, aged 60.

Discoveries and Settling of Countries.
AMERICAN Islands, first discovered by Christopher Columbus, Oct, 11, 1492; so
named by Americus Vespusianus, who discovered the continent of South America
1497; not known to the French till 1504.

America North, first discovered by Sebastian Cabot a Venetian, 1497.

Andreanoffsky Isles, between Asia and America, discovered 1760.

Anguilla, in the Caribees, first settled by the English 1650.

Antigua, settled by the English 1632.

Azores, or Western Islands, discovered by Portugal 1449.

BAFFIN's Bay, discovered 1622.

Bahama Islands, discovered 1629; taken possession of by the English, Dec. 1718.

Barbados, the first English settlement in the West Indies, was planted 1625.
It contained 50,000 Inhabitants 1650.

Batavia, in the Island of Java in the East Indies, first fortified by Holland
1618.

Bermuda Islands, first discovered 1527; settled 1612.

Botany Bay, settlement for, consisting of a number of convicts, sailed from
England March 21, 1787; a form of government established there 1788.

Bourbon, the Island of, planted by the French 1672.

Braintrey, in Massachussetts, first settled by Captain Wollaston, March 1625.

Brasil, discovered 1498; settled by the Portuguese 1549.

Britain, first discovered to be an Island 90.

CALEDONIA, in America, settled by the Scotch 1699.

Califormia, in America, discovered by Fernardo Cortes 1536; taken possession
of by Sir Frances Drake, who had his right confirmed by the king of the country
1578.

Campeachy, discovered by Cordova 1520.

Canada, discovered by Cabot 1497: settled by the French 1608.

Canary Islands, discovered and granted to Spain 1344.

Cape Breton, discovered by the English 1584.

Cape de Verd Islands, discovered 1449.

Cape of Good Hope, discovered 1487; planted by Holland 1651.

Cape Horn, first sailed round, 1616.

Carolina, discovered 1497; afterward by Pance de Leon a Spaniard 1512;
settled by the English from Virginia 1622.

Caribee Islands, discovered 1595.

Cat Island, one of the Bahamas, the first discovery in America by Columbus
1492.

Ceylon, the Island of, first discovered 1506.

Chebucta, in Nova Scotia, settled by the English 1748.

Chili, discovered by Spain 1518.

China, first visited by the Portuguese 1517: conquered by the Eastern Tartars
1635.

Christopher's, St. Isle of, discovered 1595; settled by the French and English
conjunctly 1626; entirely ceded to the English by the peace of Utrecht 1783.

Congou kingdom, discovered 1490; settled on by the Portuguese 1492.

Connecticut, the first grant of, made by the Plymouth company to the earl of
Warwick 1630; began to be settled by emigrants from Massachussetts 1635.

Cuba Island of, discovered by Columbus, Oct. 27, 1492, settled 1511.

Curacoa, the Island of, settled by the Dutch 1634.

DAVIS's Straits, discovered 1585.

Delaware, State of, settled first by the Swedes and Finns 1627; conquered by
the Swedes 1655; purchased by William Penn from the Duke of York, brother to
king Charles II. 1683, and considered as a part of Pennsylvania till 1776, when
they established an independent constitution.

Descada Island, discovered by Columbus 1494.

Domingo, St. Island of, discovered by Columbus 1492.

Dominica, discovered by Columbus, Nov. 3, 1493.

EASTER Island, discovered 1722.

East Indies, discovered by the Portuguese 1497; visited overland by some
English 1591; first Dutch voyage 1595; first voyage of the English East India
company 1601; first from France 1601; first voyage of the Danes 1612; first of
the Americans 1784.

Elizabeth Islands, near Massachussetts, discovered by Captain Gosnold and so
named by him in honor of Queen Elizabeth, 1602.

Eustatia, St. Island of, discovered 1494.

FAULKLAND Islands, discovered 1592.

Florida, discovered by Cabot 1497; settled by the Spaniards 1539.

Forbisher's Straits, discovered 1576.

Fox Island, in the Northern Pacific ocean, discovered 1760.

GEORGIA, the state of, began to be settled 1732, by General Oglethorpe, who
obtained a charter, June 9, in that year. It was so called in honor of George
II.

Goree Island of, on the Guinea coast, first planted by the Dutch 1617.

Granada Island, settled 1652.

Greenland, was discovered in 1585.

Guadaloupe Island, discovered by Columbus 1493; planted by the French 1635.

HELENA, St. the Island of, discovered 1502; settled by the English 1651.

Honduras bay, discovered by Columbus 1502.

Hudson's river, discovered by Captain Hudson 1608.

Hudson's bay, discovered by Captain Hudson 1610.

ICELAND, discovered by a Danish pirate in 869.

JAMAICA, discovered by Columbus 1494; settled by the Spaniards 1509; taken by
the English, May 1656.

Japan Island, discovered 1542; visited by the English 1612.

KENTUCKY, discovered by James M'Bride 1754; explored by Captain Daniel Boon
1769, settled by Colonel Boon and others 1773.

LE Roache Island, near Faulkand Islands, discovered 1657.

Louisiana, first discovered by Ferdinand de Sioto 1541; discovered by the
French 1633; settled by them 1718.

Lucia St. first settled by the English 1637.

MADAGASCAR, discovered by the Portuguese 1506.

Madiera Island, discovered 1420.

Magellan Straits of, discovered 1518.

Maine district, first attempt to settle it made 1607; first permanent
settlement commenced about 1630; united under the government of Massachussetts
1652.

Marigalante Island, discovered by Columbus 1493.

Maryland, the State of, began to be settled by Lord Baltimore 1633, who had
obtained a charter, June 20, preceding.

Massachussetts, first settlement of, by John Endicot of, and others at Salem
1628.

Mauritius Island, discovered 1598.

Mexico, discovered by the Spaniards 1518; taken possession of by the Spaniards
under the command of Cortes 1521.

Montserrat, in the West Indies, discovered by Columbus 1493; planted by the
English 1632.

NEVIS, planted by the English 1628.

New Caledonia, discovered by Captain Cook 1774.

New England, discovered by Captain Gosnold 1602; had the name of New England
given it by Captain John Smith, who drew a map of it 1614; began to be settled
by a colony of English puritans 1620.

Newfoundland, discovered by Cabot 1496; settled by the English 1614.

New Hampshire, granted by the Plymouth company to Captain John Mason 1621;
began to be settled 1623.

New Holland, discovered by the Dutch 1628; taken possession of at Botany bay
by a number of English convicts, March 21, 1787.

New Jersey, began to be settled by the Dutch 1614; by the Swedes and Finns
1627; charter of, granted to James Duke of York 1634; disposed of by him to
Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret 1664.

New Plymouth, in New England, settled by a colony of English Puritans 1620.

Newport, in Rhode Island, began to be settled 1639.

New Spain or Mexico, discovered 1518.

New York, first settled by the Dutch 1614; surrendered to the English under
Colonel Nichols 1664: treacherously given up to the Dutch by Captain John
Manning, July 30, 1673; restored to England by a treaty of peace, Feb. 9,
following.

New Zealand, discovered 1660: explored in 1769.

North Carolina, began to be settled by a number of indigent Palatines 1710.

Nova Scotia, began to be settled by a colony under Sir William Alexander 1622:
Its charter was granted by king James I. Sept. 10th preceding: peopled by 3000
families from New England 1749.

Nova Zembla, discovered 1553.

OTAHEITE, or George III.'s Island, discovered by Captain Cook, June 18, 1765.

Owhyhee Island, discovered by Captain Cook 1778.

PARAGUAY, or La Plata, discovered by the Spaniards 1515; settled by the
Spaniards 1535.

Patagonia, discovered by Magellan 1519.

Pelew Islands, discovered by Captain Wilson of the Antelope Packet, who was
wrecked on these Islands, August 1783.

Pennsylvania, the first settlement of, began by the Swedes and Fins 1627; its
charter granted to William Penn 1680; who began to settle it 1682.

Peru, first visited by the Spaniards 1526; and the whole country subdued by
Pizarro 1533.

Piscataqua, the country between it and Merrimack, purchased by the Indian
chiefs from Massachussetts planters, 1629.

Phillipine Islands, discovered by the Spaniards 1521.

Plymouth colony, in New England, first settlement of, began Dec. 31, 1620; the
number of souls being then 101, of whom 46 died before the ensuing spring.

Porto Rico, discovered 1497.

Potosi mountain of, which contains the richest mine in America, discovered
1546.

QUEBEC, settled by the French 1608.

RHODE Island, began to be settled by the Rev. Roger Williams and his
persecuted brethern 1635; in first charter granted 1644.

SALEM, in Massachussetts, attempted to be settled 1626; the settlement was
effected by Captain John Endicot and company 1628.

Sandwich Islands, in the Pacific ocean, discovered by Captain Cook 1778.

Society Islands, in the Pacific ocean, discovered by Captain Cook 1769.

Solomon's Islands, in America, discovered 1527.

Somer's, or the Bahama Islands, discovered 1493.

South Carolina, including North Carolina and Georgia, charter granted 1662,
erected into a province by itself, May 24, 1663, the first permanent settlement
began 1669.

St. Eustatia Island, settled by the Dutch 1632.

St. Helena, first possessed by the English 1600; settled 1651.

St. Salvador, or Guaniham, was the first land discovered by Columbus in the
West Indies, October 11, 1492.

Suffolk Islands, discovered 1774.

Surinam, planted by England 1640.

TERRA firma, discovered by Columbus in his third voyage to America, August 1,
1498; settled by the Spaniards 1514.

Tobago, the Island of, first settled 1602.

Trinidad, the Island of, discovered 1498.

VERMONT, the state of, first began to be settled 1725; increased by the
accession of a number of inhabitants from Connecticut 1724; became an
independent state, Dec. 25. 1777.

Virginia, taken possession of in a formal manner by Sir Walter Raleigh, who
had previously obtained a patent for that purpose from Queen Elizabeth, July
13, 1584: called Virginia in honor of their virgin Queen; first began to be
settled 1585: the settlement broke up 1589; began again to be settled at
Jamestown 1607: the colony consisted of 500 people 1609; reduced by sickness
and otherwise to 60, May 23, 1610; all embark for England, June 7, 1610; but
having met Lord Delawar in the bay with a number of recruits, they again
returned, June 10, 1610.

WEST Indies, discovered by Columbus 1492.

Inventions, Improvements, and Discoveries in the Arts, etc.
* This mark denotes that the person mentioned has obtained a patent from the
Federal Government.

AGARIC of the oak, first known to be a styptic, June 1750.

Air balloons, invented in France by Monsieur Mongolfier 1783; introduced into
England by Lunardi, who ascended from Moorfields, London, Sept. 15, 1784; into
America by Blanchard, who ascended from the prison, yard Philadelphia, Jan. 9,
1793.

Air pumps, invented 1654, air guns 1656.

Algebra, first known in Europe 1494.

Alum, first brought to perfection in England 1609: discovered in Ireland,
Oct. 22, 1757.

Amethists, discovered at Kerry in Ireland 1755.

Anatomy, restored in 1550; of Plants discovered 1680.

Anchors, invented 587.

Animal magnetism, first discovered in France 1788, introduced into England
1789; into America 1791.

Apothecaries, first mentioned in history 1345.

Appeals, first made from England to Rome 1138; abolished 1532.

Apple Trees, brought into Italy from Syria and Africa, nine years before
Christ.

Apricots, which originally come from Epirus, first planted in England 1540.

Argand's lamps, introduced into general use in London, in 1785.

Arithmetic, introduced into Europe from Arabia 991. Decimal, invented 1402.

Army, the first standing one in modern times established in France in 1445.

Artichokes, first planted in England 1487.

Asparagus first produced in England 1608.

Astronomical observations, first made at Babylon 2234 before Christ.

Astronomy and Geography, brought to Europe by the Moors of Barbary 1201.

Attraction, the first idea of, taken up by Kepler 1605.

Auction, the first in Britain, was about 1700, by Elisha Yale, of the goods he
brought home with him from Fort George in the East Indies, where he had been
governor.

Aurora Borealis, or the Northern lights, first observed, March 6, 1716.
Electricity of, discovered 1769; remarked in New Hampshire 1719.

BAIZE manufacture, first introduced at Colchester in England 1660.

Banks, first began 808; that of Venice 1157; of Genoa 1345; of Amsterdam 1609;
of England 1640; old Scotch bank 1649, of Hamburg 1710, of the royal bank of
Scotland 1727, of Ireland 1783; in the British settlements in the East Indies
1787.

Banks in America. Bank established in Philadelphia for the purpose of
supplying the American army with provisions, by a number of gentlemen with a
capital of (839,160 Dollars), June 17, 1780.

Bank of North America, incorporated by Congress, Dec. 31, 1781. The first at
Boston There are now 3 banks in Massachussetts incorporated, Massachussetts,
Union, and Essex banks.
was established 1784, and the Bank of New York commenced in the same year. The
banks of New Hampshire and of South Carolina incorporated 1792, and those of
Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia 1793.

Bark Jesuit, found in Peru, its virtues discovered 1500; first brought to
Europe 1650.

Bark, a method, by which the essence or gum of, may be extracted, improved by
John Biddis and Thomas Bedwell* 1791.

Bark, an improvement in the mode of grinding for tanning by John Markley of
Pennsylvania *, 1795

Barometers, invented by Toricelli 1626.

Battering ram, invented 441, before Christ.

Bayonets, first used at the end of muskets by the French 1693.

Beer, first made in Scotland 1482, introduced into England 1524.

Bedstead a, particularly adapted to the situation of sick or bedridden people,
invented by Conrad Ludwig Kuhn *, 1791.

Bells, invented by Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Campania about 400: first known
in France 550, were introduced into churches in England about 900: the first
music bells set in England was at Croyland abbey in Lincolnshire 960.

Bells, an improvement in their construction by Robert Leslie of Pennsylvania *
1793.

Bellows, invented 554, before Christ; an improvement in their construction by
James Drake of New Jersey * 1793; another improvement by James Ramsey * 1794.

Bible, the first printed in America was by Robert Aiken of Philadelphia 1782,
see Religious Institutions.

Bills of exchange, first mentioned 1160: the only mode of sending money from
England by law 1381.

Bills of mortality, for London, began 1538;

Blankets, first made in England 1340.

Blister plasters, invented 60 before Christ.

Blood, its circulation through the lungs first made public by Servetus a
French physician 1553, fully demonstrated and confirmed by William Harvey an
English physician 1628.

Boats, flat bottomed, invented in the reign of William the conqueror about the
year 1066; a mode of propelling boats by horses invented by Henry Voight of
Pennsylvania* 1791: an improvement in a machine for propelling them, invented
by Abijah Babcock of the Western territory * 1793.

Bombs, first invented by a man at Venlo in France 1388; bomb vessels invented
in France 1681.

Books, in the present form were invented by Attalus king of Pergamus 887: the
first supposed to be written in Job's time, who died 1553, before Christ; a
very large estate given for one on Cosmography by king Alfred of England about
870, Manuscript volumes were sold from (44 Dollars to 133 Dollars and 20 Cents)
a piece about 1400; the first printed one was the vulgate edition of the bible
1462, Cornelius Nepos was the first classic printed in Russia, April 29, 1762.
Lucian's Dialogues, the first Greek book printed in America was at Philadelphia
by Joseph James, 1789.

Book keeping, first used after the Italian method in London 1569.

Boots, were invented 907, before Christ; an improvement in manufacturing them
invented by Peter Gordon * of Philadelphia 1791.

Bo^nties, first legally granted in England, for raising naval stores in
America 1703.

Bows and arrows, introduced into England 1066.

Boxing, schools opened in different parts of Britain, to teach the science of,
1790.

Brasil, diamond mines discovered 1730.

Bread-trees, 347 plants of the, brought from Otaheite to Jamaica by Captain
Bligh, Feb. 7, 1793, where they are said to prosper well.

Bricks, first used in England by the Romans about 40, A. D. an improvement in
making them by Apollas Kinsley * of New York 1794; by Christopher Colles, * of
New York who invented a machine for tempering and moulding clay 1793; by Samuel
Brower * of New York who invented an improvement in manufacturing brick and
pan-tile the same year; another improvement in manufacturing brick by David
Ridgway * 1792.

Bridges wooden, an improvement in their construction by John Stone * 1791.

Bridge, the first of stone in England, was at Bow near Strafford 1087.
Westminster bridge London, which, if we except those of China, is perhaps equal
to any in the world, was finished 1750.

Blackfriar's bridge, equally elegant, erected 1770.

Bridges, some of the most remarkable in America;

Over York river in main district 270 feet long, built 1761.

Over Connecticut river, between Walpole and Westminster 1784.

Over Charles river 1503 feet in length 1787.

Over Mystic river, Connecticut, 2420 feet long 1787.

Essex Massachussetts 1500 feet long 1789.

Over Merrimack river 1793.

* Piscataqua, from Newington to Durham 1362 feet in length, desinged by
Timothy Palmer of Newbury port, and completed Dec. 9, 1794. A model of this
elegant bridge may now be seen in the Philadelphia library.


Bridges, over the Hackinsack and Passaic, finished Feb. 5, 1795.

Building with stone, brought into England by Bennet a monk 670; with brick
about 886.

Bull fighting, first introduced into Spain 1560.

Bullets of stone, used 1514, Iron ones being not yet invented.

CALENDAR, first regulated by Pope Gregory 1579.

Calendar, As many of our readers may be unacquainted with the French mode of
reckoning time, we shall here subjoin their Calendar as regulated by the
convention.

The year which consists of twelve months, each month of three decades or
thirty days commences on Sept. 22.

Names of months in French. Do. in English. Term. AUTUMN. Vindemaire, Vintage
month from Sept. 22, to Oct. 21, Brumaire Fog month Oct. 22, to Nov. 20,
Frumaire Sleet month Nov. 21, to Dec. 20, WINTER. Nivos Snow month Dec. 21, to
Jan. 19, Pluvios Rain month Jan. 20, to Feb. 18, Ventos Wind month Feb. 19, to
March 20. SPRING. Germinal Sprouts month March 21, to April 19, Floreal Flowers
month April 20, to May 19, Priarial Pasture month May 20, to June 18, SUMMER.
Messidor Harvest month June 19, to July 18, Fervidor Hot month July 19, to Aug.
17, Fructidor Fruit month Aug. 18, to Sept. 16, SAMS CULOTIDES, AS FEASTS
DEDICATED TO Les Vertus The Virtues Sept. 17, Le Genie Genius Sept. 18, Le
Travail Labor Sept. 19, Le Opinion Opinion Sept. 20, Les Recompenses Rewards
Sept. 21.

The intercalary day of every fourth year is called La Sans Cullotide; on which
there is to be a national renovation of their oath, "to live free or die." The
days of each decade are named from the Latin numerals thus, Primidi, Duodi,
Tridi, Quatridi, Quintidi, Sextidi, Septidi, Oct^di, Nonodi and Decadi, which
last is appointed as a day of rest.


the French adopted by the Convention 1793.

Callico, first imported into England by the East India Company 1657.

Camera Obscura, invented 1515.

Canals, first made in England by Henry I. 1130. The Canal, which joins the
Baltic and North Sea made open to all nations, May 14, 1785. From the forth to
the Clyde in Scotland 1768. The Canal of Languedoc in France was begun 1666. It
is extended over hills and valleys for 100 miles, opens a communication between
the Mediterranean and the Ocean, and was completed 1680.

Canal, the Grand, in Ireland, was begun 1756, and completed from Dublin to
Monastereven 1786. Canals in China, some of them are of an amazing extent, one
in particular, reaching from Canton to Peking, being 1800 miles in length.

Canal, Besides the Canals here mentioned, there are many others of great
importance now carrying on in different parts of the United States, to
particularize all of which, would far exceed our limits. The same may be said
of bridges, etc.
in North Carolina, from Philips lake to a river about 5 miles distance,
finished by Messieurs, Collins, Allen, and Dickinson 1785.

A company established to cut one in Virginia, to remove the obstructions of
navigation in the Potomack 1784.

A company, incorporated by the legislature of North Carolina and Virginia, for
opening a Navigable canal from Pasquota^ to a branch of Elizabeth river 1790.

A company, incorporated in New York, for cutting a canal between Hudson's
river and lake Champlain 1792.

A company, incorporated in New York, for extending the navigation from the now
navigable part of Hudson's river, to lake Ontario and the Seneca lake 1792.

A Canal, completed to James river Virginia, where the navigation had been
heretofore interrupted 1795.

South Hadley Canal, Massachussetts, began 1793.

A Canal and Lock, navigation between the rivers Schuylkill and Susquehannah,
began 1792.

Between the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill 1792.

Canal company of Conewago incorporated, April 10, 1793.

Candles tallow, so great a luxury, that splinters of wood were generally used
for light 1300. Tallow Candles first began to be used in England 1390. The art
of manufacturing them improved by Richard Robotheau * of New York 1793, by
Joseph Stacy Sampson,* who invented two machines, the one for cutting
candlewicks, and the other for dipping candles, 1790, by Benjamin Folger,* who
invented a mode of separating and refining the gross matter contained in common
whale oils, whereby it is rendered fit for making candles 1792.

Cannibals, See Guthrie's Geography, improved by Carey, page 635, Second Volume.
their existence confirmed by Captain Furneaux 1775.

Cannons, invented 1330; first used by the English 1346, in Denmark 1354.

Caps, first worn 1449: Red Caps adopted by the Jacobins of France as a
distinguishing badge 1790.

Card teeth, a machine invented for bending and cutting, by Mr Chittendon of
Connecticut about 1787.

Cards playing, first invented in France as an amusement for Charles VI. 1390.

Carriages, to be propelled by the mechanical powers, improved by John J.
Staples, Jun.* of New York 1793.

Carving in marble, invented 772, before Christ.

Celery, first introduced into England by Count Tallard 1709.

Celestial sphere, first seen in Greece 368, before Christ.

Chain shot, invented by Admiral De Wit 1666.

Chairs sedan, first used in London 1634.

Charity schools, The chief cities of the United States, are well provided with
such institutions. In the New England, and in some of the other states,
provision is made by the legislature for the education of poor children; and as
it is universally acknowledged that the diffusion of knowledge is essentially
necessary to the existence of a free government, it is certainly to be expected
that the enlightened legislators of America will speedily make such provision,
as that no person can be so indigent to whose children the means of education
shall not be accessible.
first began in England 1688: a charity school for the blacks instituted at
Philadelphia 1770: at New York about the year 1786.

Chemistry and distillery, introduced into Europe by the Moors, who had learnt
it from the Egyptians 1150.

Cherries, first brought from Pontus to Rome 70, A. D.

Cherry trees, first planted in Britain 100 before before Christ: brought from
Flanders and planted in Kent with such success that an orchard of 32 acres
produced in one year (4440 Dollars) 1540.

Chess the game of, invented 608, before Christ.

Chest, at Chatham for the relief of seamen, instituted 1558.

Chiaro obscuro, the art of printing in, with three plates to imitate drawings,
first used 1500.

Chimnies, began to be introduced into England about 1300.

China, first made in England, by Mr. Wedgwood 1762.

Chivalry, began in Europe 912.

Circumnavigation of the globe, has been effected in England by Drake 1579;
Cavendish 1586, Cowley 1683, Dampier 1689; Anson 1740: Byron 1764; Carteret
1766; Cook 1768; 1772; 1776; continued by King 1780; and since by Portlock,
etc. 1788. The most remarkable Spanish Circumnavigator, was Magellan who first
entered the Pacific ocean 1520. The others are Grayalva 1537; Mendana 1567;
Quiros 1605. The Dutch Circumnavigators were Le Maire 1615. Tasman 1642;
Roggewein 1721. M. Bougainville the Frenchman's voyage was 1766.

Civil list, of the king of Britain, is 3,996,000 Dollars: that allowed to the
late king of France in the year 1789, was 4,624,997 Dollars. The money
appropriated by the United States to defray the civil list, which besides the
salaries allowed to all the officers of government, comprehended a number of
pensions to disabled soldiers, their widows etc. amounted only to 521,447
Dollars, 1793.

Clocks, called Water clocks, first used in Rome 158, before Christ; clocks
first set up in churches 913; made to strike by the Arabians 801; by the
Italians 1300; in England 1368.

Cloth, coarse woollen, introduced into England 1191: a manufactory of cloth
established at Hartford New England about 1787: a machine for raising and
shearing the nap of Cloth invented by Samuel G. D^^rr * 1792, another invention
for the same purpose by Samuel Mulliken * 1791.

Coaches, The number of coaches in England in the year 1788, were 23,000, and
the duty on them amounted to 117,000 l. Sterling, (5,91,480 Dollars).
first used in England 1589: Hackney coaches established in London, when at
first there were only 20, 1625. Their number was extended to 1000, 1770.
Hackney coaches used in New York 1787.

Coals, discovered at Newcastle in England 1234, first began to be used 1280.
The first ship with Irish coals arrived at Dublin from Newry 1742; discovered
in the Western counties of Virginia about 1765, where there are found to be
immense quantities. They abound also in the State of Pennsylvania, New York and
in other parts of the United States.

Cockfighting, instituted by the Romans after a victory, which they had gained
over the Persians 476, before Christ.

Coffee, first brought into England by Nathaniel Conopius a Cretan 1651.

The duty on coals in England, amounted in the year 1788, to the enormous sum
of 306,718 l. Sterling (1,361, 827 Dollars and 92 Cents).
Coffee-trees, discovered in the West Indies 1730: first cultivated at Surinam
by the Dutch 1718. Its culture first encouraged in the British plantations 1732.

Coin, silver, first coined by Sidon king of Argos 869, before Christ. Silver
first coined at Rome 269, before Christ, before which time, brass money was
only used. Coin first used in Britain 25, before Christ: in Scotland of Gold
and silver 233, after Christ; first made round in England 1101: gold first
coined in England 1087; gold first coined at Venice 1476: Shillings first
coined in England 1505: Copper money introduced into France 1580: Copper money
first introduced into England by James I. 1620: milling coins introduced 1632:
Guineas were first coined 1673: one million of Guineas was coined from French
Louis d'ors in 1710.

Coins, the first of copper at the mint of the United States 1793, of silver
1794.

Coin, a French, bearing date 1596, found in digging a well at Dorchester
Massachussetts, July 30, 1631.

Coining with a die, first invented 1617: first used in England 1620.

Comedy, the first acted at Athens on a scaffold by Susarian and Dolon 562,
before Christ; the first in England 1551.

Compass, the seaman's, first invented or improved by Gioya or Goya at Venice
1300; its variation discovered by Columbus on his first voyage to America 1493.

Conic section, the first idea of, given 240 years before Christ.

Copper, first exported from Virginia, Oct. 1730, Copper money, see coins.

Copper mines, first discovered in Sweden 1396; in England 1561; in the State
of New York 1722: upwards of 200 lb. weight of copper plowed up in a field near
New Brunswick 1750, and a rich vein found in that neighborhood in the year
following; two lumps of pure virgin copper weighing 1900 lb. found in
Vanhorne's mountain, New Jersey, when there is a rich vein 1734. Copper is also
found at Leveret, Massachussetts, also in Pennsylvania, and it abounds in
Virginia.

Cordage, an improvement in the mode of manufacturing it by George Parkinson of
Pennsylvania * 1793.

Cornelius Nepos published at Moskow, being the first Classical author printed
in Russia, April 29, 1762.

Corporations, invented by king Numa among the Romans 118 before Christ; began
in England 1090.

Cotton manufactory, established at Providence Rhode Island about the year 1788.

Cotton wool, used in English manufactures in 1787, was valued at (33,300,031
Dollars) and weighed 22, 600,000 lb. An improvement in the mode of gurning it
invented by Eli Whitney of Massachussetts * 1794; a machine to spin it improved
by William Pollard 1791.

Counterfeiting, a method devised by Francis Bailey,* of Philadelphia to render
it difficult, 1791.

Couriers, or posts, first instituted by Charlemagne about 808.

Crayons, the art of fixing them, discovered 1748.

Crockery ware, first invented 1309, before Christ. A manufactory of, set up at
New York about 1787.

Crown, the first Roman who wore one, was the tyrant Tarquin 616, before
Christ; the first single one used by the Pope was 553; and the first tiara or
triple crown used 1364. The first used in England was 872.

Croisades to Palestine, began 1095.

Currants, first planted in England 1532.

Customs, on exports and imports first collected in England about 979; amounted
only to 62,160 Dollars, 1580, farmed for many years for 88,800 Dollars till
1590: for 222,000 Dollars, 1592. The customs produced 2,476,418 Dollars, 1688;
amounted in 1788, to 15,540,000 Dol. The customs in the United States amounted
in the year 1793, to about 4,000,000 Dol.

Customs, the first collector of, in America, appointed at Charleston South
Carolina 1685.

Ciphers, digits, or figures in arithmetic, invented by the Arabian moors, 813.

DECIMAL arithmetic, invented by Simon Stevin of Bruges 1602.

Degrees academical, first introduced at Paris before 1213.

Diamonds, first polished and cut at Bruges 1489.

Diamond mines, discovered in Brasil 1730; that of Couloar in the East Indies
1640; that of Raolconda in 1584; one sent from Brasil to the court of Portugal
which weighed 12 ounces valued at 224 millions Sterling (993,560,000 Dollars).

Debt. See National debt.

Dice, invented 1500, before Christ.

Dieu and mon droit, first used as a motto by Richard I. on a victory over the
French 1194.

Dispensary, the Philadelphia founded 1786, the New York 1789.

Distaff spinning, first introduced into England 1505.

Distillation, an improvement in the art of, by Aaron Putnam * 1791: another
improvement in the same art by John Fitch * 1793: another by Joseph Simpson of
Virginia 1794.

Distillery, in England in the year 1784, yielded to government 1,651,329
Dollars.

Docks or harbors, a machine for cleaning or deepening them, improved by Peter
Zachary * 1794.

Dollar, the first coined at the mint of the United States, 1794.

Duel, the first public, 1096.

Dying, was so much a mystery to the English previous to the year 1608, that
they used to send their cloths white to Holland, which were there dyed and
afterward returned to England for sale: An improvement in the art of
manufacturing the plant called Khus or Surac for the purpose of dying invented
by Richard Rosewell * of Connecticut 1793.

Duck and other cloth, an improvement in the mode of weaving and beating,
invented by James Davenport of New Jersey * 1794. A duck manufactory has for
several years been established at Boston, where 68,000 yards equal to any
imported have been made in a single year. There is also a large Duck
manufactory at Wilsonville, Pennsylvania, belonging to Judge Wilson, erected
1794, which promises very favorably.

EARTHEN vessels, first made by the Romans 715, before Christ.

Eclipses, (the most remarkable) of the sun, observed at Sardis, and predicted
by Thales 585, before Christ; at Athens 424, before Christ. At Rome, which
caused a total darkness at noonday A. D. 291: the same thing happened in
France, June 29, 1033: in England an eclipse occasioned so great a darkness,
that the stars were visible at ten in the morning, June 22, 1191. Another
eclipse of the sun occasioned so great a darkness in England, that the birds
went to roost about ten in the morning, April 28, 1715.

Eclipses of the moon, total, observed by the Chaldeans at Babylon 721, before
Christ. At Syracuse 413, before Christ. In Asia Minor 219, before Christ. At
Rome 168, before Christ. Another which terrified the Roman troops and prevented
their revolt A. D. 14.

Electricity, first idea of it given by two globes of brimstone 1467: electric
stroke discovered at Leyden 1746; first known that it would set fire to spirits
1756; the identity of electric fire and lightning, discovered by Doctor
Franklin, who thereupon invented a method of securing buildings from thunder
storms 1757.

Elevator, a new piece of mechanism invented by Rev. Dr. Collin of
Philadelphia, for which he was honored by the American Philosophical society,
with the magellanic Mr John Hyacinth de Magellan of London, presented to the
society the sum of 200 Guineas, in the year 1787, the interest of which is to
be annually expended in premiums, each to consist of an oval plate of standard
gold, to be adjudged by the society to the author of the best discovery or most
useful invention relative to navigation, astronomy or natural philosophy.
prize, Dec. 26, 1794.

Ell, or yard, in measure, fixed by the length of Henry I^'s arm 1101.

Encyclopaedia the, the greatest typographical undertaking ever attempted in
America, the first volume of, was published at Philadelphia, May 1790, and the
13th volume, March 1795.

Eng^nes, to extinguish fires, invented 1663.

England, the first geographical map of it, 1520.

Engraving, and etching, and consequently rolling-press printing, invented by a
goldsmith at Florence 1460. In m^zzotinto, and improved by Prince Rupert of
Palatine 1648; Crayon engraving, invented at Paris by Bonnet 1769.

Epsom, mineral spring in England, first discovered 1630. A spring in Vermont
produces Epsom salts.

Eras, the most remarkable in history. The Christians make their era from the
birth of Christ, which happened in the year of the world 3962. This was not
used till about the year 600. The Mahometans compute their time from the
Hegira; or flight of their prophet A. D. 617: The ancient Greeks reckoned by
Olympiads, the first of which is placed in the year of the world 3187; but as
this account perished under the Constantinopolitan Emperors, they reckoned by
inductions, every induction containing 15 years, and the first beginning A. D.
313. The ancient Romans reckoned from the building of their city, which was A.
M 3113. The Jews had diverse epochs or eras; first, from the creation of the
world 4004, before Christ; secondly from the universal deluge A. M. 1656:
thirdly from the confusion of languages 1757, A. M. fourthly, from Abraham's
journey to the land of Canaan 2021, A. M. fifthly, from the departure of the
Israelites out of Egypt 2513, A. M. sixthly, from the year of the jubilee 2499:
7thly, from the building of Solomon's Temple 2932; and 8thly, from the
captivity of Babylon 3357: The French era commenced Sept. 20, 1792, from which
time they compute as follows: the -- year of the French republic one and
indivisible.

Exports, from Britain in 1700, were to the amount of 32,423,999 Dollars: and
the imports 27,707,577 Dollars. In 1788, the exports were 81,234,977 Dollars,
and the imports 79,049,860 Dollars. The exports from the United States, from
Oct. 1, 1792, to Sept. 30, 1793, amounted to 26,011,788 Dollars, from Oct. 1,
1793, to Sept. 1, 1794, they amounted to 29,464,470 Dollars.

FANS, muffs, masks, and false hair, were first devised by the harlots in
Italy; and afterward brought into England from France 1572.

Feudal system, first introduced into England 1066, into Scotland 1090.

Figures in arithmetic, introduced from India into Arabia 900: by the Arabs
into Europe 1240.

Fire engines to force water, invented 1663.

Fire, a method to prevent its spreading, invented by David Hartley of England
1766; a method invented for safely conducting persons and effects from houses
when on fire, invented by Samuel Green * 1792; an improvement in the mode of
stopping its progress, by Benjamin Tailor of New York * 1794.

Fireships, invented 1588.

Flag, of the United States, established by act of Congress, June 14, 1777.

Flour and meal, an improvement in the manufacture of, by Oliver Evans of
Pennsylvania * 1791.

Flowers, the art of preserving them in sand, discovered 1633; a mode of
preserving them from the effects of frost in winter, and hastening their
vegetation in summer, invented by George Morris 1792*.

Franking of letters, first claimed in Britain 1660; commenced 1734; members of
both houses of Congress and the executive officers of government, enjoy the
privilege of Franking letters on public business.

Friction, at the point of a spindle, several devices invented to diminish it
by Robert R. Livingston, of New York 1791.

GARDENING, the art of, introduced into England from the Netherlands about 1500.

Gauging, the art of, invented 1570.

Gauze, the manufacture of, began at Paisley in Scotland 1759. Its progress was
so rapid, that in the year 1784, it employed 11,634 hands, and yielded
1,554,000 Dollars.

Gilding, with leaf gold, on bole amoniac, the art of, invented 1273.

Ginseng, first discovered in Canada, by Father Lafitau, a Jesuit, 1715.

Glass, introduced into England about 674; Glass windows began to be used in
private houses about 1180; Glass bottles first made in England 1557. Glass
manufactories have lately been established in New York There is in the State of
New York a manufactory of bottles, which we are informed, is likely to flourish.
and Massachussetts.

Gold. See Coin.

Gold mines, discovered in Malacca, Oct. 27, 1731; in New Andalusia 1785.

Glauber salts, a sufficient quantity manufactured by the Messrs. Marshall of
Philadelphia, to supply the United States 1794.

Greek language, first introduced into England by William Grocyn, who publicly
taught it at Oxford 1491.

Grist mills, invented in Ireland 214.

Guillotine, so called from the name of the person who brought it into use in
(...) was used for the execution of criminals at Hal^^^^ in England about 1600.
It was afterward introduced into Scotland by the Earl of Morton, who suffered
by it himself. In Britain, it was called the Maid^n.

Guineas, first coined in England 1673; so called because the gold of which
they were made was brought from the coast of Guinea.

Guinea, the first slave trade on that coast, by the English, was opened by
John Hawkins, assisted by a subscription of sundry other persons 1563, when he
set out with three ships, purchased negroes, sold them at Hispaniola, and as he
returned home richly laden, other avaricious persons followed the example, and
thus a traffic commenced, which to the disgrace of humanity, has been carried
on ever since.

Gunpowder, and great guns, invented by Swartz a monk of Cologne 1330; used at
the battle of Cressy 1336; where Edward the third had four pieces of cannons
which greatly contributed to gain him the victory, 1346. they were used at the
siege of Ca^ais 1347; first used at sea by Venice against Genoa 1377: first
made in England of brass 1535: of iron 1547; Bombs and mortars invented 1634:
an improvement in the art of manufacturing Gunpowder invented by Henry Keyser*
1791. In the State of Pennsylvania 25 powder mills have been erected since the
year 1770.

HANDKERCHIEFS, first manufactured at Paisley in Scotland 1743, to the worth of
70,533 dollars; this branch of manufacture has increased so rapidly that in
1784, it yielded 729,869 Dollars.

Hats for men, invented at Paris by a Swiss 1404.

Hebrew points, invented 475.

Hemp and flax, a machine to break and swingle, invented by Samuel Mulliken *
1791, a mode of breaking and softening hemp and flax for spinning, invented by
the same person 1795.

Herculaneum, the ancient city of, discovered 1730

Herring fishery, first commenced 1164: the art of curing them sound out by
William Backel a Dutchman 1416.

Holy war (as it was called) began 1096.

Hospital, the Pennsylvania, founded 1750: the New York about 1771.

Hydraulic fire engines, invented 1682: an improvement in hydraulics, made by
Joshua Hatheway of Vermont * 1794.

Hydrostatics, taught by Archimedes 200 before Christ.

IAMBIC verse, invented by Archilochus who flourished 686 before Christ.

Impeachment, the first by the English commons 1386. The first in Pennsylvania
was against Francis Hopkinson judge of the admiralty 1780; the second against
John Nicholson Comptroller General 1792. Both gentlemen were acquitted.

Indigo, discovered in south Carolina 1745.

Innoculation, for the smallpox, first tried in England on criminals 1721: the
same year it began to be practiced at Boston in Massachussetts by Doctor
Boylston.

Insurances, on ships and merchandise, contrived by Claudius the Roman Emperor
43.

Iron, This metal is found in great abundance, in almost every one of the
United States.
discovered by the burning of mount Ida 1406 before Christ: first discovered in
Virginia 1715; an iron m^ne opened in Vermont at Tinmouth 1785.*

Iron Bullets, first used in England 1550.

Italian method of bookkeeping, published in England 1569.

JUPITER's Satellites, discovered by Jansen 1590.

KINGDOMS, the origin of, by Nimrod at Babylon 2337, before Christ.

Knitting stockings, the art of, invented in Spain, about 1550.

Knives, first made in England about 1563.

LACE Flanders, may be made more valuable than gold; as an ounce has been sold
in London for 177 Dollars and 60 Cents, which is about ten times the value of
standard gold.

Lacteals the, discovered by chance, in opening a dog by Aselsius, July 23,
1662: in birds, fishes, etc. by Mr. Hewson surgeon of London 1770.

Lanterns, invented by king Alfred 890.

Laquer varnish, first used instead of gilding 1633.

Lead mine, discovered in Rutland county, Vermont, about 1792. Lead is also
found in several other parts of the United States.

Leo IX. was the first Pope, who kept up an army, 1054.

Letters, invented by Memnon the Egyptian 1822 before Christ.

Library, the first private one was the property of Aristotle 534, before
Christ; the first public one of which we have any certain account, was founded
at Athens by Hipparchus 526, before Christ; the second was founded at
Alexandria by Ptolemy Philadelphus 284: and was burnt when Julius Caesar set
fire to that city 47, before Christ, by which catastrophe 400,000 volumes in
Manuscript were said to have been destroyed. The first at Rome was established
167. At Constantinople by Constantine the great about the year 333, which was
destroyed 477. From the remains of the first library at Alexandria, a second
was fou^^ed by Ptolemy's successors, and reputed to have cons^^^d of 700,000
volumes which was totally destroyed by the Saracens 642. The Vatican at Rome,
founded by Pope Nicholas V. 1446. The Imperial at Vienna by Maximilian I. about
1500. The Royal at Paris by Francis I. 1520. The Escurial at Madrid by Philip
II* 1557. The Bodleian at Oxford 1598. The Cottonian founded at Westminster by
Sir Robert Cotton 1600. The Radcliffe^an at Oxford, founded by the will of
Doctor Radcliffe, who left 177,600 Dollars to the university for that purpose
1714.

Libraries, the most remarkable in America. The Library of Philadelphia founded
1731. The Loganian library founded by the will of James Logan of Philadelphia,
who left for the use of the public a large and valuable collection of books
1776; was opened in the present building 1794. The New York library was
instituted about 1771. The library of Newport founded 1747, by a donation of
1294 volumes from Abraham Redwood. The library of the University of Kentucky,
was given by the Rev. John Todd, about 1790. Besides the above, there are
libraries not only in the other large towns throughout the United States, but
also in many of the villages; and it is pleasing to observe, that their number
is annually increasing.


Linen, first made in England 1253, previous to which woollen shirts were worn.
In the year 1787, 30,728,728 yards were exported from Ireland.

Loadstone attraction of, known in France before 1180.

Logarithms, invented by Sir John Napier, of Marcheston in Scotland 1618.

Loan office, the first continental established, Oct. 4, 1776.

Longitude, discovered by Harrison's time piece, for which the inventor
received from the British Parliament a reward of 44,400 Dollars, 1764.

Looking-glasses, made only at Venice 1300.

Lotteries, established for money in England 1693.

MACHINE to work in a current of water, or air, by means of valves or hinged
buckets, improved by John Clark * of Virginia 1793.

Magic lanterns, first invented by Roger Bacon 1252.

Magnifying glasses, invented by Roger Bacon 1260; an improved one made by
David Rittenhouse of Philadelphia about 1750.

Malacca, gold mines, discovered 1731.

Malt liquor, first used in Egypt 450, before Christ.

Manufactures, in England, produced in the year 1783, the enormous sum of
251,126,400 Dollars.

Maps, and globes, invented by Anaximander 600, before Christ: Maps and Charts
were first brought to England by Bartholomew Columbus 1489. The first map of
England was published 1520: that of Russia 1560. The first of New England by
Captain John Smith 1614.

Maritime affairs, an improvement in, by Benjamin Wynkoop * of Pennsylvania
1794.

Mercator's charts, invented 1556.

Mercury, discovered to be antivenereal 1512; discovered to be maleable by Mrs.
Orbelin at Vienna 1785.

Microscopes, invented by Jansen 1590; first used in Germany 1621. Solar
microscopes invented 1740.

Millitary uniforms, first introduced into France by Louis XIV. about 1650.

Mills an improvement in Dr. Barker's, by James Rumsey * 1791: an improvement
by Oliver Evans 1791, a hand mill invented by Solomon Hodge, and Jonathan
Dorr,* for picking mill stones 1792.

Minute-men, troops so called, instituted in Massachussetts, Oct. 1774.

Mirrors, invented in silver by Praxiteles 288, before Christ.

Monarch, the first sole, in England 828.

Money, first made at Argos 894, before Christ. It has increased 18 times its
value from 1290, to 1789, and twelve times its value from 1530, to 1789.

Months, first received their names from Charlemagne about the year 870. New
names given to the months by the French convention 1794.

Mortar, a mode of manufacturing a certain species of it, for the flooring of
malt houses, and also for covering the bottoms of ships and vessels to preserve
them from worms, invented by Richard Robotheau,* of Vermont 1794.

Mortars, for bombs, first made in England 1543.

Mulberry-trees, first planted in England 1609. They have for these some years
past been planted in Massachussetts and Connecticut, where they thrive
remarkably well.

Muskets, first used in France at the siege of Arras 1414; in general use 1521.

Muslins, from India, first worn in England 1670.

NAILS, an improved method of manufacturing them, invented by Samuel Briggs
Sen. and Junior * 1791; by Thomas Perkins,* of Pennsylvania 1794: another by
Jonathan G. Pierson,* of New York 1795; and a third, by Jacob Perkins,* of
Massachussetts, in the same year.

National debt, the British, amounted in the year 1783, to the sum of
1,241,863,173 Dollars. Many millions must have been added to this
inconceiveable sum, since the commencement of the present disastrous war.
Were this sum laid down in guineas in a line, it would extend above 4300 miles
in length; if in British shillings, it would extend three and a half times
round the globe; if in solid silver it would require 60,400 horses to draw it,
at 15 cwt. for each horse.

National, the debt, of the United States, nearly 70,000,000 Dollars. See a
view of the United States, by Tench Coxe, page 496.


Navigation submarine, a machine invented for, by David Bushnell of Saybrook,
Connecticut 1776.

Navigable canals. See Canals.

Needles, were first made in England, by a native of India 1545.

Negroe, adventure, the first to America 1508: the first from England 1562.

Newspapers, the first published in Paris was 1631: first in England, The sum
received by the British government, for the duties on Newspapers, amounted in
the year 1788, to 572,760 Dollars.
August 22, 1642. The first printed in Philadelphia was 1719.

New-style, see Remarkable events.

OAK, saw dust, first discovered to be useful in tanning 1765.

Oiled silk, linen or cotton, the method of manufacturing and of covering them
with hair, wool or fur, improved by Ralph Hodgson * 1792.

Olives, first planted in Italy 562, before Christ.

Olympiads, the method of reckoning time by the ancient Greeks, each olympiad
consisting of four years. The first commenced 776, before Christ.

Orbits, of the planets, first determined by a Saxon Clergyman 1681.

Orrerry, invented 1670.

PAINTING the art of, first introduced at Rome from Hetruria by Quintus, who,
on that account, was surnamed Pictor 291, before Christ.

Paper, made of cotton rags, was in use 1000: that of l^nen rags 1417. The
manufacture of, introduced into England 1558; Little or no white paper was
manufactured in England, previous to the year 1690: an improvement in the mode
of making moulds for the manufacturing of paper, by John Carnes Junior,* of
Delaware 1793; another improvement in the art of manufacturing paper and paste
board, by John Biddis * of Pennsylvania 1794.

Parliament, the first in England 1216; made triennial 1651: Septennial The
number of representatives in the British house of Commons, are from England
489: from Wales 24, and from Scotland 45. In all 558.
1716.

Pawnbrokers, first began in England 1457.

Pendulum, and cylindric mills, invented by James Rumsey * 1791; double
pendulum, invented by Robert Leslie * of Pennsylvania 1793.

Penny-post, set up in London and suburbs, by one Murray an upholsterer, 1683,
who afterward assigned the same to one Dockwra. It was ultimately claimed by
government, who allowed the latter a pension of 888 Dollars per annum.

Peruke, the first worn in France 1620; introduced into England 1660.

Phosphorus, artificial fire, discovered 1675.

Physic, the practice of, was confined to ecclesiastics from 1206, to about
1500.

Pins, first brought from France into England 1543. Previous to that invention
both sexes used ribbons, loop-holes, laces and skewers of brass, silver, and
gold.

Pitch and tar, made from pitcoal, discovered at Bristol in England 1779.

Plaster of Paris, the way first found out for taking a likeness in it, by
Andrew Verocchio 1470.

Planetarium a, invented by Joseph Pope, of Boston 1788.

Poor rates, in England, in 1680, amounted to 2,953,940 Dollars: in 1760, to
6,912,209 Dollars, in 1785, to 9,690,977 Dollars, and they are still increasing.

Population: for the population and religion of the different countries in the
world, see under Population and Religion.

Porcelain, of Saxony, brought to perfection 1719.

Port holes, in ships of war, introduced 1545

Post-offices, The postage of letters in the year 1788, amounted in Britain to
1,777,600 Dollars. In France in the year 1789, to 2,220,000 Dollars.
first established in Paris 1470: in England 1642: in Scotland 1695: first
established in America by Parliament 1710: by congress, July 26, 1775.

Pot and pearl ashes, an improvement in the art of manufacturing them by Samuel
Hopkins * 1790: an improvement in the construction of a furnace for
manufacturing them, by Edward Ryan,* of Pennsylvania 1793.

Potatoes, first carried to England from America 1610.

Potosi mountain, which contains the richest mine in America, discovered 1546.

Powdering the hair, the custom of, took its rise from some ballad singers at a
fair in Europe, who powdered themselves to look the more ridiculous 1614. This
practice was only known in America a short time before the late revolution.

Printing, Chinese mode of, on tablets existed from the most remote antiquity.

Printing, invented in Europe, by I. Faust 1441: first made public by John
Guttenburg of Mentz 1458: brought into England by William Caxton a mercer of
London 1471, who had a press in Westminster abbey till 1494;

Printing press, the first in New England, established at Cambridge 1639: The
first thing printed was "the Freeman's oath," and the next an almanac.

Printing house, first set up in Constantinople 1784.

Pumps, first invented 1425, an improvement in the art of working them by
Elisha Bigg * of Pennsylvania 1794.

Purple, discovery of it about 500 before Christ.

QUADRANTS solar, introduced 290 before Christ.

Quicksilver, the use of, in refining silver ore, discovered 1540: a large mine
of, discovered at Guancavelica in Peru 1567.

RED book, published by the National Assembly of France, by which amongst other
immense depredations committed on the public treasury, it appeared that the
king's brothers, notwithstanding their immense revenues, had spent two millions
sterling of the public money (8,880,000 Dollars).

Rice, first brought to Carolina by a brigantine from Madagascar, the captain
of which presented the governor with a bag; which he afterward divided amongst
his neighbors 1696.

Roses, first planted in England 1522.

Russia, began their new year from Jan. 1, 1700.

SAIL cloth, first made in England 1599. The sails of ships, boats, windmills,
etc. an improvement in the mode of supplying, invented by Robert Heterick * of
Pennsylvania 1793.

Saltmines, discovered in Staffordshire England 1670: rock salt discovered
about 950: the mode of procuring salt from sea water and b^ine, improved by
James Fennel * of Pennsylvania 1794.

Saturn's Satellites, first discovered 1608.

Saw-mills, first erected near London 1633; a horizontal saw-mill for cutting
and polishing marble, invented Samuel Mulliken * 1791. Improvement in a round
saw and perfection of a saw-mill, by Zachariah Cox* of Georgia 1793; a machine
for sawing wood, grinding bark, etc. by Thomas Farring ^n* 1792.

Sea water, made fresh by an experiment, Jan. 1752.

Semper eadem, first used as the motto for the arms of England, Dec. 13, 1702.

Shillings, first coined in England 1505.

Ship, the first seen in Greece, arrived at Rhodes from Egypt 1485 before
Christ.

Shipping, the tonnage of those built in the United States amounted in 1789, to
18,000 tons: in 1790, to 32,000, and during the 18 months following Jan. 1,
1792, it amounted to 80,000 tons.

Shoes, of the present fashion first worn in England, 1633.

Signals at sea, first devised by the Duke of York, who was afterward James
II. 1665. Lord How is said to have made very important improvements in the
mode of exhibiting signals, about the year 1781

Silk, wrought, brought from Persia to Greece 323 before Christ: from India 274
after Christ. Silk introduced into Europe by some monks 531: began to be
manufactured in England 1504: in France 1521. Broad silk manufacture from raw
silk introduced into England 1620. Lombe's famous silk throwing machine, which
contains 26,586, wheels * and in a day and night works 318,504,960 yards of
organzine silk, erected at Derby in England 1719, the culture of, first
introduced into Carolina by Sir Nathaniel Johnson 1700. Silk has lately been
raised and manufactured in different parts of New England in considerable
quantities, particularly by the industrious ladies of Connecticut.

Silver, There is a silver mine at Phillipsburgh, State of New York.
first coined at the mint of the United States 1794.

Sirnames, introduced into England by the Normans 1200.

The Quakers, to their lasting honor, were the first who as a religious body
publicly discountenanced this infernal traffic. The humane of every religious
persuasion in every nation now unite their influence against it. We may
therefore hope that as all men are born free, they will in a few years continue
so in every stage of life.
Slave trade, first commenced 1503; began by the English 1556. The importation
of slaves to the West Indies is said, by Abbe Reynal, to have amounted to
9,000,000, of whom 60,000 are imported annually.

In 1768, Britain purchased 53,100 America 6,300 France 23,500 Holland 11,300
Portugal 8,700 Denmark 1,200.

Soap, first made at Bristol 1524.

Speaking trumpets, invented by Kircher, a jesuit 1652.

Spectacles invented by Spina a monk of Pisa 1299.

Sphere, invented by Archimedes of Syracuse 209 before Christ.

Spinning wheel, invented at Brunswick in Germany 1530: another invented by Mr.
Swindell at Stockport in Cheshire, which finishes on each spindle, three lays
of 30 hanks to the pound in one hour 1785; a machine for spinning flax, hemp,
and combed wool, invented by George Parkinson * 1791, an improved machine for
spinning, doubling, twisting, and reeling thread, by Obadiah Herbert* 1792.

Spirits, 4,869,992 gallons, were imported into the United States 1792.

Starching of linen, first introduced into England 1552.

Steam engine, invented for taking ballast or gravel out of rivers, and for
raising great quantities of water 1618. An improvement in the steam still by
Alexander Anderson * of Pennsylvania Sept. 12, 1794; different modes of
propelling vessels by means of steam by James Rumsey, John Fitch, Nathan Read,
and John Stevens, each of whom obtained patents for their respective
discoveries 1794: an improved method of raising water by means of steam by John
Stevens * 1794, who also invented a method of applying steam for the purpose of
working a bellows. In the same year an engine was invented to raise steam by
Englehart Cruise * of Maryland: a steam jack invented by John Bailey * 1792.

Steel, may be made 300 times dearer than standard gold; thus six steel wire
springs for watch pendulums weigh one grain, for which the artist receives ten
dollars, when a grain of gold is only worth about 3 Cents. A new method of
tempering steel edged instruments, invented by David Hartley * 1792.

Stills, an improvement in, invented by John Kincaid * of Philadelphia 1794.

Stockings silk, first worn by Henry II. of France 1543: in England by Queen
Elizabeth 1560: the weaving of them was invented by the Rev. Mr. Lee of
Cambridge in England 1589.

Stone, cured by a medicine invented by Mrs. Stephens, for the discovery of
which she received a premium from the British government, June 1739.

Stops, in literature introduced 1520: the colon 1580, the semicolon 1599.

Style. See Remarkable events.

Sugar, first mentioned by Paul Eginetta a physician, 625, being originally
brought to Europe from China and the East; produced in the island of Sicily
1148: carried to the West Indies by the Spaniards and Portuguese 1550. Sugar
refining first introduced into England 1659; a new and useful improvement in
moulds or vessels for the purpose of claying or whitening refined sugar,
invented by Jonathan Williams, Junior, of Pennsylvania 1793. In England in the
year 1787, there was imported 1,926,741 cwt. for which the duty paid to
government, amounted to 5,273,897 Dollars.


Sugar Maple, 120,000 lb. of, was manufactured in the thinly inhabited parts of
the county of Otsego state of New York, equal in flavor and whiteness to the
best muscovado in the year 1791. The manufacture of maple sugar, is now carried
on in different parts of the United States, and from its excellence being more
extensively known, it must in a short time diminish, if not entirely preclude
the necessity of importing sugar of any other quality.


Sunday schools, first established in Gloucester in England by Mr Rakes 1784:
became general in England and Scotland 1787; instituted in Philadelphia 1791.

Sun-dials, invented 558 before Christ.

Supremacy, of the Pope above kings, etc. said to be introduced 607. King Henry
VIII. of England, was the first prince who threw of the yoke of supremacy 1533.

TAPESTRY, introduced into England by Sir Francis Crane 1619.

Tar, mineral, discovered in Gloucestershire in England 1787.

Tea, first brought into Europe by the Dutch East India company early in the
last century: and first mentioned in the British statute books 1660. The tea
plant was introduced into Georgia by Samuel Bowen about 1770, where it is said
to thrive.

Telegraphe, an instrument, by which dispatches can be transmitted to places
some hundred miles distance in a few hours, invented in France 1793.

Telescopes, invented by Jansen, a spectacle maker at Middleburgh, 1520. The
first reflecting ones made on the principles of Sir Isaac Newton 1692. The
first made in America, was by D. Rittenhouse.

Theaters, that of Bacchus erected at Athens 420 before Christ, and this was
the first of which we have any account.

Theracic duct, discovered in a horse by Eusta^hius 1563: in the human body
1653. See Lacteals.

Thermometers, first invented by a Dutchman 1620.

Thread, first made at Paisley in Scotland 1722.

Threshing of grain, an improvemeet in the art of, by Samuel Mulliken 1791,*
another by James Wardrop of Virginia * 1794.

Tin, found at an early period of the British history in Devonshire, and
Cornwall in Wales. First found in Germany 1241, and in Barbary 1640.

Titles, Titles are now abolished in France, and not known in America. In these
two republics merit alone entitles to pre-eminence.
first creation to, by Patent in England 1344.

Titles royal, the following is the succession, in which they swelled in
England: Henry IV. had the title of "Grace" conferred on him. Henry II. that of
"excellent grace." Edward IV. that of "high and mighty prince." Henry VII.
"Highness." Henry VIII. "Majesty." James I. "Sacred Majesty," or most excellent
Majesty.

Tobacco, Tobacco has its name from Tobago, where it grows in great plenty.
first discovered by the Spaniards in Yucatan 1520: introduced into France by
Nicot 1560: first brought into England by Mr. R. Lane 1586.

Tollgates, or Turnpikes, first in England 1350: first in Pennsylvania 1793.

Tonnage, of the United States in 1789, amounted to 297,468 tons: in 1790, to
347,663; in 1791, to 363,810; and in 1792, to 549,279.

Tragedy, the first acted at Athens was 535 before Christ.

Transfusion of the blood, first tried at Paris 1667.

Treaty, the first between England and any foreign nation, was with the
Flemings 1272.

Trumpets, speaking, first invented by Kircher a Jesuit 1652.

Turnpikes, see Tollgates.

VENEREAL disease, first brought from America into Spain by Columbus's fleet
1492. Thence carried into Italy, where it broke out in the French army at
Naples 1493.

Ventilators, invented by the Rev. Dr. Hales of England 1740.

Vines, grew wild in the island of Sicily in Homer's time: first planted in the
Island Madeira 1420. From vines which grew wild in the Territory North West of
the Ohio, the French settlers made 110 hogsheads of strong wine 1769.

Violins, invented about 1477.

Vision, the true theory of, first given by Kepler about 1610.

Voyages round the globe, see Circumnavigaton.

WATCHES, supposed to be invented at Nuremberg in Germany 1477; first used in
astronomical observations by Purbech 1500: first brought from Germ^^y to
England 1597: invented with pendulums by Huygens of Zulichem 1657: spring
pocket watches invented by Hook 1658, an improvement in the construction of
watches by Robert Leslie * of Philadelphia 1793.

Water mills, for grinding corn, invented by Bellisarius, while besieged in
Rome by the Goths 529. The ancients parched their corn and pounded it in
mortars. Afterward mills were invented, which were turned by men and beasts
with great labor; and yet Pliny mentions wheels turned by water. For
improvements in the construction of water mills by Americans, see Mills.

Weaving duck, an improvement in, by James Davenport* of New Jersey 1794.

Weights, and measures, invented 194 before Christ: fixed to a standard in
England 1257. A mode ascertaining with certainty a standard for weights and
measures, according to Philosophical principles, adopted by the French
convention 1794.

Whales, killed at Newfoundland and Iceland for their oil only, 1578. As the
use of their bones and fins were not known no stays were at that time worn by
the Ladies.

Wild fire, commonly called Greek fire, was invented by Callinicus a Grecian
680. The use of this fire was continued by the Saracens against their enemies
till the middle of the fourteenth century, when the scientific or casual
compound of nitre, charcoal and sulphur led to the discovery of gunpowder.

Wind guns, invented 1648: Wind mills 1299.

Windows of glass, were known as early as the third century, but did not become
general in England till the year 1180.

Wine, the art of making it, first discovered by Noah: sold by apothecaries in
England as a cordial 1300.

Wire, invented at Nuremberg 1410. Wire mills first constructed in Germany
1563: a machine invented to weave wire by Timothy Kirk and Robert Leslie * 1792.

Wool cards, invented by Bishop Blaize, about 300.

Woollen cloth, the first made in England was 1331: at Sedan, in France 1646;
at Hartford in Connecticut about 1787. An improvement in the art of shearing
woollen and other cloth, invented by Samuel Kellogg,* of Vermont 1795.

Wormwood and other plants, used for preserving malt liquors before the use of
Hops 1492.

Writing, the divine art of, supposed to be communicated by God to Moses, when
he received the commandments on Mount Sinai 1491 before Christ.

YEAR, the solar, found to consist of 365 days 5 hours and 49 minutes, 285
before Christ.

ZODIAC, the signs of, invented by Aneximander, about 540 before Christ.

Memorable Events.
ABBEY's and monasteries, suppressed by Henry VIII. of England, to the value of
12,667,520 Dollars 1540: suppressed by the Emperor of Germany 1785.

Abdication of King James II. of England, Dec. 1688; of Philip V. of Spain,
January 1724; of Victor Amadaeus of Sardinia, Sept. 3, 1730.

Algiers, an insurrection at, on account of tribute 1761.

Ambassador, the first sent from England to Turkey 1606; the first who arrived
in Europe from India, was from Tippo Saib to France, June 1788. George Hammond
Esquire the first sent from Britain to the United States 1791. Lord M'Cartney, the
first from England to China 1793.

Amboyna, the English factory at, murdered by the Dutch 1623.

America, the formerly British colonies of, declared independent by Congress,
July 4, 1776. See United States.

Antioch, at, 100,000 people, killed by the Jews in one day 145 before Christ.

Antwerp, made a free port 1784.

Army, the American, much distressed by famine and nakedness at Valley forge in
the winter 1778.

Associations. -- In South Carolina, against the proprietary government, Nov.
28, 1719.

-- Against the consumption of British manufactures in several of the colonies
1764.

-- Against the stamp act, by the New York and Connecticut sons of liberty,
Dec. 25, 1766.

-- Against importing goods from Britain, till the stamp act should be
repealed, by the merchants in New York, Oct. 31, 1766.

-- By the merchants in Philadelphia, Nov. 7, 1766, and about the same time by
the merchants of Boston.

-- By the Virginians, against importing any goods from Britain, which were
taxed, May 18, 1769.

-- By the Gentlemen and merchants of Maryland, June 1769.

-- In South Carolina the same year; when the city of Charlestown, broke off
all commerce with Rhode Island and Georgia, because they had not adopted
similar measures with their sister colonies. Georgia acceeded to the
non-importation agreement. Sept. 19, 1769, and North Carolina the October
following.

Bastille, the French, taken July 14, 1789.

Boston, port bill passed by the British parliament, March 25, 1774; by which
act that port was to continue shut, from and after June 1, next ensuing, till
full satisfaction should be made to the East India company, for their tea
destroyed.

Bottle conjuror, who had given out that he would jump into a quart bottle,
imposed on the credulous multitude, at the Haymarket theater London, Jan. 16,
1748.

Bottle, which contained two hogsheads, was blown at Leith in Scotland, Jan. 7,
1747.

Bull and three heifers, the first creatures of that kind, in New England, were
brought to Massachussetts 1624.

CASTLES, demolished in England, to the number of 1100, in 1153.

Census, of the inhabitants of the United States, was taken by act of Congress
in the year 1790: when the whole number was found to be 3,929,326, of whom in
these free states there were 697,655 slaves.

Ceylon, nearly destroyed by the natives, to revenge the cruelties of the Dutch
1761.

Child, the first born of European parents, in New England, Nov. 1620.

Colossus, of Rhodes, thrown down, 234 before Christ. It weighed 713,000 lb.

Colony, the first English in America, planted on the island of Roanoke in
Virginia 1585.

Commemoration of Handel, the first, performed in Westminster abbey, by 600
performers, May 26, 1784.

Commissioners to the court of France, appointed by Congress, Sept. 26, 1776.

Commissioners resolved by Congress, to be sent to the courts of Vienna,
Madrid, Prussia and Tuscany, Dec. 28, 1776.

Commissioners, viz. William Eden, George Johnstone, and the Earl of Carlisle,
appointed by the court of Britain to treat with America, arrive at
Philadelphia, June 1778; with whom Congress refuse to treat unless their
independence should be admitted, or the British fleets and armies withdrawn.

Commissioners from several States, agreeably to the recommendation of James
Madison of Virginia, met at Annapolis Maryland, for the purpose of effecting a
more efficient government for the United States, 1786.

Confederation articles of, for mutual defense agreed upon by the four New
England colonies, 1643.

Confederation articles of, and perpetual union agreed on between the American
colonies, May 20, 1775.

Confederation at Paris, in commemoration of the capture of the Bastille, July
14, 1790.

Congress a, met at New York, to consult on measures necessary to be taken for
the mutual assistance and defense of the colonies, May 1, 1690.

Congress a, of Governors met at New London, to adjust the measures necessary
to be taken for the Canada expedition 1711.

Congress a, met at Albany, to concert a plan for the union of all the colonies
1754.

Congress a, met at New York, to consult upon measures for obtaining the
redress of grievances 1765.

Congress the, met at Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1774: dissolved Oct. 26,
following; met again at Philadelphia, May 10, 1775: signed a petition to the
king, and addressed the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland, July 8, 1775:
abolished the authority of Britain over the then colonies, May 15, 1776; and on
July 4, following; declare the colonies to be free, sovereign and independent,
under the name of the United States. The following, is a list of those patriots
who subscribed this important instrument, viz.

JOHN HANCOCK, PRESIDENT. New Hampshire, Josiah Bartlett, William Whipple,
Matthew Thornton. Massachussetts Bay, Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat
Pain, Eldridge Gerry. Rhode Island, Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery.
Connecticut, Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams. Oliver
Wolcott. New York, William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis
Morris New Jersey, Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John
Heart, Abraham Clark. Pennsylvania, Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin
Franklin, John Morton, George Clymer, James Smith, George Tailor, James Wilson,
George Ross. Delaware, Caesar Rodney, George Read, Thomas M'Kean. Maryland,
Samuel Chase, William Paca, Thomas Stone, Charles ^arroll of Carleton.
Virginia, George With, Richard Hen^y Lee, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Harrison,
Thomas Nelson, junior, Francis Lightfoot Lee, Carter Braxton. North Carolina,
William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Pen^. South Carolina, Edward Rutledge,
Thomas Heyward, junior, Thomas Lynch, junior, Arthur Middleton. Georgia, Button
Gwinnett, Lyman Hall, George Walton.



Congress, first meeting of under the federal constitution at New York, March
4, 1789, met at Philadelphia, Dec. 6, 1790.

Conspiracies, insurrections, and assassinations, the most remarkable in
ancient or modern history:

A conspiracy, was formed against the infant republic of Rome, to restore
Sextus Tarquin, and the regal government, in which the two sons of Junius
Brutus, the first consul, being concerned, were condemned and put to death by
order of their father, 507 before Christ; conspiracy of Cataline and his
associates, to murder the consul and Roman senate, and to burn the city of
Rome, discovered by Cicero consul for that year 62; of the Gunpowder plot in
England, which was discovered Nov. 4, 1605; of the Bishop of Ely and others to
restore king James 1691; of Lord Lovat in favor of the pretender 1703; of
Layer and others to bring in the pretender 1722; at Lisbon, by several of the
nobility who attempted to shoot the king 1758; at Madrid, when the king was
obliged to banish the Marquis Squillaci 1769; by five Frenchmen to kill the
king of Spain, after which all Frenchmen were expelled the Spanish dominions,
1793. The unfortunate victims of this mandate, were said to be upwards of
70,000; of Ankerstrom, who killed Gustavus III. king of Sweden, March 16, 1792;
an attempt to assassinate Louis XV. was made by Francis Damien 1757; an attempt
to assassinate the king of Poland by Thorinski, Pulaski and others, Sept. 3,
1771; to assassinate George III. by Margaret Nicholson, a lunatic, August 2,
1786.

Conspiracies and insurrections in America: of the Indians in New England to
destroy the colonists, discovered by John Segamore a friendly Indian, April
1630; of Cleybourne and Ingle, against the Governor of Maryland, who fled to
Virginia 1645, and could not return till the month of Aug. 1646; of Culpepper
against the proprietary government of Carolina, which commenced 1677, and
continued till 1680: again in the year 1690; of the negroes at Stono in South
Carolina, who committed great depredations against the inhabitants 1738; of
Shays, and others in Massachussetts 1786; of the negroes in St. Domingo, which
commenced Aug. 1791, and is not yet suppressed The negroes, had been inhumanly
treated by their tyrannical masters. The word insurrection, is therefore in
this instance, perhaps too harsh.
; of the four Western counties of Pennsylvania, which though at first very
alarming, was by the prudence of the president and the patriotism of the
militia, quelled without bloodshed, 1794. In North Carolina, when a body of
people under the name of regulators, headed by Herman Husband, began to oppose
government 1770. They were at last suppressed by the friends of order in an
engagement, where they lost 20 men killed and a number wounded, 12 of the
leaders were capitally convicted and six executed; Husband escaped Now in
Philadelphia jail, charged with high treason in the late insurrection, in the
Western counties of Pennsylvinia.
. Of the Corce and Tuscorora Indians, who killed upwards of 150 inhabitants of
North Carolina 1712.

Constitution the Federal, agreed to by the grand convention held at
Philadelphia, by a representation from 21 States, (Rhode Island not being
representated, Sept. 17, 1787; ratified by the different States in the
follownig order.

By Delaware, Dec 3, 1787 unanimously major. Pennsylvania, Dec. 13, -- 46
against 23 23 New Jersey, Dec. 19, -- unanimously Georgia, January 2, 1788
unanimously Connecticut, Jan. 9, -- 128 to 40 88 Massachussetts, Feb. 6, -- 187
to 168 19 Maryland, April 28, -- 63 to 12 51 South Carolina, May 23, -- 149 to
73 76 New Hampshire, June 25, -- 57 to 46 11 Virginia, June 25, -- 89 to 79 10
New York, July 26, -- 30 to 25 5 North Carolina, Nov 27, 1789, 193 to 75 118
Rhode Island, May 29, 1790 by a majority of 2 Vermont, Jan. 10, 1791 by a great
majority.

Kentucky, received into the union, June 1, 1792.

Constitution, the first French, presented to the king, Sept. 3, 1791; the new
constitution after the abolition of royalty, adopted by the convention, June
23, 1793.

Convention, the Federal, met at Philadelphia, for the purpose of forming a new
constitution for the United States, May 25, 1787. The members of this
honorable body, were as follow GEORGE WASHINGTON, President and delegate from
Virginia. New Hampshire, John Langdon, John Gilman. Massachussetts, Nathaniel
Gorham, Rufus King. Connecticut, William Samuel Johnson, Roger Sherman. New
York, Alexander Hamilton. New Jersey, William Livingston, David Brearly,
William Patterson, Jonatha^ Dayton. Pennsylania, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas
Mifflin, Robert Morris, George Clymer, Thomas Fitsimmons, Jared Ingersol, James
Wilson, Governeur Morris. Delaware, George Read, Gunning Bedford, junior, John
Dickinson, Richard Bassett, Jacob Broom Maryland, James M'Henry, Daniel of St.
Thomas, Jennifer, Daniel Carroll. Virginia, John Blair, James Madison, junior.
North Carolina, William Blount, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Hugh Williamson. South
Carolina, John Rutledge, Charles Catesworth, Pinckney, Charles Pinckney, Pierce
Butler. Georgia, William Few, Abraham Baldwin.





Conventions, in several towns in Massachussetts, were held for the purpose of
redressing grievances 1784, which laid the foundation of the insurrection which
took place 1786.

Convention the French, first assembled Sept. 20, 1792. The legislative body of
France, previous to that meeting was called the National Assembly.

Convention the Irish, for the reform of parliament met at Dublin, Dec. 8, 1785.

Cook, Captain James, circumnavigated the globe 1776.

DRAKE Sir Francis, circumnavigated the globe 1580.

Duel, the first fought in New England, was between two servants with sword and
dagger, when neither of them being killed, the punishment inflicted on them was
to have their feet and heads tied together, and kept in that situation 24 hours
without meat or drink 1621.

ELLIN Ellis, at Beaumaris in Denbighshire England, aged 72, was brought to
bed, May 10, 1766.

FAST a, observed throughout the American colonies, June 1, 1774, being the day
on which the Boston portbill took effect.

France, admitted American independence, Feb. 6, 1778; the court gave an
audience to the American commissioners, viz. Messieurs Franklin, Deane and Lee,
March 21, 1778; the French recovered their civil liberty, July 14, 1789.

GENOA Bank, sailed 1750.

Great seal, stolen from the Lord Chancellor of Britain, March 24, 1784.

HABEAS corpus act, suspended in Massachussetts during the insurrection of
1786; in Britain 1794.

Hair, an association against wearing it long, by the Governor and council of
Massachussetts, who considered it as a heinous sin, March 1649.

Hessian fly, see Wheat Insect.

Holland, allows the American independence, April 19, 1782.

Holstein, ceded to Denmark by Russia 1773.

Hugenots, murdered at Paris, Aug. 24, 1572.

INQUISITION of Naples, abolished 1782.

Insurrection, see Conspiracy.

Ireland, admitted to a free trade by the British parliament 1779: its liberty
of the press restrained 1784.

JERSEY, the British prison ship, during the American war 11,000 prisoners
perished on board of her, from ill treatment.

LADIES, the patriotic of Philadelphia, with their own donations purchase a
quantity of linen, which with their own hands they made into 1207 shirts, for
the use of the American army, July and August 1780; the ladies of New Jersey,
at the same time made a present of 380 pairs of stockings; the whig ladies of
Charlestown, South Carolina, absolutely refused any sociality with the British;
while they generously contributed to mitigate the sufferings of the American
prisoners 1781.

League and covenant, the solemn for (as it was stated) the reformation and
defense of religion, formed at Westminster 1643: ratified by the Scotch
parliament 1644.

League and covenant, a solemn, entered into by the Boston committee, to
suspend all commercial intercourse with Britain, from Aug. 31, 1774, until the
Boston port-bill and all other obnoxious laws should be repealed.

Liberty of the press, granted in Denmark 1770.

Longevity, extraordinary instances of it in England. Thomas Parr, of
Shropshire, died 1635, aged 160; Henry Jenkins of Yorkshire, died 1670, aged
169.

Longevity in America 1765, Mr. Temple of Worcester Massachussetts, aged 86
left 8 Children, whose ages in 1790, were as follow, viz. 89, 85, 83, 81, 79,
77, 75, 73. John Sydenham, of Mount Holly, New Jersey, was living N^v. 5, 1788,
aged 106 years and 3 months; Edward Drinker, born in Philadelphia, died 1782,
aged 102 years; Mr Hutton, died on Long Island, New York 1794, aged 108 years;
In the bills of mortality of Christ Church Philadelphia, there is a person
mentioned, who died aged 120. In two hundreds of Sommerset county, Maryland
1793, there were fifty persons aged as follow, twenty three upwards of 90, 16
upwards of 87, and 11 aged 85 years. In 1775, Mrs. Lear, died at Portsmouth New
Hampshire, aged 103, Mr. Abigail Mayo, in Massachussetts aged 106, and Mr.
William Ward, at Fairfield in Connecticut, aged 105: Sept. 20, 1788, in
Albemaric county, Virginia, Daniel Manphin, died in his 88th year. At the time
of his death, there were living of his offspring upwards of 200 persons
including some of the fifth generation. Same year Jacob Wiseman, died in
Pennsylvania, aged 103, and left living 170 of his descendants; Mr Williams at
Chesterfield, Virginia aged 105: at Wyndham in Connecticut, Dr. Ribbins, aged
110: John Dance Chesterfield county, Virginia, aged 125. In 1790, died Doctor
Bernard Vanlear, in Delaware county, aged 104: In Massachussetts, Mrs. Newton,
aged 106: her mother lived to 113, and her sister to 102. At Thompson,
Connecticut, Henry Elthrop, aged 105. At Albany, Abraham Vanverts, aged 124.
These remarks, which are extracted from the writings of the celebrated Doctor
Rush, inserted in the transactins of the American Philosophical society, will
clearly satisfy the unprejudiced reader that the chance for a long life is as
great in America, as in any country of Europe. As a further proof of this truth
the following fact may be added. In the Lutheran congregation of Philadelphia,
the births between the years 1774, and 1780, were 5175, and the deaths only
2380.
William Tailor, in Pit county Virginia, died aged 114, 1794.

Marriage, the first English, celebrated in New England, May 12, 1621.

Massacres, horrid 2000 Tyrians crucified, and 8000 put to the sword, for not
surrendering to Alexander the Great, 331 before Christ. The Jews of Antioch
massacred, 100,000 of the other inhabitants for refusing to surrender their
arms to Demetrius Nicanor, tyrant of Syria 145. About 200,000 of the Teutones
and Ambrones, were massacred by order of Marius the Roman General near Aix 102;
300 Roman senators and other persons of distinction, were sacrificed to the
manes of Julius Caesar by order of Sylla 41. At the destruction of Jerusalem,
1,000,000 Jews were massacred A. D. 70. The Emperor Probus, after he had
subdued Gaul, massacred 700,000 inhibitants, 277. At Thessalonica, upwards of
7000, persons invited into the circus, were massacred by order of Theodosius
390. At Constantinople 30,000 inhabitants were put to death by order of
Bel^i^arius, because they had revolted against the oppression of two rapacious
ministers, set over them by the emperor Justinian 532. The dreadful massacre of
the French, without distinction of age or sex, in Sicily on Easter day 1282.
This is called the Sicilian vespers;; of 70,000 Hugeno^s in France, which began
at Paris in the night of the Festival of St. Bartholomew, August 25, 1572, by
orders from Charles IX. of France, at the instigation of his infamous mother,
Catharine de Medicis. Of 65,000 Christians, slain by the Turks in Croatia 1592,
of the English, by the Dutch at Amboyna 1624; of the Irish in different parts
of that kingdom when 40,000 were slain* In Paris, Sept. 2, and 3, 1793, when
state prisoners, amounting to the number of 1085, were massacred by the
populace supposed to be excited by Marat, Robespiere and Danton; of the Russian
General Suwarrow, who butchered 20,000 Polanders near Warsaw, Nov. 4. 1794, of
the Spaniards, who by their cruelties depopulated the islands of Cuba,
containing 600,000 and Hispaniola 3,000,000 of inhabitants, about the year
1510; the Yamassee Indians massacre a number of the inhabitants of South
Carolina, April 15, 1714; a massacre of the Virginians by the Indians, 1644; of
Indians by the Pennsylvanians, 1764; of the Bostonians by the British 29th
regiment, March 5, 1770; by the British near Paoli, Chester county, September
11, 1777; at Wyoming, of the Americans by the Indians and Tories, July 1, 1778;
at Taapan of 67 Americans by order of General Gray, September 27, 1778; of the
Moravian Indians at Muskingum by a party of Americans, when 90 were inhumanly
butchered in the spring of 1782; at Fort Dauphin, St. Domingo, when the
Spaniards murdered 742 Frenchmen, July 7, 1794.

Mississippi bubble, in France, ceased June 27, 1720.

Mob, see riot.

Mohocks, a set of disorderly people, infested the streets of London at night,
wounding and disfiguring the men and indecently exposing the women 1711, when
the executive issued a proclamation offering a reward of 444 Dollars for
apprehending each of them.

Monarchy abolished in France, September 20, 1792.

NATIONAL Assembly of France first met May 5, 1789; on the 17th June following
the Tiers etats or representatives of the people, after using every effort to
obtain an union with the privileged orders, constituted themselves the National
Assembly.

Non importation, non consumption, and non exportation agreement entered by the
merchants in the different colonies, December 14th, 1774.

North West passage, attempted by Captain Phipps, now Lord Musgrave, 1773.

OXFORD assizes, in England, made memorable by the death of the Sheriff and 300
persons, who died of the goal distemper caught from the prisoners 1577.

PACKET a, of blank paper, was received by Congress from Paris, instead of the
dispatches from their Ambassadors there, June 12th, 1778.

Paper money, first made in Massachusetts 1690; emitted by Rhode Island 1744;
by Pennsylvania 1722; issued by Congress May 15th, 1775; made a legal tender
1777; after a gradual depreciation, ceased to circulate without occasioning any
disturbance, 1781.

Persian army, fearing they should be cut off by the Romans, threw themselves
into the Euphrates, where upwards of 10,000 perished, 424.

Peter, Emperor of Russia, visited England, School.

Poland, dismantled of several of its provinces by Russia, Prussia, and the
Emperor of Germany, 1772; harassed again by the same powers 1794.

Pope the, visited Vienna, to solicit the Emperor in favor of the Roman
church, March 1782.

Powell, a lawyer, walked from London to York and back again in six days,
November 27, 1773, about 402 miles. He again performed the same journey June
20, 1787, when aged 57.

Printing press, set up at Cambridge, New England, 1642; practiced at
Constantinople 1730; abolished 1740; re-established 1784.

Proclamations remarkable, General Gage's, promising pardon to all who would
lay down their arms, June 12, 1775; Lord and General Howe's to the same
purpose, Novr. 30, 1776; Burgoyne's Our readers may compare the gasconading
proclamations of Burgoyne and Brunswick with that of Senacherib mentioned in
the Bible, 2 Kings xviii. and xix. chapters. May all crack-brained generals,
meet with a fate similar to that of these three bullies.
threatening proclamation, June 29, 1777; Tryone's to the inhabitants of
Connecticut, July 7, 1778; a proclamation made in Paris "that the country was
in danger," July 22, 1792; the sanguinary proclamation of the Duke of Brunswick
against the French, July 25, 1792; of the President of the United States,
recommending neutrality, April, 1793.

QUAKERS, began to be persecuted in Massachussetts, 1656; a committee from
their yearly meeting presented an address to Congress against slavery, March,
1790.

Queens of England, Scotland, and France, in England at the same time, 1517.

REVOLT, of the Pennsylvania and part of the New Jersey line of troops, January
9, 1781: they were, however, soon after reconciled to their duty.

Revolutions remarkable, in ancient history, the Assyrian empire destroyed, and
that of the Medes and Persians founded by Cyrus the Great, 536 B. C.; the
Persian empire destroyed by Alexander the Great, and the Macedonian succeeds,
331 B. C.; the Roman empire established on the ruins of the Macedonian, or
Greek monarchy by Julius Caesar, 47 B. C.; the eastern empire founded by
Constantine the Great, on the final overthrow of the Romans, A. D. 306; the
empire of the western Franks, began under Charlemagne A. D. 802; this empire
underwent a new revolution and became the German empire under Rudolph of
Augsburg, 1273, head of the house of Austria, from whom it is also called "the
monarchy of the Austrians;" the monarchy of the Eastern empire, passed into the
hands of the Turks, A. D. 1353.

Revolutions, in modern history, in Denmark, January 1661, when the king became
absolute; in Sweden, August, 1772, when the power of the king was greatly
augmented; revolution began in Holland, 1579, and was completed, 1609; in
Britain, when James VI. having abdicated the throne, William, Prince of Orange
succeeded, 1688; in Poland, May, 1791 This constitution was, universally,
believed to be well calculated to remove the inveterate evils, under which, the
unhappy Poles had for a long time labored; but, by the very forcible reasoning
of the bayonet, employed by the humane empress of Russia, it has been since
overturned.
; revolution in America began July 4, 1776, and was completed, September, 1783,
when its independence was acknowledged by the king of Britain; in Holland a
revolution was attempted, 1787, but prevented by Prussia; the revolution in
France may be said to have commenced on the capture of the Bastille, July 14,
1789; royalty declared by the Convention to be for ever abolished in France,
September, 1792; revolution in Holland, January, 1795.

Riots remarkable, in London of the Whig and Tory mobs, commonly called from
their leaders, the Ormond and New Castle mobs, immediately after the accession
of George I. 1715: both parties having done much mischief, what is called the
riot act was passed the same year; rioters in Herefordshire, demolished the
turnpikes and were quelled after a severe engagement with the posse comitatus,
1735; of the Spittal-field weavers, on account of their employers having sent
for workmen from Ireland, when the military interfered and several lives were
lost, 1736; at Edinburgh, the prison door was set fire to by the populace, and
a Captain Porteous (who had wantonly ordered his soldiers to fire upon the
people at a former mob, for which he had beeen justly condemned and afterward
reprieved) was taken out and hanged on a sign post, 1736; the people peaceably
retired immediately after his death; of the people in all parts of England, on
account of the dearth of provisions, 1766 and 1767; a mob having assembled in
St. George's fields, London, to see John Wilkes in the King's Bench prison, the
military being imprudently called for, fired upon the populace and killed
several innocent persons, 1768; a great riot in London, June 6, 1780, when a
number of Roman chapels, prisons, and private houses, were destroyed by the
mob; the military were at last called and fired upon the populace, when many
were killed, and many more afterward executed for f^lony; a dreadful riot in
Paris, when 600 people were killed before it was suppressed, April 27, 1789; at
Paris again, between the national guards and some royal companies who had
assumed the white cockade, when 24 of the latter were killed, June 4,
following; at the palace of the Thuillieries, to compel the king to withdraw
his veto from the decree against the priests, etc. June 20, 1792; in Ireland,
riots of the White Boys, 1786; of the Peep of day Boys, 1789;

Riots Happily for this country, the peaceable disposition of the inhabitants;
the fertility of the soil; and the excellence of the government, render the
people easy and comfortable in their situation: hence there being few grounds
of complaints, riots, mobs, and insurrections seldom happen, and these few have
been suppressed with little or no bloodshed.
in America, general, through all the colonies, on account of the Stamp Act,
when those who were in favor of that unpopular measure, were burnt in effigy
by the populace, 1765; in Massachussetts, to prevent the sitting of the court
at Worcester, 1786; of 400 men, who wished to force the legislature of New
Hampshire, into a paper money system, 1786; of a number of disbanded soldiers,
to the amount of 300, who wanted to force Congress to redress their grievances,
June 20, 1783; an alarming riot in New York against the young physicians, whom
the mob accused of taking up for dissection a number of dead bodies; several of
the mob were killed by the militia before the riot was suppressed, 1787.

Roman ladies, a number having murdered their husbands, 170 suffered death for
it: this was the first example of such a crime, 331.

Russia, acknowledged the independence of the United States, July, 1783.

SAMPSON, pulled down the temple of Dagon and destroyed 3000 Philistines, 1117
before Christ.

South Sea scheme, which ruined several hundred families, vanished in England,
1720.

Spain, acknowledged the independence of the United States, March, 1783.

Straw, used for the English king's bed, 1234.

Style, altered by Augustus Caesar's ordering leap year to be but once in four
years, and the month Sextilis to be called August, eight years before Christ;
it was again altered by Pope Gregory, in Italy, the 5th October being accounted
the 15th, 1582; the Gregorian style was adopted by France, December 15,
following; by most of the Protestant states in Europe, 1700; by Britain, when
the 3d of September was accounted the 14th, 1752;

Sweden, acknowledged the independence of the United States, February 25, 1783.

TEA, a quantity belonging to the British East India company consisting of 340
chests was destroyed by the populace at Boston, to express their abhorrence of
British taxes, and 17 chests were destroyed at New York for the same reason,
November, 1773.

Titles, abolished in France, June 19, 1790.

Torture, abolished in France by edict of Louis the last king, August 29, 1780;
by the late king of Sweden, November 22, 1785: in Poland, 1776.

Trade with the American colonies, prohibited by the British parliament, August
18, 1775.

UNITED STATES, first styled so by a resolve of Congress, September 9, 1776;
the flag resolved to be thirteen stripes alternately red and white and thirteen
stars in a blue field, June 20, 1777; their independence was admitted by
France, February 6, 1778; by Britain, 1782; and soon after by the other powers
of Europe.

WALES, a prince of, committed to prison for assaulting a judge on the bench,
1412.

Wampum, passed as a currency in Delaware, Albany, and several other places,
when 6 white grains and 3 black ones passed for a penny, 1762.

Wheat, first blasted in New England, 1664.

Wheat insect, ccmmonly called the Hessian fly from the notion of its being
brought into this country by the Hessians, was totally unknown in America till
a few years after the commencement of the late war; it has since done much
injury to the wheat in New York and the adjoining states, but we are happy to
understand that for these two or three last years, its ravages have been less
destructive.

Wood's halfpence, which raised a great ferment in Ireland, were sent thither,
January 15, 1780.

Religious Institutions, Councils, Sacred Writings, etc.
ABSTINENTS, the sect began, 170.

Acts of the Apostles, written, 63.

Adam and Eve, created 4004 B. C.

Adamites, a sect of heretics, began, 130; renewed, 1124.

Advent Sunday, first observed, 433.

Agnus Dei, or "O Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, etc."
introduced into the Litany, 687.

Albigenses, held their origin, 1160.

All Saints festival, instituted, 835.

All Souls festival, instituted, 998.

Altars, first used in churches, 135; first consecrated, 271.

Anathemas, first brought into the church, 387.

Augsburg confession of faith, made, 1550.

Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, observed, 350.

Anthems, first introduced into the church service, 386.

Antinomian sect, began, 1538.

Antinomianism, great controversies about, in Boston, Massachussetts, 1638.

Arian sect, began, 290.

Armenianism, began, 1229.

Articles of religion, six for the established church of England were published
by Henry VIII. 1536; 42 published without consent of parliament, 1552; the 42
reduced to 39, January, 1563; received the authority of parliament 1571; the 39
articles of the church of England were reduced by the bishops and clergy of the
Protestant Episcopal church in America to the number of 20, 1789.

Ascension day, first commemorated, 68.

Athanasian creed, said to be written, 340.

Augustines, began, 389: first in England, 1250.

Auricular confession, said to be first introduced, 1254.

BANNS publication of, for marriage, first used in England, 1254.

Baptism, practiced by immersion till about 100.

Baptists, began, 1525; first in England. 1549; Rhode Island settled by
Baptists, 1635.

Beads, said to be first used in devotion, 1093.

Begging friars, established in France, 1587.

Bells, first consecrated, 968.

Benedictines, founded, 548.

Benefices, began about, 500; those in England are so unequally divided, that
while several poor curates, who preach twice and perhaps three times each
Sunday and perform all the other duties of their office, receive only from 10
l. to 20 sterling per annum, several of the bishops, who do not preach ten
times in a year, enjoy a yearly income of more than ten thousand pounds.

Bethlehemites, began, 1248.

Bible history, ceases, 340 B. C.; Septuagint version, made 284; first divided
into chapters, 1253, the number of which is 929 in the Old Testament and 260 in
the New. The first English edition, was in 1536; the first authorized edition
in England was in 1539; the second translation was ordered to be read in
churches, 1549; the present translation, was finished, September 1611;
permitted by the Pope to be translated into all the languages of the Catholic
states, February 28, 1759; the first edition of the Bible printed in the United
States, was by Robert Aitkin of Philadelphia, 178^; the Doway translation of
the Bible, printed by Matthew Carey, of Philadelphia, 1790; the Bible
translated into the Indian language by Rev. Mr. Elliot of New England, 1664.

Bishops, the first in England, 694; first in Denmark, 939; the form of
consecrating English bishops, was ordained, 1549; their order abolished by
parliament, October 9, 1646; restored, October 25, 1660; the number of the
English bishops is, at present, the two archbishops of Canterbury and York, and
24 bishops; those of Ireland are 4 archbishops, and 18 bishops.

Bishops, the first in America, was the Right Rev. Doctor Samuel Seabury,
consecrated bishop of Connecticut by four nonjuring prelates at Aberdeen in
Scotland, November 14, 1784; the other American bishops are the Right Rev.
William White, D. D. bishop of Pennsylvania, and the Right Rev. Doctor Samuel
Provost bishop of New York, who were both consecrated at London by the
archbishop of Canterbury, February 4, 1787; and the Right Rev. Doctor Maddison,
of Virginia, who was likewise consecrated by the archbishop of Canterbury, 1790.

Bishop, the first Catholic, in the United States, the Right Rev. Doctor Carrol
of Maryland consecrated, 1789.

Bishop, of Nova Scotia, first appointed, August 18, 1787.

Brownists, began, 1660.

Buchanites, about 300 deluded fanatics, the followers of Margaret Buchan, who
promised to conduct them to the New Jerusalem, appeared in Scotland about the
year 1784.

Burial places It has long been the opinion of many, that to bury the dead in
the center of populous cities, was highly injurious to the health of the
living. This opinion appeared to be universally adopted by the citizens of
Philadelphia soon after the mortality occasioned by the Yellow Fever; but as
danger seems now at a distance, no further attempt has been made to change the
present places of interment.
, first permitted in cities in England, 742.

CALVINISTS, began, 1546.

Candle light, first introduced into churches, 274.

Canonical hours for prayer, instituted, 391.

Canonization, first introduced by Papal authority, 993.

Cardinals, originally the parish priests of Rome; the title began to be used,
308; they did not elect the popes till 1160; wore the red hat (to remind them
that they ought to shed their blood, if required, for religion) and were made
princes of the church, 1222; the title of Eminence first given them by Pope
Urban VIII. about 1630.

Carmelites, began, 1141.

Carthusians, began, 1084.

Catholic, the term of, first given to Christians, 38.

CHRIST. See JESUS.

Christian, the appellation of, first given to the disciples of Christ, at
Antioch, 40.

Christianity, propagated in Spain, 36; supposed to be first introduced into
Britain, 60; established there by public authority, 181; introduced into
Scotland, 212; propagated in Persia, 408; began in France, 496; introduced into
Friesland, 698; into Germany, 719; embraced by the king of Denmark, for which
he was dethroned, 825: preached in Sweden, about 850; established in Russia,
985; in Hungary, in the tenth century; in Prussia, in the eleventh; in Norway,
in the twelfth; in part of Tartary, in the thirteenth; in Africa, at Guinea,
etc. in the fifteeenth; and it made great progress in the East Indies, and in
China, in the sixteenth century; the American Indians, began to be instructed
in Christianity by the Rev. Mr. Elliot of New England, 1650.

Christmas day, first observed as a festival, 98.

Church congregational, the first in the the United States, formed at Salem in
Massachussetts, 1629.

Church, of England, established by law in South Carolina, about the year 1703.

Churches, the first Christian, built 214* first began to be built in England,
638.

Churching of women, originated from the Jewish rite of purification.

Church music, introduced into worship, 350.

Choiral service, first used in England at Canterbury, 677.

Church service, changed in England from Latin to English, 1559.

Church yards, first consecrated, about 317; admitted into cities, 742.

Circumcision, instituted, 1897 B. C. when Abraham was 99, and Ishmael 13 years
old. The feast of Circumcision, first observed, 487.

Clergy, the Roman, compelled to a vow of celibacy, about 1073.

Commandments, given to Moses, 1424 B. C.

Commandments, creed, and Lord's Prayer, translated into the Saxon language,
781.

Common prayer, of the Church of England, published by authority of Parliament,
1548; altered by the authority of the bishops and clergy of the Protestant
Episcopal church of America, 1789.

Conception of the Virgin, festival of, ordained, 1387.

Conclave, for the election of popes, first instituted, 1274.

Confession, auricular, introduced, 1254.

Confirmation, the rite of, used by St. Peter and St. Paul.

Congregationalists. See Independents.

Consecration, of churches instituted, 153; the form of consecrating bishops of
the church of England, ordained, 1549.

Corpus Christi, the festival of, appointed, 1265.

Councils, that at Jerusalem, when the first controversy in the Christian
church was discussed, 48; at Antioch, 269; at Arles, 314; the first council of
Nice, against Arius, 325; the first at Constantinople, when Pope Damascus
presided, 381; that at Sardis, when 376 fathers attended, 400; that at
Chalcedon when ^ope Leo presided and 600 fathers attended, 451; at
Constantinople, 600; at Rome, 649; at Nice, when Pope Adrian presided and 350
fathers attended, 787; the first Lateran council, when Pope Calixtus II.
presided and 300 fathers attended, 1122; the second Lateran one, when Pope
Innocent presided and 1000 fathers attended, 1139; the third Lateran council,
when Pope Alexander III. presided, 1175; the fourth Lateran council, when Pope
Innocent III. presided and 1285 fathers attended, 1215 and 1217; the fifth
Lateran council, 1517; the sixth Lateran one, against Luther, when Pope Julian
III. and Pius IV. presided, 1546.

Covenant, the solemn league and, agreed on by the Scotch for the maintenance
of the Presbyterian religion, etc. 1638.

Creation of the world, 4004 B. C.

Cross, of Christ, found on Mount Calvary, 326; the sign of, first used by
Christians, 110.

Crossed friars, began, 1170.

Crucifixes painted, in churches and chambers, first introduced, 461.

Crusades, or Holy War, began, 1095.

Culdees, Scottish monks, who never submitted to the power of the Pope, had
their principal seat at St. Kndrews from the year 280; settled at York in
England, before 1446.

Cup, sacramental, restored to the laity. 1547.

DANIEL, the prophet, from a vision predicted the Persian empire under
Alexander, 534 B. C.

Dedication of churches, by bishops introduced, 483; the first church
consecrated by a bishop in the United States, was Trinity Church, New York, by
the Right Rev. Samuel Provoost, D. D. 1788.

Dispensations, first granted by the Pope, 1200.

Dissenters, first se^^^ated from the church of England, 1571; a bill f^^ their
relief passed the house of Commons, May 8, 1772; but was rejected by the Lords.

Dominican order, confirmed 1216; came into England 1221, Friars of that order
arrive in Hispaniola, to preach the gospel to the Indians 1513. Four were sent
to Florida 1549: but their mission was unsuccessful.

Donatists, the sect of, arose under Donatus 311.

Dunkards, a religious sect, began in Pennsylvania 1710.

EASTER, established 68: the time of celebrating Easter, calculated for 592
years by Victorious 463.

Elevation, of the Host, introduced 1222.

Epiphany, the feast of, instituted 813.

Episcopacy, introduced before 100, abolished in Scotland 1638: in England
1645: restored in England 1660: and in Scotland 1661: finally abolished in
Scotland 1689.

Exaltation of the cross, instituted 629.

FASTS, first established 138.

Fast, a solemn, observed throughout the American colonies, by recommendation
of Congress, July 20, 1775.

Festival of the Jews, the principal, being the feast of tabernacles, which was
instituted by Moses in the wilderness 1490 before Christ, continues to be
celebrated by them to this day.

Festivals of Christmas, Easter, Ascension, and Pentecost, first observed by
Christians 68. Rogation days appointed 469. Jubilees, appointed in the Roman
church by Pope Boniface VIII. 1300, Jubilees were at first observed every
hundred years, but future popes reduced them to fifty, and afterward to 25
years.

First fruits and tenths, a papal usurpation, first collected in England 1316:
added to the revenue of the crown 1534: granted by Queen Anne for the relief of
the poor clergy, February 17, 1704.

Fonts, instituted 167.

Food animal, permitted by God for Man's use, 2357 before Christ.

Fools, festival of, in which all sorts of absurdities and indecencies were
committed, held at Paris, Jan. 1, 1198, and continued for 240 years.

Flagellants, the sect of, began 1259.

Franciscans, began 1206: settled in England 1217.

GLORIA Patri, the Doxology of, first used 382.

Godfathers and Godmothers, first appointed in time of persecution, 130.

Gospel, St. Mathew's written 44, St. Mark's in the same year, St. Luke's 55,
and St. John's 97.

Gospel, persons ordered to stand, when it is read 399.

Gown and Cassoc, began to be used in England, about 1670.

Grace, before and after meat, was a very ancient practice even in the heathen
world.

Greek church, began 860.

HABIT, the clerical, began to be distinguished from the lay habit, in the
sixth century.

Hair, the wearing of long, considered as a very ^einous sin, in
Massachussetts, March 1649, when the Governor and council entered into an
association against it.

Hallelujah, and Amen, instituted by Haggai the prophet 584 before Christ.

High and Low church, two distinct parties, occasioned by the prosecution of
Sach^vral, for seditious sermons began in England 1710.

Holy Ghost, descent of the, May 24, 33.

Holy Water, first used in churches 120.

Huguenots, protestants, first so called in France 1560.

IDOLATRY, introduced by Ninus, king of Assyria, first abolished from Kent in
England, 641.

Images, and relics, reverence to, commenced 448, suppressed in England 1548,
in Hungary and Germany 1785.

Impostors two, men, were crucified, for assuming the character of Christ; and
two women for pretending to be the Virgin Mary, and Mary Magdalene 1221. Jemima
Wilkinson of Rhode Island pretended to be Christ, 1787.

Independents, or Congregationalists, those who hold that each congregation may
govern themselves in religious matters, had their first meeting house in
England 1616. In the New England States, there are more congregationalists than
those of any other persuasion.

Indulgences, invented in the eleventh century; first disposed of for money
1190.

Inquisition, court of, began 1204; established at Toulouse 1229: in Spain
1482: abolished in Naples 1782, in Tuscany 1785. (In Spain where it still
continues, it now appears to be intended to answer the purposes of State,
rather than those of religion).

Invocation, of the Blessed Virgin and of the Saints, began to be practiced 593.

JAMES's, St. Epistle of, written 59.

James St. the festival of, instituted 1089.

January 30, ordered by the British Parliament, to be annually observed as a
day of fasting and humiliation, to emplore ALMIGHTY GOD to avert from the
British nation, the calamities which it deserved for shedding the blood of
their righteous sovereign Charles I. who was (as they say) martyred, on January
30, 1649: Even to the present day, this ridiculous farce is still kept up, and
the anniversary of the just punishment of this infamous tyrant, is observed
with, at least, as much solemnity, as Good Friday, the day appointed by several
of the Christian Churches, for commemorating the sufferings of the Blessed
Jesus.

Jeremiah, wrote his lamentations, 610 before Christ.

Jesuits, society of, established by Ignatius Loyola, 1536, expelled England,
1604. Venice 1606. Portugal 1759. Naples 1768. The order abolished by the Pope
1773: rev^^ed in Russia 1783.

JESUS CHRIST, was born Monday, December 25, in the year of the world 4004, in
that of Rome 725; his baptism by John, and his first ministry 30: celebrated
the last passover and instituted the sacrament of the supper in its stead on
Thursday, April 2, was crucified, April 3, at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, arose
April 5, and ascended Thursday, May 14, following, in the 33d year of his age.

Jews, 150,000, driven out of Spain 1492.

Joan, Pope, in 956. This was a fable to depict the effeminate manners of the
times.

John, St. the apostle, wrote his epistle 92.

John, St. the Evangelist, wrote his revelation 96, and his gospel 97.

Joshua, book of, written 415 before Christ.

Jubilee, at the end of every century, instituted by Pope Boniface VIII. 1300.
The jubilee was afterward celebrated every 50 years, by order of Clement VI.
Succeeding Popes, afterward reduced it to 25 years, at which period it is now
fixed.

Jude, St. wrote his epistle 71.

KISSING, the Pope's foot, took its rise from kneeling to those called
sovereigns, and began in the year 709.

Knee ordered, to be bent at the name of Jesus, 1275.

Koran, the Mohammedan system of faith, translated into Latin, 1^43. (This book
has been afterward, translated into English, and may now be seen in the
Philadelphia Library).

LENT, the fast of, instituted 152.

Lights, first used in Churches, in the day time 409.

Litanies, first used in churches, 443: the first in the English language 1343.

Liturgy, of the Church of England, first read in Scotland, July 23, 1637.

Lollards, the sect of, began 1315: proscribed by parliament 1406. Many of the
Lollards were executed 1414.

Luke, St. wrote his gospel, 55.

Lutherans, began 1517.

MOHAMMEDAN Sect, began 622.

Manichees sect, began 343.

Mark, St. wrote his gospel 44.

Marriage, the first institution of, by ceremony, is ascribed to Cecrops king
of Athens, 1556 B. C.: celebration of it in Churches, first ordained about
1200. The first celebrated in New England, was between Mr. Edward Winslow, and
Mrs. Susannah White, May 12, 1621.

Matthew St. wrote his gospel 44.

Mass, first used in Latin 394: introduced into England 680.

Monk, the first is said to have been, Paul of Thebai^, about 250.

Moravians, or Unitas Fratrum, appeared in Bohemia 1457; in England 1737; first
introduced into America by Count Zinzindorf 1741. (No religious denomination
has been more assiduous, than the Moravians, in endeavoring to obtain converts
for the Christian religion, nor has any been more successful).

Muggletonians, sprung from L. Muggleton, a journeyman tailor, 1647.

NATIVITY, of the Virgin Mary, the feast of instituted, 695.

Nicene Creed, made 325, first appointed to be read in Churches 336,

Nonjurors, or Jacobites, in Scotland, those who were averse to the Hanoverian
succession to the crown of Britain, began to pray for George III. and his
family, May 25, 1788.

Nunneries, the first founded in France, was near Poictiers 360. The first in
England erected 630.

Nunneries, abolished by the French Convention 1793.

ORGANS, were more early than Job, see Genesis iv. 21, and Job xxx. 31, first
used in Christian Churches 751.

Orphan house, in Georgia, founded by the Rev. Mr. George Whitfield 1740.

PASSOVER, instituted, Monday May 4, 1491: celebrated in the new temple, April
18, 515 B. C.

Paul, St. converted 33, caught up into the third heavens 44: wrote his first
epistle to the Corinthians, and that to the Galatians 51: first epistle to the
Thessalonians 52; second epistle to do. 53; second epistle to the Corinthians
and that to the Philippians, Ephesians, Colossians, and Philemon 62: to the
Hebrews 63. First Epistle to Timothy, and that to Titus 65. Second Epistle to
Timothy 66. St. Paul, died June 29, 67.

Pelagian sect, began 382.

Penance, first enjoined as a punishment 157.

Penitents, an order of Nuns, founded 1494.

Pentateuch, or the five book of Moses, written 1452 B. C.

Pentecost, the feast of, established 68.

Persecutions, of the Jews. -- Antiochus, king of Syria, kills 40,000 Jews at
Jerusalem, and sells 40,000 for slaves, 170 B. C.; the Romans destroyed
580,000, besides those who perished by disease and famine, A. D. 136; the
Emperor Leo I. wanting to compel them to turn Christians, they set fire to
their houses at Constantinople and perished in the flames, 722; many of them
massacred in London, at the coronation of Richard I. 1189; they were all
apprehended throughout England in one day; their effects confiscated, and their
persons banished the realm, to the number of 15,000, in 1287; they were
massacred in Germany, on a ridiculous suspicion of having poisoned the springs
and wells 1348.

Persecutions, by the Jews, the first 63; the second 44. B. C. 200,000 Greeks
and Romans were massacred by the Jews, headed by one Andreoe 115; the first
general persecution of the Christians was under Nero, 64; under Domitian 93;
under Trajan 107; under Adrian 118; under Marcus Aurellius 164; under Severus
202; under Maximus 235; under Decius 250; under Valerian 257; under Aurelian
272; under Dioclesian 302; under Julian the Apostate 361.

Persecutions, of the different sects of Christians against one another; a
number of the followers of Luther, were killed in Germany by the Catholics,
1525, and in England 1556; Calvin had some persons hanged who opposed his
doctrines about 1560: several Catholics were executed for their religious
principles, in the reign of Edward VI. of England, about 1550; Puritans were
executed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, about 1580; during the reign of
Charles I. and II. of England, the Presbyterians were severely persecuted and
many put to death; about this time a number of Presbyterians or Puritans, fled
to New England, and in October 1656 passed a law, inflicting the punishment of
death on such Quakers, as should return to that colony after banishment, and
several suffered under this iniquitous law, which, however, was repealed 1661.

Thus each sect or party, whilst under the influence of bigotry and
superstition, seemed to think they did God service by persecuting those, who
differed from themselves in opinion.

Peter, St. wrote his first epistle 60; His second 66.

Pix or box, to hold the host, ordered by the Lateran council 1215.

Pope, the title of formerly given to all bishops. The Emperor in 606, confined
it to the bishops of Rome, and from this period the power of the Pope may be
dated. The Pope's supremacy over the Christian world, is said by Protestant
writers, to have been first established by, Bonniface III. 607; the custom of
kissing the Pope's toes, was introduced 708; the Pope's temporal grandeur,
commenced 755; Servius II. was the first pope, who changed his name on his
election 844; the first pope, who kept an army was Leo IX. 1054; their assumed
authority was carried to such excesses, that they not only excommunicated, but
even began to depose sovereigns 1073; the Pope's authority first introduced
into England 1079; abrogated by parl^ament 1534; the word Pope, was struck out
of all English books 1541; kissing the Pope's toe, and some other ceremonies
equally ridiculous, and the order of the Jesuits abolished by the late Pope
Clement XIV. of famous memory 1773; The temporal power of the Pope has been for
these many years rapidly declining, and indeed since the year 1787, it may be
safely asserted, that he has been destitute of all political influence in
Europe; Burnt in effigy in Paris, May 4, 1791.

Praying, toward the east, ordered by the Pope 532; Praying for the dead, is
mentioned in the apochryphal book of the Macchabees; said by Protestant
writers, to be first introduced into the Christian Church, about 590.

Predestination, established by Lucidus a priest of Gaul 470.

Prebyterianism, advanced by Calvin, who died 1564; made the established
religion of Scotland by John Knox, about the time of Calvin's, death; the first
Presbyterian synod in America, was held at Cambridge, New England, 1637, when a
form of church government was agreed on.

Prostration, at the elevation of the host, ordained 1201.

Protestant, the name of, took its rise from the opponnents of the Church of
Rome, having protested against the doctrines of that church at the diet of
Spires in Germany 1529; the Protestant religion commenced in England, under
Henry VIII. 1534.

Protestantism, tolerated in Germany 1624; in Bohemia 1707.

Purgatory, the doctrine of, according to Protestant writers, was invented 250;
introduced into the Christian church 511; made an article of faith 1545.

Puritans, protestants who fled from England to Germany, in the reign of Queen
Mary, and returned in that of Queen Elizabeth, about 1560. (About 100 Puritans,
who had fled from religious persecution in England, arrived at a place in
Massachussetts, which in commemoration of the city in their native land, which
they had last left, they denominated Plymouth, December 31, 1620. (This was the
first permanent settlement in New England).

Purple, given the cardinals by Paul II. 1465.

QUAKERS, the sect of, founded by George Fox 1664; notwithstanding their
affirmation, was admitted by act of parliament as equivalent to an oath in
1696, the election of John Archdale, who was chosen member of parliament was
set aside, because he refused to take the oaths School; they began to be
persecuted in Massachussetts 1656, when a law was passed to banish them and
inflicting the punishment of death, if they should return.

Quietists, or Molinists arose under Molinos, a priest of Saragossa 1685.

RAMAZEIN, a fast observed by the Mahometans, with the greatest devotion,
instituted about 630.

Religious houses, dissolved in England by Parliament 1537; in Germany by the
Emperor Joseph 1782, and 1785; in France 1792.

Ring, appears to have been in use, amongst the Hebrews Genesis xxxviii. 18. It
was used by the ancient Gauls and Britons to distinguish rank.

Rosary, or beads first used by Christians, in their prayers 1093.

SABELLIANS, a sect who, arose about 255.

Sacramentarians, appeared 1048.

Sanctuaries, instituted 617; totally abolished in England 1541.

Saturnalia, festivals instituted in Rome, in December 407 B. C.

Scribes, and Pharisees, commenced 31 B. C.

Septuagint, found in a cask 217. Charles Thompson, late secretary of Congress,
has been for some time past, employed in translating this valuable book into
the English language, which, it is expected, will be soon published.


Singing in churches, established 67.

Socinians, arose under Socinus 1555.

Solomon, wrote his Ecclesiastics, 981 B. C.

Sponsors, first instituted 130

Standing, at reading of the Gospel, introduced 406.

Surplices, first used in churches 316.

Swedenburghers, the sect, began 1760. (The doctrines of this religious
society, have been printed by Francis Bailey of Philadelphia).

TALMUD the, made, 117 B. C.

Temples, first erected to the Gods by the Egyptians; They were all destroyed
throughout the Roman empire, by Constantine the Great 331; Solomon's temple,
which was founded, May 21, 1012, and completed, October 30, 1000 B. C. was the
most magnificent structure ever erected.

Tenths, of church livings, first collected in England 1226.

Tithes, first given by Moses, to the tribe of Levi 1490, B. C. established
throughout England 844: by the Latteran council 1215.

Transfiguration, festival of, first observed 700.

Transubstantiation, introduced as an article of faith, about 840, opposed by
the English church, 1000, received by it some time previous to 1066.

Trinitarians, the order of, instituted 1198.

Trinity, the word, first applied to the persons of the Godhead by Theophilus
of Antioch, about 150.

Trinity Sunday, the feast of, instituted about 828: appointed to be held on
the present day 1334.

Tritheists, the sect of, arose 560.

Tutelar Saints, St. George of England and Portugal, St. Andrew of Scotland,
St. Patrick of Ireland, St. David of Wales, St. Dennis, of France, St. James of
Spain, St. Anthony, of Padua, St. Mark, of Venice, St. Colman of Austria, St.
Tammany, of America.

UBIQUARIANS, the sect of, began 1540.

Unction extreme, practiced in the first century. It became general 450.

Unitarians, the sect of, revived 1553. Dr Priestley the celebrated advocate of
that Doctrine, came to America 1794.

Universalists, or those who believe in the final salvation of all men, the
celebrated Doctor Tillotson, who died 1694, appears from several of his
Sermons, to have adopted that opinion. The universal churches in the United
States, agreed on their articles of faith at Philadelphia, May 25, 1790, which
were soon after published by Mr. Dobson.

VESTMENTS, the wearing of, at the altar adopted 257.

Visitation, of the blessed Virgin, the festival of, instituted 1389.

Vulgate, edition of the bible, discovered 218: first printed 1462.

WATER, mixed with wine, in the holy sacrament, first introduced 122.

Whit untide, festival, instituted 813.

Witchcraft, six hundred condemned as wizards, and most of them burnt in France
1609; twenty old women were burnt in Bretagne in France, for this supposed
crime 1654; nine old women were burnt at Kalish in Poland, charged with having
bewitched, and rendered unfruitful the lands, belonging to a gentleman of the
Palatinate 1775; several persons, accused of witchcraft in Scotland, suffered
death about 1600; disturbances commenced, for this supposed crime in
Massachussetts 1648: the frenzy at its height 1649; revived again and raged
vehemently 1692; persecutions for it began in Pennsylvania 1683.

Population, Government, Religion, etc. of the different continents, states,
empires, kingdoms, etc.
AFRICA, the continent of, contains 150,000,000 inhabitants; the government is
despotic, and with respect to religion the greater number are Pagans: the
others are Mahometans, and some few are Christians. The number of square miles,
is 9,654,807.

America, contains 150,000,000 inhabitants, of whom the United States has at
present 4 milions; the other inhabitants are Indians, colonists from the
different European powers, and negroes; the Indians are generally Pagans. In
the United States there is free liberty of conscience, for the peaceable
profession of every religion. In South America, the Catholic is the established
religion; which a number of Indians have likewise embraced, and in North
America, there are several Indian congregations both of Catholics and
Protestants. America contains 14,110,874 square miles, see United States.

Asia, the continent of, contains 500,000,000 inhabitants, and 10,768,823
square miles, the government is highly despotic, and the religion, Paganism,
Mahomatanism, and a few Christians.

Arabia, the inhabitants are Mahometans.

Austria, an archdukedom, its number of inhabitants is 4,182,000, and their
religion Catholic.

BARBARY, the government of the different states of, highly despotic, and the
religion Mohammedan.

Bavaria, a dukedom, contains 1,600,000 inhabitants, and the established
religion is the Catholic.

Bohemia, a kingdom, contains 2,100,000 inhabitants, the established religion
is the Catholic and Protestants, are tolerated.

Brandenburgh, a marquisate, contains 1,007,232 inhabitants; their religion is
the Lutheran, Calvinist, and Catholic.

Britain, the European dominions of, contain about 13,500,000, see England and
Scotland.

Brunswick, a dukedom, contains 166,350 inhabitants, and Lutheranism is the
established religion.

CANADA, a British province, contains 230,000 inhabitants; the greatest number
of whom are Catholics.

China, an Empire, contained in the year 1761, 198,214,553 inhabitants; the
Chinese, in religious matters, are in general the followers of Confucius, whose
doctrines, according to the Jesuits who resided there, approximate to those of
Christianity.

Cologn, an archbishopric, the established religion is the Catholic, and the
number of inhabitants, about 550,000.

Connecticut, see United States.

DELAWARE, see United States.

Denmark, an absolute monarchy; the whole of the king of Denmark's subjects, in
the year 1759, amounted to 2,444,000, and Lutheranism is the established
religion.

ENGLAND, a limited monarchy, contains upwards of 7,000,000 of inhabitants; its
established religion is the church of England, but all others are tolerated.

Europe, a continent, containing 2,749,349 square miles, and 153,000,000
inhabitants, its government is different in different countries; Christianity
is the established, religion, in every part of Europe except Turkey, the
Mohammedan is established, and in Lapland where the inhabitants are still
Pagans. According to Guthrie, the number of Protestants in Europe is only
24,000,000; whilst the Catholics amount to 90,000,000.

FRANCE, was formerly a kingdom, but now a democratic republic, and contains
27,253,000 inhabitants. Previous to the late revolution the Catholic was the
established religion; but now the people enjoy an universal liberty of
worshipping God according to the dictates of their own conscience.

GENOA, a republic, Catholics.

Georgia, see United States.

Germany, an empire, contains 26,265,000 inhabitants; the Catholic religion
prevails in the South of Germany; the Lutheran in the North, and the Calvinist
near the Rhine; the Jews and all other religions are tolerated throughout the
Empire.

Greece, a part of Turkey, their religion is the Mohammedan, Jewish, and a few
Christians.

HANOVER, an electorate, contains 750,000 inhabitants, who are Lutherans,
Calvinists, etc.

Hesse Cassel, a Landgraviate, contains about 900,000 inhabitants, who are with
respect to religion Lutherans, Calvinists, and Catholics.

Hungary, a kingdom, contains about 3,000,000 of inhabitants; their established
religion is the Catholic, although the major part of the inhabitants are
Protestants or Greeks; all religions are now tolerated.

INDOSTAN, or India in general, contains about 110, 000,000 inhabitants, the
greatest number of whom are followers of Brumma; they believe in a supreme
being, whom they worship with the greatest reverence, as also in a future state
of rewards and punishments, and are of excellent morals; there are also, in
Indostan, Mahometans and Christians.

Ireland, a kingdom, contains 4,000,000 of inhabitants; the church of England
is established by law, although about 3,000,000 of the people are Catholics.
All religions are tolerated.

Italy, under the pope, etc. contains 20,000,000 of inhabitants, and the
Catholic is the established religion.

KENTUCKY, see United States.

MARYLAND, and Massachussetts, see United States.

New Jersey, New Hampshire, and New York, see United States.

Naples, a kingdom, contains 4,500,000 inhabitants, who are Catholics.

Netherlands, or United Provinces, contain 2,000,000 inhabitants; previous to
the late revolution, in Jan. 1795, this country though denominated a republic,
was in fact an aristocracy; their established religion was the Presbyterian,
and all others tolerated. By the last accounts they appear to be now forming a
constitution, agreeably to the genuine rights of man, and it can scarcely be
doubted, that they will abolish that source of hypocrisy and irreligion, viz. a
religious establishment.

North Carolina, see United States.

Norway, a kingdom subject (...) Denmark; their religion Lutheran.

OSNABURGH, a bishopric, contains 120,000 inhabitants, who are Lutherans At the
peace of Westphalia, it was agreed that the Bishops should be alternately of
the Lutheran, and Catholic religion. Their present spiritual guide is the Duke
of York, the second Son of George III.
and Catholics.

PENNSYLVANIA, see United States.

Persia, with respect to the population of this country, we have no certain
account, although from the great armies it has raised, both in ancient and
modern times, it must be very great; the inhabitants are in general Mahometans;
there are also a number of sects, who have obviously Christianity for the
ground work of their religion.

Poland, with respect to government, has for a long time had a king although it
might with propriety have been called an aristocracy; it contains 9,000,000
inhabitants, of whom 600,000 are Jews; the established religion is the
Catholic, but all others are tolerated. What its government is to be in future,
it is impossible to conjecture, as their country has lately been overrun by
that detestable enemy of the human species, the Empress of Russia, who seems at
present to have the power of regulating the affairs, of that unhappy country as
she pleases "The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong." The same God, who has enabled the American nation to effect their
liberty, and the French to oppose so many enemies, will, we trust, support them.
.

Portugal, a kingdom, contains 2,000,000 inhabitants, of whom 30,000 are
Ecclesiastics; the established religion is the Catholic.

Prussia, a kingdom; the Prussian dominions contained in the year 1779,
3,290,000 inhabitants; the established religion is the Lutheran and Calvinist,
and all others are tolerated.

RHODE Island, see Unite States.

Russia, an empire, contains 20,000,000 inhabitants; their established religion
is the Greek; and all others are tolerated.

SARDINIA, the kingdom, of, contains 3,170,000 inhabitants; and their
established religion is Catholic.

Scotland, a kingdom, contains 2,000,000 inhabitants; their established
religion is Presbyterian; but all others are tolerated.

Sicily, the Island of, contains 1,300,000 inhabitants, who are Catholics.

South Carolina, see United States.

Spain, a kingdom, contains 9,250,000 inhabitants, and the Catholic is the
established religion.

Sweden, a kingdom, contains 3,000,000 of inhabitants; the established religion
is Lutheran, but all others are tolerated.

Swisserland, a republic, contains 2,000,000 inhabitants; it has 13 Cantons,
six of whom are Protestants, and 7 Catholics; in both the Catholic and
Protestant cantons, all religions are tolerated.

TARTARY, in Asia, concerning the number of its inhabitants, it is difficult to
conjecture; with respect to re^igion there are some Idolators; but they in
general believe in one supreme God, whom they consider as a beneficent,
omnipotent, and omniscient being; there are also a number of Christians.

Turkey, the subjects of the empire of, are estimated at 49,000,000; their
religion is Mohammedan, and their government highly despotic.

UNITED States, contain 4,000,000 inhabitants; the government is a republic, in
which it may be safely asserted, that the rights of man, are under the present
constitution as well, if not better secured than in any other country; with
respect to religion, the United States have the honor, of having first
abolished all religious establishments; the example has been followed by
France, and now in both countries, every man is left at liberty to worship God
according to the dictates of his own conscience.

The inhabitants of the different States, agreeably to the census, taken by act
of Congress, in the year 1790, were as follows; Total of whom slaves In
Vermont, 85,589 16 In New Hampshire, 141,885 157 In Massachussetts, 475,327
none In Rhode Island, 68,825 948 In Connecticut, 237,946 2,764 In New York,
340,120 21,324 In New Jersey, 184,139 11.423 In Pennsylvania, 434,373 3 737 In
Delaware, 59,094 8,887 In Maryland, 319,728 103,036 In Virginia, 747,610
292,627 In Kentucky, 73,677 12,430 In North Carolina, 393,751 100,571 In South
Carolina, 249,073 107,094 In Georgia, 82,548 29,264 In the ter. South of the
Ohio, 35,691 3,417 In the ter. N. W. of the Ohio, 4,280

Universities, Colleges and Academies, founded.
ABERDEEN, in Scotland, the university of, 1477.

Andrew's St. in Scotland 1411.

Augusta, Academy, in Georgia, instituted about 1786.

Avignon, in France, 1388.

BOWDOIN, College, in Massachussetts, founded 1794; so called in honor of
James Bowdoin, who gave a donation of 1000 Dollars, and 1000 acres of land.

CAMBRIDGE, University, in England, founded 531, revived 1110.

Cambridge, College, at Ninety-six, South Carolina, founded about 1789.

Cambridge College, Massachussetts see Harvard College.

Carlisle College, see Dickinson College.

Catholic College, see Georgetown.

Charlestown, South Carolina, College, founded about 1789.

Clinton Academy, at East Hampton, Long Island; so called from George Clinton,
Governor of the State of New York, incorporated 1789.

Cokesbury College, Maryland, founded by the Methodists, and so called in
honor of their bishop, the Rev. Dr. Coke 1785.

Columbia College, New York, founded by the name of King's College 1754;
incorporated by act of assembly, by the name of Columbia College, 1787.

Copenhagen, 1498.

Cracow, Poland, 700.

DARTMOUTH College, New Hampshire, founded by the Rev. Eleazar Whitlock 1769;
it consists of three buildings for the use of students, one of which was
erected 1786.

Dickinson College, so called from John Dickinson late governor of
Pennsylvania, and Author of the Farmers Letters, 1783.

Dijon, in France, 1722.

Douay, French Flanders, 1562.

Dublin, University, called Trinity College, 1591.

Dummer Academy, Newbury Massachussetts, incorporated 1782.

EDINBURGH, founded by James VI. of Scotland 1580.

Erasmus Academy, at Flatbush, Long Island, incorporated 1788.

FRANKLIN College, founded at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, 1787.

GEORGETOWN College, Maryland, instituted by the Catholics 1789.

Georgia, the University of, instituted about 1787.

Glasgow, University, in Scotland, 1450.

Gottingen, Hanover, 1734.

Greenfield Academy, at Greenfield Connecticut, incorporated 1779.

HACKINSACK Academy, New Jersey, founded about 1764.

Hamilton Academy, so called in honor of Alexander Hamilton, late Secretary of
the Treasury of the United States, founded in Oneida county, New York, 1794.

Harvard College, so called from its founder the Rev. John Harvard, was
instituted at Cambridge, Massachussetts 1638; received its first charter 1650.

KENTUCKY College, founded about 1787.

Konningsburgh, Prussia, 1544.

LEICESTER Academy, Massachussetts, incorporated 1784.

Leipsic, Saxony, 1409.

Leyden, University, Holland, 1575.

Louvaine, Flanders, 926.

Lions, France, 830.

MARYLAND, University, founded 1784.

Mentz, Germany, 1482.

Montpelier, France, 1196.

Moscow, Russia, 1754.

NASSAU Hall, commonly called Princetown College, founded 1738.

Naples, Italy, 1216.

Newark Academy, New Jersey, founded 1792.

North Carolina, the University of, commenced at Orangetown, June 1790.

ORLEANS, France, 1312.

Oxford, University of, England, 886.

PARIS University, France, 792.

Petersburgh, Russia, 1747.

Pennsylvania, the University of, had its first origin from an institution
called, "the College, Academy, and Charity Schools of the city of Philadelphia,
in Pennsylvania," which commenced 1750, and was incorporated 1753. In the year
1779, the seminary was placed under new trustees, and its style changed to that
of, "the University of the State of Pennsylvania." In the year 1789, in
consequence of an application being made to the legislature, by the former
trustees, they were again reinstated in their rights and property; hence two
seminaries of general learning, began to exist in the same city, when
confessedly only one was wanting. On the petition of the trustees of both
seminaries, to the legislature in 1791, they were united under the name of "the
University of Pennsylvania."

Phillips, Exeter Academy, founded by John Phillips 1781.

Pisa, Italy, 1339.

Prague, Bohemia, 1360.

Princetown College, New Jersey, founded 1738.

QUEEN's College, at Brunswick, New Jersey, founded by Governor Belcher,
October 12, 1746.

RHEMES, France, 1145.

Rhode Island College, charter of, granted 1764.

SALAMANCA, Spain, 1404.

Saragossa, Spain, 1474.

Seville, Spain, 1517.

Sorbonne, France, 1253.

St. John's College, Maryland, instituted 1784.

Strasburg, Germany, 1538.

THOULOUSE, France, 809.

Toledo, Spain, 1518.

Treves, Germany, 1473.

UPSALA, Sweden, 1477.

Utrecht, Holland, 1636.

VENICE, Italy, 1592.

Vermont, the University of, established 1791.

Vienna, Germany, 1236.

WASHINGTON Academy, Somerset, Maryland, instituted by law 1779.

Washington College, Kent county, Maryland, incorporated 1783.

William and Mary, College, in Virginia, was founded at Jamestown 1619; is
first charter granted 1692, when the seminary was removed to Williamsburgh.

Williams College, Massachussetts, so called from its principal benefactor,
Col. Ephraim Williams, incorporated 1793.

Winnsburgh College, South Carolina, founded about 1789.

Wittemburgh, Saxony, 1502.

YALE College, Connecticut so called from Governor Yale its principal
benefactor, founded at Killinsworth 1700: removed to New Haven 1716; it funds
were greatly augmented by the legislature in 1792.

Battles, Sea Fights, Sieges, etc.
ABRAHAM, the plains of, the battle of, when General Wolf was killed, Sept.
13, 1759.

Acapulco ship, taken by Admiral Anson, June 20, 1744.

Actium, the battle of, fought, in which Mark Anthony and Cleopatra were
totally defeated, by Octavius, nephew of Julius Caesar, 41 B. C.

Africa, conquered by Bellisarius, 533.

Algiers, reduced by the English, under Admiral Blake 1655; great part of it
destroyed by the French, under Du Quesne, August 1682; again by the same
Admiral, May 1683; when all the fortifications, shipping, and above two thirds
of the town were laid in ruins; attacked by the Spaniards under Count O'Reilly,
July, 1775, when the Spaniards were repulsed; the Algerines began to capture
the vessels belonging to the United States 1785; in consequence of which, many
of our fellow citizens have been enslaved. The following list is taken from the
Journal of Captain O'Brian, who had been then ten years in captivity, dated
February 19, 1794.

Ship, Dauphin, Pennsylvania, R. O Brian, Minerva, Do. John M'Shane, President,
Do. Wm. Penrose, Hope, New York, J. Burkhar, Thomas, Massachussetts, J. Newman,
Brig, George, Rhode Island, J. Tailor. Minerva, New, York, J Ingraham, Jane,
Massachussetts, Moses Morse, Polly, Do. Michael Smith, Olive Branch, New
Hampshire, Wm. Furnace, Schooner, Dispatch, Virginia, Wm. Wallace, Maria,
Massachussetts, J. Stephens, Jay, Do. Samuel Calder,

In all 5 ships, 5 brigs, and 3 schoners, two of which vessels were captured in
1785; ten do. 1793, and one in 1794 Of their crews, which consisted of 13
masters, 11 mates, 2 supercargoes, 4 second mates, and 84 Seamen, 4 only have
been redeemed. The remainder, according to accounts received, are reduced by
the plague, hard labor, etc. to between 60 and 70; their sufferings have been
great; it, therefore gives us the most sincere pleasure to inform our readers,
that measures have been at last adopted, by which, it is hoped, they will soon
be restored to their friends and country.




Amsterdam, taken possession of, by the French troops, whom the inhabitants
received with every demonstration of joy, January 19, 1795.

Anson Admiral, his expedition against the Spaniards in the South Seas, 1740.

Arabians the, attacked a caravan of 60,000 merchants, pilgrims, etc. and
killed 50,000 of them, 1750.

Arcot, in the East Indies, taken by the English, 1759.

Arlon, the battle of, between the French and Austrians, when the latter were
defeated, and retired to Luxembourgh, June 9, 1793.

Armada, the Spanish, arrived in the English channel, July 19, 1588, but were
dispersed by a storm.

Armada, the second Spanish, defeated with great loss, 1639.

Armed neutrality, of the Northern European powers, against England, by the
Empress of Russia, commenced 1780.

Asia, a British man of war, fired on New York, to prevent the removal of the
cannon from the battery, Aug. 22, 1775.

Augusta, in Georgia, unsuccessfully attacked by Colonel Clark, September 14,
1780; taken by Colonels Picken and Lee, June 5, 1781.

Avignon, taken from the Pope, by the French 1769; restored by the suppression
of the Jesuits 1773: declared to belong to France by the National Assembly 1791.

Austria, taken from Hungary and annexed to Germany, when it received its name,
1040.

BAHAMA Islands, taken by the Spaniards, May 8, 1782; retaken by the English,
July 16, 1783.

Baltimore, Maryland, its inhabitants seized the provincial magazine with 1500
stand of arms, May 1775.

Bangalore, in the East Indies, taken by Lord Cornwallis 1791.

Bastile, in Paris, captured by the national guard, July 14, 1789, when the
governor was killed, and many lost their lives on both sides.

Batavia, taken by the English, January 1782.

Bedford, town of, in Massachussetts, much damaged by the British, when a
considerable number of houses and stores, and seventy sail of shipping, besides
small-craft, were burnt, September 5, and 6, 1778.

Bellegarde, being the last fort which the combined powers possessed in France,
taken by the republicans, September 18, 1794.

Bellisle, island of, taken from the French by the British, June 7, 1761.

Benevento, seized by the king of Naples from the pope, 1768; restored on the
suppression of the Jesuits, 1773.

Bennington, battle of, August 16, 1777.

Bermuda, 100 barrels of gun powder taken from their public magazine by a sloop
from Philadelphia, and a schooner from Carolina, 1775.

Blake, the English admiral, reduced Algiers, Tripoli and Tunis, 1655.

Blenheim, the battle of, won by the Duke of Marlborough and the allies,
against the French, 1704.

Bois le Duc, the strong Dutch garrison of, taken by the French, October 7,
1794.

Boston, evacuated by the British, March 17, 1776

Boyne, the battle of the, in Ireland, gained by King William over his
father-in-law King James, July 1, 1690.

Brandywine, battle of, when the Americans were defeated, September 11, 1777.

Brasil, the northern provinces of, taken by the Dutch from the Portuguese,
1623; relinquished on the latter paying 8 tons of gold, 1665 The fortress of
St. Sacrament was taken by the Spaniards, 1762, but soon after restored

Breast, in France, invaded by Julius Caesar, 54; possessed by the English,
1378; restored to France, 1391

Bria^'s Creek, battle of, when the Americans under the command of General Ash
were defeated, March 3, 1779.

Bristol, in Rhode Island, fired on by the British, October 7, 1775.

Britons the, applied to the Romans for aid against the Scotch; but were
refused, 446: They invited the Saxons, 448, who soon after conquered them.

Buda, taken from the Turks by the Imperialists, 1686.

Bunker's-hill, battle of, June 17, 1775; when after a most vigorous
resistance, the Americans consisting of 1500 men, were defeated by 3000 British.

Byzantium, taken by the Romans, 73; destroyed by Severus, 196; rebuilt by
Constantine, 330; taken by the Turks, 1453.

CADIZ, in Spain, taken by the English, 1596.

Calais, taken by the English, August 4, 1347; retaken by the French, January
10, 1558.

Calvi, a small garrison, in the island of Corsica, taken by the English under
Lord Hood, after a most vigorous resistance, July 1794.

Cambden, the battle at, in South Carolina: first between Generals Gates and
Cornwallis, when the Americans were defeated, August 16, 1780: second between
General Green and Lord Rawdon, when the Americans retreated, April 25, 1781;
evacuated and burnt by the British, May 13, 1781.

Canada, the province of, unsuccessfully attacked ^y the New Yorkers, 1709; by
the British troops and those of New England, 1711; taken by the English,
September 13, 1759; invaded by the American forces, October 1775, evacuated,
July 1776.

Candia, the island of, seized by the Saracens 808, who changed its name to
Crete: after having repeatedly changed its masters, it was confirmed to the
Turks, 1669.

Cape Breton, taken by the English, 1745: ceded to the French by the treaty of
Aix la Chapelle, 1748: taken again by the English 1758, and confirmed to them
by the treaty of peace at Paris, February 10, 1763.

Cape Francois, burnt by the insurgents, June 22, 1793 The greatest part of the
survivors of this melancholy catastrophe fled to the United States, where they
were received with open arms, and such relief afforded them as their
unfortunate situation required.
.

Carlberg, the battle of, when the French under Custine, defeated the
Prussians, May 18, 1793.

Carolina, invaded by the French, who were repulsed with great loss, 1706.

Carthage, destroyed by the Romans 146 B. C. again by the Saracens 622 A. D.

Carthagena, bombarded by admiral Vernon, 1740.

Casco fort, New Hampshire, taken by the French and Indians, 1690.

Cataline's conspiracy, 66; war, 63 B. C.

Cedars, the fort at the, given up to the British by Major Rutherfield, March
15, 1775.

Ceuta, in Barbary, seized by Genoa, 1231; by Portugal, 1415; by Spain, 1640.

Ceylon, Island of, was taken by the Portuguese 1595; by the Dutch 1603;
retaken by the Portuguese, 1621; by the Dutch, 1658; a great part of it
captured by the British East India company's troops, 1782; restored to the
Dutch, 1783.

Chads-ford, battle of, when the Americans were defeated, 1777.

Chamblee, taken from the French, by the British, September 7, 1760; by the
Americans commanded by Colonel Brown and Major Livingston, Oct. 18, 1775.

Chamblefort, in Canada, taken by the Americans, Oct. 20, 1775; retaken by the
British, Jan. 18, 1776.

Chandernagore, taken from the French by the British, July 1794.

Charleroy, a garrison consisting of 3000 Austrians, surrendered to the French
under General Jourdan, June 25, 1794.

Charlestown, Massachussetts, burnt by the British, June 17, 1775.

Charlestown, South Carolina, invaded by the French, who were repulsed with
loss, 1706; attacked by a squadron of ships under Sir Peter Parker, and a body
of troops under Generals Clinton and Cornwallis, who were defeated with great
slaughter, June 25, 1776; taken by the British under General Clinton, May 12,
1780; evacuated by the British, December 14, 1782.

Chatham, the English fleet, destroyed at, by the Dutch, 1667.

Cherburgh forts, in France, destroyed by the English, August 8, 1758.

Cherokee Indians, in Carolina, defeated by the Americans under Colonel Grant,
1761.

China, conquered by the Eastern Tartars, 1635.

Christopher St. Island of, retaken from the French, 1690; ceded to the English
by the peace of 1713; taken by the French, 1782; restored to the English at the
peace, 1783.

Clermont, South Carolina, taken by Colonel Washington, December 4, 1780.

Cobl^ntz, evacuated by the Austrians, upon the approach of the French, October
1794.

Coilloure, the Spanish garrison of, also Port Vendre, Fort St. Elmo, etc. with
8000 prisoners taken by the French under General Dugoumier, May 1794.

Constantinople, taken by the Latins, 1204; recovered by the Greeks, 1261:
taken by Mahomet, which put an end to the eastern empire, 1453.

Corsica, the Island of, seized by the Genoese from the Moors, 1115; ceded to
France, 1770; surrendered to the British, June 21, 1794, when they adopted a
new constitution and acknowledged George III. as their king.

Courtray, taken by the French, April 29, 1795.

Cowpens, battle of the, when the Americans under General Morgan defeated
Colonel Tarleton, with the loss of 100 men killed and 500 taken prisoners,
January 17, 1781.

Croisades, or the Holy war began, 1065: again 1101.

Crown Point, taken from the English, 1759, by the Americans, May 14, 1775:
retaken by the British, 1776.

Cuba, Island of, taken by the Spaniards, 1511; by the English, 1762; restored
to the Spaniards, by the treaty of peace, 1763.

Culloden, the battle of, in Scotland, when the Duke of Cumberland defeated the
Pretender's army, April 16, 1746.

Curacoa, the Island of, seized by Holland, 1634.

Dampiere, the French General, killed by the shot of a cannon ball in an
engagement near the woods of Rhemes and Vicoigne, May 8, 1793, when the a lies
were defeated with great loss.

Danbury, town of, in Connecticut, burnt by the British, and large quantities
of continental stores destroyed, April 26, 1777.

Danes, their first descent upon England, at Portland, 787; under Canute they
conquered England, 1017; expelled, 1041. Their last invasion of England was
1074, when they were bribed to depart. The Danes, under Rollo, made their first
descent on France, 895, and settled in Normandy 905.

Dantzick, taken by the Swedes, 1734; by the Prussians, 1773, by whom it was
abridged of its privileges, 1775.

Deerfield, in Massachussetts, burnt and the inhabitants carried off by the
French, and Indians as prisoners, February 1703.

Demarara and Issequibo, taken by the British, March 1781; retaken by the
French, February 3, 1782.

Dettingen, the battle of, won by the English and allies in favor of the Queen
of Hungary 1743.

Dominica, taken by the English 1761; by the French under the Marquis de
Bouine, when 164 pieces of cannon and 24 brass mortars were found therein,
September 7, 1778; restored to Britain by the peace 1783.

Dorchester Point, fortified, in the night of March 4, 1776; so as to render
Boston, no longer tenable by the British.

Dresden, taken by the Prussians, 1758; the imperialists 1759; by the Prussians
again 1760.

Dunkirk, taken by the English, June 24, 1658; sold to the French by Charles
II. 1662; delivered up to the English, July 17, 1712. Its basin, etc. destroyed
1763, and 1764; it began to be besieged by the combined army, under the Duke of
York, August 25, 1793; who were repulsed with great slaughter, Sept. 7,
following. The French commander Houchard, was afterward beheaded for not
improving his success, as it was asserted that, by proper exertions, he might
have captured the greatest part of the duke of York's army.


EGYPT, conquered by the Saracens, 640; conquered by the Turks 1516.

Elizabeth town, New Jersey, taken by the British, June 7, 1780.

England, invaded by Julius Caesar, 54 B. C.; who relates, in his commentaries,
book 5, that the inhabitants on the sea coast, from their correspondence with
Gaul, were clothed, and that those who lived in the inland countries, were
wild and naked; that their towns were only a parcel of huts on an eminence,
surrounded with trees laid crosswise, and a ditch; and that they had a
community of wives; also that they painted themselves in different colors.
(From the whole description, which he has given of the manners of the Ancient
Britons, they appear to have been as far remote from civilization, as the
American Indians, of the present day.) England was abandoned by the Romans 430;
ravaged by the Picts and Scots 440. The Saxons being invited to expel these
invaders, took possession of different parts of the kingdom, 446; invaded by
the Normans, under William their Duke, who subdued the kingdom 1066; afterward
at different periods by the Scotch, Irish, Welsh, etc.

Esopus, State of New York, was totally destroyed by the British, with great
quantities of stores, October 15, 1777.

Eustatia, Island, taken by the French from Holland, 1689; to whom it was
afterward restored; taken by the English under the command of Admiral Rodney
and General Vaughan, February 3, 1781, when these officers, to the everlasting
disgrace of their names, with an infamous degree of rigor confiscated the
private property of all the inhabitants; retaken by the French under the
command of the Marquis de Bouille, If the infamous conduct of Rodney and
Vaughan, be transmitted to posterity, it would be highly culpable to omit
recording the very different behavior of the humane, the brave, and the
generous Bouille, who in all his victories, ever considered private property as
sacred. The conduct of that worthy man was so much approved of, that thanks, in
the most polite terms were presented to him by the merchants of London,
Glasgow, etc. while the conduct of Rodney and Vaughan, was universally
reprobated throughout every part of Britain.
November 27, following; and restored to the Dutch at the peace of 1783. Since
the late revolution in Holland, the possession of this Island, has been
demanded in March last, by both the English and French, to the latter of whom
the Governor appears to have been disposed to surrender.

Eutaw, springs, the battle of, in which General Green defeats the British,
September 8, 1781.

FAIRFIELD, town of, in Connecticut, burnt by the British, July 7, 1777.

Falkland Islands, seized by the Spaniards 1771.

Falmouth, New England, destroyed by the British forces, October 18, 1775.

Famars, the battle of, between the French and combined powers, when the former
were defeated, May 23, 1793.

Flatbush, Long Island, the battle of, when the Americans were defeated, with
the loss of 2000 men killed and 1000 prisoners, August 27, 1776. The American
army in their retreat to New York, were providentially saved by the
interposition of a thick fog.

Fleurus, the battle of, gained by the French, when the combined forces lost
about 8000 men killed, and 1500 prisoners, June 28, 1794. In consequence of
this victory, Le Chateau de Namur soon after submitted to the republic.

Floating batteries, the, destroyed before Gibraltar, September 13, 1782.

Florida, taken from the Spaniards by the English, 1759; to whom it was
confirmed by the peace of 1763; taken by the Spaniards 1781; to whom it was
confirmed by the treaty of peace 1783 An expedition against the Floridas, by a
number of citizens of the United States and others, was projected by the French
minister Citizen Genet, 1793, but as this measure might have involved the
United States in war, it was suppressed by the executive.
.

Fontarabia, the key of Spain, was taken by the French, July 1794; Sebastian
was taken soon after.

Fort Cornwallis, at Augusta, taken by the Americans under General Marion, and
Colonel Lee, June 5, 1781.

Fort Du Quesne, battle of, July 9, 1755; taken by General Forbes 1758.

Fort Granby, in South Carolina, taken by the Americans, May 15, 1781.

Fort Lee, New York, taken by the British, Nov. 18, 1776.

Fort Motte, in South Carolina, taken by the Americans, May 12, 1781.

Forts, Montgomery and Clinton, taken by the British, October 1777.

Fort Stanwix, alias Fort Schuyler, the siege of, raised by Sir John Johnson,
and Lieutenant Colonel St. Ledger, August 22, 1777.

Fort Washington, New York, taken by the British, Nov. 16, 1776.

Fort Watson, South Carolina, taken by the Americans, April 15, 1781.

Fort, William and Mary, in New Hampshire, seized by the inhabitants, who
possessed themselves of a quantity of powder, and military stores, Dec. 14,
1774.

France, subdued by the Romans, 25 B. C.; conquered by the English 1170, again
1358; recovered by the French 1447.

Frankfort, treacherously given up to the Austrians; when 1300 Frenchmen were
massacred by the Hessians, and several whose lives were spared had their hands
cut off, December 2, 1792.

GEORGIA, invaded by the Spaniards, and Indians 1742; acceded to the articles
of confederation July 1775; surrendered to the British, under the command of
Colonel Archibald Campbell, December 29, 1778; abandoned by the English forces
1783.

Germantown, battle of, when the Americans were defeated with considerable
loss, October 4, 1777.

Gibraltar, was taken from the Moors, by the Spaniards 1463; by the combined
fleets of Britain and Holland, under the command of Sir George Rooke, July 23,
1704: besieged by the Spaniard^ at different times; but the most remarkable
siege commenced 1779, and continued without intermission, till September 13,
1782; when the forces of France and Spain, made their grand attack by battering
ships, etc. which, however, were destroyed by red hot balls from the garrison.
Captain Drinkwater, who was present, during the siege, has written a very
interesting history of that event. To him we refer our readers for particular
information.
It still continues in possession of the English.

Graves, the fortress of, taken by the French, Dec. 30, 1794.

Great Bridge, in Virginia, the battle of, in which the British were defeated,
December 1775.

Grenada, the Island of, taken by Admiral Rodney, February 1756: and confirmed
to the crown of Britain, by the peace of 1763; taken by the French, July 6,
1779: restored 1783; a bloody battle fought between the French and English in
that island, March 3, 1795, when the latter were defeated. It is now most
probably in possession of the French republic.

Grotton, town of, in Connecticut, burnt by General Arnold, September 6, 1781.

Guadaloupe, taken by the British 1759; restored to the French 1763; taken
again by the British 1779, and restored at the peace 1783. This Island was
taken possession of by the British, April 1794; but soon after retaken by the
French republicans.

Guilford Courthouse, the battle of, in which the Americans under General
Green, were defeated, March 15, 1781.

HANOVER, desolated by the French, 1758.

Hastings, the battle of, when the English were defeated, and William Duke of
Normandy, became king of England, 1066.

Havannah, taken from the Spaniards, by the British, August 13, 1762.

Havre de Grace, successfully bombarded by the British 1759.

Helena St. the Island of, taken by the Dutch 1665; by the English 1666.

Highlanders, and regulators of North Carolina, defeated with great loss near
Moore's Creek bridge, by General Moore, February 27, 1776.

Highlanders, 200 taken on board the ship George in Boston bay, June 17, 1776.

Hillsborough, in Carolina, the royal standard erected there by Lord
Cornwallis, February 20, 1781.

Hudson's-bay, the forts at, destroyed by the French 1686; again 1782.

INDIANS, in New England, at war amongst themselves 1644; instigated by a
Jesuit to make incursions upon the colony of Massachussetts, 1717. Indian war
in North Carolina 1712. The Miami Indians, defeated General Harmer with great
loss, September 30, 1790; General St Clair, with great loss, November 4, 1791;
are defeated by General Wayne, August 20, 1794.

Invasions of Britain, by the Romans under Julius Caesar, 55 B. C.; again,
under Plautius 447 A. D.; by the Normans, under William I. 1066.

Invasions of France, by England, under Edward III. when the whole kingdom,
except Paris, was subdued between 1341, and 1359; again by Henry V. who
conquered the whole country about, 1410.

Invasions of America. By the French in South Carolina, when they were repulsed
with slaughter 1706; of Canada by the British and Americans, under General
Hill, which proved unsuccessful 1711.

Invasion of Scotland, by the Spaniards 1719.

Ireland, subdued by king Edgar 962; invaded by Fitzstephens near Wexford, May
1170, where the first British colony was settled; surrendered to Henry II.
1172; totally subdued by the English 1210.

JAMAICA, the Island of, taken from the Spaniards, by the English under Admiral
Penn, May 7, 1655.

Jeremie fort, St. Domingo, taken by the British, October 1793.

Jerusalem, taken by David from the Jebusites, 1048 B. C.; by Nebuchadnezzar
after a siege of 18 Months 587 B. C; destroyed by Titus, August 31, 70, A. D.
pillaged by the Persians, and 90,000 inhabitants killed 613; taken by the
Saracens 637; taken by Robert Duke of Normandy 1100; finally conquered by
Saladin 1187,

Jersey, the Island of, unsuccessfully attacked by the French, May 1, 1779.

Joan, of Arc, burnt by the English for a witch, May 30, 1431.

John, king of France, taken prisoner by Edward the Black Prince, brought to
England, and ransomed for 3,000,000 of crowns 1357; but being unable to pay
this sum, he returned to England, and died in prison 1364.

Juliers, the fortress of, submited to the French, October 3, 1794, when all
the provinces West of Rhine, fell into their hands.

KING's Mountain, battle of, in which the American militia under Colonel
M'Dowell, gained a victory over the British, and took 800 prisoners, October 7,
1780.

Kingston, in Ulster county, New York, burnt by the British, October 15, 1777.

LANDAU, the siege of, raised by the combined powers, December 30, 1793.

Lexington, battle of near Boston, April 19, 1775; being the first action
fought between the British and Americans.

Limbach, the battle of, when the French were victorious, September 14, 1793.

Long Island, the battle of, see Flatbush.

Londonderry, in Ireland, besieged, April 20, 1689.

Louis, son to Philip of France, laid claim to the crown of England, and landed
with an army on the Isle of Thanet, May 23, 1216.

Louisburg, taken by the Massachussetts forces, June 17, 1745; given up to the
French 1749; retaken, July 22, 1758.

Louisiana, ceded by England to France, 1763; taken by the English, December
30, 1778; restored to the French by the treaty of peace 1783.

Lucia St. the Island of, ceded to France 1763; taken by the English, December
30, 1778; restored to France by the treaty of peace 1783; retaken by the
British 1794; but according to late accounts it appears to be again in the
hands of the French.

MADRAS, taken from the English, 1746.

Maestrecht, the garrison of, consisting of 8000 Austrians, surrendered to the
French, November 9 1794.

Marseilles, which had revolted against the convention, subdued August 24, 1793.

Martha's Island, pillaged by the British, who carried off 300 oxen, and 2000
sheep, 1777.

Martinico, the Island of, taken from the French by the English 1756; restored
at the peace of 1763; again taken by the British, March 23, 1794, when the
brave garrison, consisting of only 800 men, were forced to capitulate to 5000
British, after having sustained a siege of 38 days.

Maubeuge, the battle of, between the Austrians and the French, when the former
were defeated with great loss, October 15, and 16, 1793.

Medfield, the town of, in Massachussetts, about half burnt by the Indians,
February 1675.

Mexico, seized by the Spaniards under Pizzarro, 1521.

Miami Indians. See Indians.

Minorca, the island of, taken by the British under General Stanhope, August
1708: surrendered to the French, June 1756, but given up to the British by the
ensuing peace; taken by the Spaniards, February 5, 1782.

Mohawk river, the battle at, when Colonel Willet defeated the British, October
24, 1782.

Monmouth Courthouse, the battle of, when the British were worsted with the
loss of 350 men by the Americans under General Washington, June 28, 1778.

Montreal, taken by the English 1760: by the Americans, November 12, 1775;
retaken by the British, June 15, 1776.

Montserrat, taken by the French, February 18, 1782; restored to the English at
the peace, 1783.

Moro Castle, at the Havannah, taken by the English, 1762.

Morocco taken by the king of Fez, 1611.

Moucron, the battle of, when the allied forces under Clairf^yt were totally
defeated by the French under Pichegru, April 26, 1794.

Mud-Island fort, now fort Mifflin, taken by the British after a most vigorous
defense, November 16, 1777.

NETHERLANDS, the Austrian, immediatley after the celebrated battle of Jemappe,
November 5, 1792, were captured by the French; retaken, 1793; but previous to
the year 1795, not only the Austrian, but also the Dutch Netherlands, were
subdued by the French republic.

Neuingen, the battle of, between the combined armies and General Dumourier,
when the French were defeated with great loss, March 20, 1793.

Nevis taken by Bouille and D'Grasse, January 14, 1782; restored to the English
at the peace, 1783.

Newhaven the town of, ravaged by the British, July 1779.

New London Connecticut, burnt by Benedict Arnold, September 13, 1781.

Newport, Rhode Island, taken by the British, Dec. 7, 1776; evacuated by the
British, October 25, 1779.

New York surrendered to the British forces, September 15, 1776; evacuated by
the British, November 25, 1783.

Niagara, taken by the English, July 24, 1759.

Nice, taken by the French under General Anselm, September 29, 1792.

Nimeguen, the port of, evacuated by the British, November 7, 1794.

Nineveh destroyed by the Medes, 612 B. C.

Noimoutier, the Island of, taken from the Insurgents of La Vendee, by the arms
of the French republic, January 3, 1794.

Norfolk, in Virginia, burnt by order of Lord Dunmore the British governor, and
great damage sustained, January 1, 1776.

Northampton, and several other towns in Massachussetts, burnt and plundered by
the Indians, March 1676.

Nova Scotia, taken by the English from the French, 1681: restored 1731, taken
again 1745 and 1758: and confirmed to the British 1760.

Norwalk, in Connecticut, burnt by the British, July 5, 1779.

OMOA, the fort of, key to the bay of Honduras, taken by the British from the
Spaniards, October 20, 1779, but soon after retaken by the Spaniards.

Oran, in Barbary, taken by the Spaniards from the Moors, 1507; ceded to the
Algerines, 1791.

Orleans, the siege of, being the first blow to the English power in France
conducted by Joan D'Arc, the celebrated maid of Orleans, who was soon after
taken prisoner and basely put to death 1431.

Osnaburgh, taken and pillaged by the French, 1761.

Ostend, attempted to be taken by the French 1658: but they were defeated with
great loss; taken possession of by the French under Dumourier, Dec. 1792.

Oswego, taken by the English, 1756.

PELOPONESIAN war, which continued 27 years, began 431 B. C.

Penobscot, a number of American vessels destroyed at, by Sir George Collier,
Aug. 14, 1779.

Pensacola, and the whole province of West Florida, surrendered to the arms of
the king of Spain, May 9, 1780.

Pequet war, in New England, in which 600 Indians were killed, 1637.

Persian empire, overthrown by Alexander the Great, 331 B. C.

Peru, the empire of, in South America, subdued by the Spanish General Pizarro,
with an army of only 160 men, 1533.

Petersburgh, in Virginia, the shipping and stores destroyed at, by Phillips
and Arnold, April 26, 1781.

Philadelphia, taken by the British, under General How, September 26, 1777;
evacuated, June 18, 1778.

Plymouth, in England, burnt by the French 1377.

Pondicherry, taken by the Dutch from France 1694, by the English 1761; but
restored to France soon after; taken again by the English 1778.

Porto-bello, taken by Admiral Vernon, November 22, 1739.

Port Royal, in Nova Scotia, taken by the Massachussetts forces, May 1690;
retaken by the French, about 1700; by the English, October 5, 1710, when it
received the name of Annapolis.

Portsmouth, in England, burnt by the French 1377.

Pawlus-hook, taken by the Americans under General Lee, when 30 of the British
were killed, and 160 made prisoners, July 19, 1779.

Portsmouth, Virginia, destroyed by the British, June 1, 1776; invaded again by
the British, under Sir George Collier and General Matthews, who burnt vast
quantities of property there, May 10, 1779.

Praga, the suburb of, near Warsaw in Poland, taken by the Russian General
Suwarrow, who gave the barbarous orders to his army to give quarters to no one,
in consequence of which, upwards of 30,000 Poles, men, women and children were
massacred, November 4, 1794.

Princetown, the battle of, when the Americans under General Washington,
defeated the British with great loss, January 2, 1777.

Providence, the Island of, taken by Commodore Hopkins, March 1777.

Providence, the town of, in Rhode Island, almost destroyed by Indians 1675.

Prussia, subdued by the Mercian Knights 1215; being weary of the extortions of
their governors, they revolted to Poland 1219; to which kingdom they did homage
for part of their territories, so late as 1471.

QUEBEC, taken by the British, September 13, 1759, besieged in vain by the
Americans 1775.

REBELLIONS, the great Irish, caused by the artifices of the Lords justices,
when the most horrid barbarities were perpetrated by the Irish on the English,
and by the English on the Irish 1640.

-- Of the Scotch, in favor of the Pretender, September, 1715, which was
suppressed by the battle of Sherrifmuir, November following; again by the
Scotch, in the same cause in the beginning of the year 1745, which was
suppressed by the battle of Culloden, April 16, 1746.

Redbank, the battle of, October 22, 1777.

Rheinfels, a fortress, garrisoned by 2000 Hessians, surrendered to the French,
November 1, 1794.

Rhode Island, taken by the British, December 6, 1776; evacuated, October 25,
1779.

Rhodes, taken by the Saracens, and the Collossus which had been thrown down by
an earthquake and weighed 720,000 lb. sold to a Jew in 652; taken by the Turks
1521, when the knights of Jerusalem quitted it and retired to Malta.

Richmond, in Virginia, destroyed by the British under General Arnold, January
5, 1781.

Rome, the city of, sacked by Brennus 390 B. C.; taken and plundered by the
Goths, 410 A. D.; by the Vandals 455; retaken by the Goths 547; reconquered by
the Emperor 533.

SABINE Virgins, the rape of the, by the Romans 750 B. C.

Samnite war, the, ended 272 B. C. after having continued 71 years.

Samaria, taken 721 B. C.

Saratoga, the convention of, when the British General Burgoyne was obliged to
surrender his whole army, consisting of 5790 men to the Americans under
Generals Gates, Lincoln and Arnold, October 27, 1777.

Sardinia, conquered by the Spaniards, 1303; taken from them by an English
fleet and given to the Duke of Savoy with the title of king 1708.

Savannah, in Georgia, taken by the British, under the command of Lieutenant
Colonel Campbell, Jan. 1779; evacuated by the British, July 11, 1782.

Savoy, part of the king of Sardinia's dominions, taken by the French under
General Montesquieu, October 1792.

Stonington, Connecticut, fired upon by the British, September 3, 1775.

Stonoferry, in Carolina, the battle of, June 20, 1779.

Suffolk, Virginia, a magazine of provisions and naval stores were destroyed by
the British, May 10. 1779.

Sullivan's Island, sort on, unsuccessfully attacked by the British, June 28,
1776; taken by the British, May 6, 1780.

Sunbury, taken by General Provost, January 9, 1779.

Swiss guards, almost every individual of them killed, in a battle between them
and the Parisians, at the Thuilleries, August 10, 1792.

Tangiers, on the coast of Barbary, taken by the Spaniards from the Moors 1470;
destroyed by the English 1684.

Thebes, destroyed by Alexander the Great, when he left only Pindar the poet's
house standing 335.

Thuilleries, see Swiss.

Ticonderoga, taken by the English 1759; by the Americans under Colonels Ethen
Allen and Easton, May 10, 1775; when 240 men, 200 pieces of cannon and other
warlike stores were taken, May 10, 1775.

Tirlemont, the battle of, began March 15, 1793, when after a contest of
several days, the French, under Dumourier, were defeated.

Tobago, declared a neutral Island 1748; ceded to the British 1763; taken by
the French, June 2, 1781; retaken by the English 1793.

Toulon, surrendered to the English Admiral Lord Hood, who took possession of
the town and shipping in the name of Louis XVII. August 29, 1793, when the tree
of liberty, which had been erected there was converted into a gibbet for the
republicans. The combined forces there, consisting of the English, Spaniards,
Neopolitans, etc. made a vigorous sally against the French, but were repulsed
with the loss of 1200 men killed and wounded, and the English General O'Hara
taken prisoner, November 30, 1793; on December 19, following, the republicans
attacked the town in a most vigorous manner; when the combined forces, finding
that all future resistance was useless, after having set fire to the shipping,
arsenals, etc. made a precipitate retreat.

Tournay, the battle of, between the French and English, when the former were
defeated, May 10, 1794; again between the French and combined powers when the
latter were defeated with great loss, May 17, and 18, following.

Trenton, the battle of, when the Americans, under General Washington took 900
Hessians.

Trinidad, the Island of, taken by Sir Walter Raleigh 1595; by the French 1676.

Trincomale, on the Island of Ceylon, taken by the English, January 11, 1782.

Tripoli, on the coast of Barbary, reduced by the English under Admiral Blake
1655.

Troy, the siege of, began 1193 B. C.; burnt 1184 B. C.; when an end was put to
the kingdom.

Tunis, in Barbary, taken by the emperor Charles V. 1535; who restored it to
its king who had been banished; reduced by the English under Admiral Blake 1535.

Tuscan war, commenced 312 B. C.

VALENCIENNES, taken by the combined powers, June 1793, and soon after retaken.

Vauban, fort, taken by the French, January 7, 1794.

Verdun, the French garrison, taken by the Prussians, September 2, 1793, and
retaken soon after.

Vincents, St. Island of, taken by the English 1756, to whom it was ceded by
the peace of 1763; taken by the French assisted by the Chariabs, whom the
English had treated with great inhumanity, June 17, 1779; restored to the
English by the treaty of peace 1783; a war broke out between the Chariabs said
to be assisted by the French, and the English, March 1795; but we know not as
yet how it is terminated.

WARSAW, the capital of Poland, taken by the Russians under Suwarrow, November
9, 1794.

Wachaws, North Carolina, where Colonel Tarleton surprised 300 Americans, of
whom he killed by far the greatest number, May 1780.

Washington, Fort, State of New York, taken by the British, with 2000
prisoners, November 16, 1776. Wars, the British, since the year 1500.

-- with France, February 4, 1512.

-- with Scotland, 1513.

Peace with France, August 7. 1514.

War with France and Scotland 1522.

Peace with France 1527.

-- with Scotland 1542.

War with Scotland, immediately after.

Peace with France and Scotland, June 7, 1546.

War with Scotland 1547.

-- with France 1549.

Peace with both, March 6, 1550.

War, civil, 1553.

War with France and Scotland 1557.

Peace with France, April 2, 1559.

-- with Scotland 1560.

War with France 1562.

Peace with France 1564.

War with Scotland 1570.

-- with Spain 1588.

Peace with Spain, August 18, 1604.

War with Spain 1624.

-- with France 1627.

Peace with France and Spain, April 14, 1629.

War, the civil, commenced in England 1642.

-- with the Dutch 1651.

Peace with the Dutch, April 5, 1654.

War with Spain 1655.

Peace with Spain, September 10, 1660.

War with France, January 26, 1666.

-- with Denmark, Oct^ber 19. following.

Peace of Breda with the French, Danes and Dutch, August 24, 1667.

War with the Algerines, September 6, 1669.

Peace with Do. November 19, 1671.

War with the Dutch, March 1672.

Peace with Do. February 28, 1674.

War with France, May 7, 1689.

Peace, a general, concluded at Risweck, September 20, 1689.

War with France, May 4, 1702.

Peace of Utrecht, July 13, 1713.

War with Spain, December 1718.

Peace with Do. 1721.

War with Spain, October 19, 1739.

-- with France, March 31, 1744.

Peace with France and Spain, October 18, 1748.

War with France 1756.

-- with Spain, January 4, 1762.

Peace with France and Spain, February 10, 1763.

War between America and Britain, commenced at Lexington, where the first blood
in that contest was shed, April 19, 1715.

-- with France 1778.

-- with Spain 1779.

-- with Holland 1780.

Peace between Britain It is stated, in the Political Progress of Britain, that
of one hundred years next after the revolution, 42 years have been spent in
actual wars with the other nations in Europe.
and France, Holland and America 1783.

War, declared by the Turks against the Russians, on account of the usurpation
of the Crimea, August 1787.

Peace between these powers, August 11, 179^.

War between the Russians and Swedes 1788.

Peace between these powers 1790.

War, the French National Convention, after having received many provocations,
declared war.

-- against the king of Hungary and Bohemia, April 24, 1792.

-- declared by the king of Prussia against the French, July 26, 1792.

-- by the Convention against the king of Sardinia, September 16, 1792.

-- by Do. against the king of Britain and the Statholder of Holand, February
1, 1793.

Peace with Holland, January 1795.

War declared by the Convention against Spain, March 7, 1793.

-- with Portugal soon after.

Watson fort, surrendered to General Marion and Lieutenant Colonel Lee, April
23, 1781.

Wyoming, out of 417 Americans stationed there, 360 were inhumanly butchered by
a party of Tories and Indians, commanded by Colonel John Butler, July 1, 1778.

White Plains, the battle of, November 30, 1776.

YORK-Town, in the province of Maine, burnt and plundered by the Indians,
January 25, 1691.

York-Town, Virginia, taken possession of by Lord Cornwallis, August 1781; who,
after having sustained a long siege there, was obliged to surrender his whole
army consisting of 7000 men to the United armies of America and France, under
the command of General Washington, October 19, 1782.

Sea Fights, the most Remarkable, since the Year 1300.
-- between the French and English, near Sluys' when 400 sail, and 30,000 men
belonging to the former were taken, 1340.

-- between the Spaniards and the English, when the latter were defeated, 1372.

-- between the English and French, when 500 vessels were taken from the
latter, 1416.

-- near the Gulf of Lepanto, between the Protestant powers and the Turks,
when the latter lost 25,000 men killed, and 4000 prisoners; and out of 260
vessels saved only 25, October 7, 1571.

-- between the English and the Spanish Armada off Calais, when the latter were
defeated, with the loss of 17 ships and 5000 men 1588.

-- between the Dutch and Spaniards, in the bay of Gibraltar, when the latter
lost 19 ships and 2800 men, April 25, 1607. The former were much inferior in
force.

-- in Dover roads, between the English under Blake, and the Dutch under Van
Tromp, when the English were defeated with the loss of six ships, June 29, 1652.

-- in the Downs, between the same Admirals, when the English were again
defeated, November 29, 1652.

Sea fight between the same Admirals near Portland, when the Dutch were
defeated with the loss of 11 ships of war and 30 merchant vessels, February 18,
1653.

-- again near the coast of Flanders, when the Dutch lost 17 ships, June 2,
1653.

-- off Portsmouth, when Admiral Blake took 11 Dutch men of war, and 30
merchant vessels, February 10, 1653.

-- again when the Dutch lost 30 ships, and their Admiral Van Tromp was killed,
July 29, 1653.

-- off Cadiz, between the English under Blake, and the Spaniards, when two
galeons of an immense value were taken, September 1656.

-- at the Canaries, where the Spaniards were again defeated by Blake, April
20, 1657.

-- between the English under the Duke of York, and the Dutch, when the latter
were defeated with the loss of 19 ships. The English lost only one, June 3,
1665.

-- the Earl of Sandwich took 12 Dutch men of war, and two East India vessels,
September 4, 1665.

-- between the English under the Duke of Albemarle, and the Dutch and French
joined, which lasted 4 days, June 1666. The English lost nine, and the Dutch 15
ships.

-- at the mouth of the Thames, between the English under Prince Rupert, and
the Dutch under Ruyter, when the latter were defeated with the loss of 24
ships, 4 Admirals killed, and 4000 officers and seamen, July 25, and 26, 1665.

The Dutch fleet sailed up the Medway almost as far as Chatham, and destroyed
great part of the English fleet, June 11, 1667.

-- at Solebay, when the Earl of Sandwich was blown up, and the Dutch defeated
by the Duke of York, May 28, 1672.

-- on the coast of Holland, between the combined fleets of France and Britain,
and the Dutch, May 28, June 4, and August 11, 1673, in all of which the Dutch
were defeated.

Sea fight, In the bay of Tripoli, when the English destroyed 4 ships of war,
belonging to that state, March 4, 1674.

-- off Beachy-head, when ^he English and Dutch were defeated by the French,
June 30, 1690.

-- off La Hogue, when the English under Admiral Rook, defeated the French with
the loss of 19 ships, May 19, 1692.

-- off St Vincent, when the English and Dutch were beaten by the French with
great loss, June 16, 1693.

-- near Vigo, when the Spaniards and French were defeated by the English and
Dutch, under Sir George Rooke, with the loss of 20 ships, August 15, 1702.

-- between the French and English, when the former were defeated August 24,
1704.

-- off the Lizard, when the English were defeated, October 9, 1707.

Admiral Leake took 60 French vessels laden with provisions for their army, May
22, 1708.

Spanish fleet destroyed by Sir George Byng, off Cape Passaro, in the
Mediterranean, Aug. 11, 1718.

-- off Toulon, between the combined fleets of France and Spain, and the
English under Admiral Mathews, February 9, 1744.

-- in the East Indies, when the French being defeated, retired to Pondicherry
1747.

-- of Cape Finisterre, when the French fleet were taken by Admiral Anson, May
3, 1747.

-- of Ushant, when Admiral Hawke took seven French men of war, October 14,
1747.

The French defeated, by the British, under Admiral Boscaven, off Cape Lagos,
Aug. 18, 1759.

-- off Bellisle, between the English under Hawke and the French under
Conflans, when the latter was beaten with the loss of one ship of the line
taken, two sunk and two burnt, November 20, 1759.

-- on Lake Champlain, between the British and Americans, when the latter were
defeated, October 11, 1776.

Sea Fight, off Ushant, between the British, under Keppel and the French, when
both sides claimed the victory, July 27, 1778.

-- at Penobscot, when the American fleet consisting of 18 armed vessels,
besides transports, were almost entirely destroyed by the British, under Sir
George Collier, July 30, 1779.

-- between the British ship Serapis and the B^n Homme Richard, Captain Paul
Jones, off Scarborough, September 23, 1779.

-- off Cape St. Vincent, between 18 sail of the English under Rodney, and 13
sail of the Spanish under Langara, when the former captured the Admiral, and 5
ships of the line: one was driven ashore and one blown up, January 16, 1780.

-- off Martinico, between the English, under Sir George Rodney, with 21 sail,
and the French, under Comte de Guichen, with 25 sail, April 17, 1780.

-- off ditto between do. May 15, and 19. These battles were indecisive.

-- at St. Jago, between the English, under Commodore Johnson, and the French
under Monsieur Suffrein, when the latter were defeated, April 16, 1781.

-- of Martinico, between the English under Sir Samuel Hood, and the French
under De Grass, April 19, 1781.

-- off the Dogger bank, between the English under Admiral Parker, and the
Dutch under Zoutman, when great slaughter was committed on both sides, August
5, 1781, a Dutch ship of 68 guns sunk the day after the engagement.

-- off Cape Henry, near Chesapeak bay, between the English under Admiral
Graves, and the French under Du Barras, September 5, 1781.

-- in the East Indies, between the English under Hughes, and the French under
Suffrein, February 17, 1782.

Sea fight, off Martinico, between the English and French, when Admiral Rodney
defeated the French then going to attack Jamaica, took five sail of the line
and their Admiral Count de Grass, April 12, 1782.

The same day, Admiral Hughes defeated the French under Suffrein, in the East
Indies.

The same day, admiral Barrington captured 2 French sail of the line and 19
transports, bound to the East Indies.

-- again in the East Indies, between Admirals Hughes and Suffrein, when the
English gained some advantage, July 6, 1782.

-- again between the sa^e commanders, of Trincomale, September 3, 1782.

-- off Gibraltar, the Spaniards defeated in their grand attack on that
garrison, when their floating batteries were destroyed, September 13, 1782.

-- off Gibraltar, a drawn battle, between the combined fleets of France and
Spain, consisting of 46 sail of the line, and the British of 34 under Lord
How, October 20, 1782.

-- in the gulf of Finland, between the Swedes, under the Duke of Sudermania,
and the Russians under admiral Gregg, when the slaughter was great on both
sides, July 26, 1789, when each took one ship from the other, and the Russians
had one sunk.

-- again, in Swenksand, between the same powers, when the Swedes took or
destroyed about 40 vessels, consisting of galleys, xebecs, f^gates. etc.
carrying in all 600 pieces of cannon, an took between 6 and ^000 prisoners,
August 1, 1790.

-- off Sandy Hook, a desperate engagement between the Ambascade a French, and
the Boston, a British f^igate, in which the latter was worsted and their
Captain killed, August 1, 1793.

-- off Ushant, three bloody engagements were sought, between the French and
British fleets, when the former were ultimately defeated with the loss of (...)
sail of the line taken and one sunk, May 30, and 31, and June 1, 1794. The
British were, however, so much shattered, that they were under the necessity of
immediately returning to port; and thus the French were able to protect their
fleet, returning from America with provisions, which was the principal object
of their cruise.

Sea Fight, in the Mediterranean, between the French and British, when the
former lost 2 sail of the line, and the latter one, March 14, 1795.

States, Empires, Kingdoms, etc. Founded.
ALGIERS, was a Roman province 44 B. C.; seized by Barbarossa 1516.

America, the only independent State in, is the United States, see United
States.

Argos, the kingdom of, began 1586 B. C.

Assyria, the ancient kingdom of, began under Ninus 2084 B. C. and lasted about
1264 years.

Athens, the kingdom of, began 1556 B. C. and ended 1070 B. C.

Austria, see Germany.

BABYLON, the kingdom of, founded by Nimrod 2640 B. C.

Berne, united with the other Swiss cantons, 1353.

Bohemia, the kingdom of, began 550.

British Islands, they were originally inhabited by a people called Britons, of
the same stock with the ancient Gauls or Celtae. England, South Britain, was
invaded by Julius Caesar 54 B. C.; subdued by Claudius 44 A. D. and completely
so by Agricola 85; from which period till the year 428, the Romans kept
possession; at that time the old inhabitants called in the Saxons to assist
them against the Pict^ and Scots, who soon subdued the country to themselves,
and divided it into seven kingdoms called the Heptarchy. This government lasted
till 829, when Egbert, having subdued and united the different kingdoms, under
one government, was crowned king of England. The crowns of England and Scotland
united, in the person of James Stuart, the sixth of that name, king of
Scotland, who succeeded to the throne of England, by the title of James I.
1603. The two kingdoms were united by consent of the parliaments of both
nations, under the name of Great Britain 1707.

CHINA, the empire of, commenced under Fohi 2147, but its history does not
extend above the sixth century, B. C. This country was conquered by the Eastern
Tartars, when the Emperor and family killed themselves 1644. In this empire the
Jesuits attempted to propagate Christianity 1692, and were at first very
successful; but upon their preaching up the supremacy of the Pope, the Emperor
became alarmed and expelled all the missionaries, 1724.

Connecticut, see United States.

Corinth, the kingdom of, established 1355 B. C.

DELAWARE, see United States.

Denmark, the first account we have of its being a kingdom, is in 714; united
under Margaret, with Sweden and Norway 1397; separated from Sweden 1528. About
the year 1448, the crown of Denmark fell to Christian, Count of Oldenburgh, by
whose descendants the United kingdoms of Denmark and Norway are still governed.

EAST Indies, were first discovered by the Romans, but authors disagree with
respect to the time. This far however, we know, with certainty, that Alexander
the Great made extensive conquests in this country, 327 B. C. The first
commercial intercourse of the English with the East Indies, was a private
adventure of three ships fitted out from England 1591; of which number only one
arrived at that country. The Captain on his return gave such information to his
employers, as to occasion a capital mercantile voyage. The establishment of the
first British East India company 1600; which since that period has carried on
an extensive commerce, and by force and fraud made themselves masters of great
part of that heretofore, happy country.

England, see British Isles.

FRANCE, the country of the ancient Gauls, a colony of the Belgae from Germany
were permitted to settle in it, 200 B. C. It was conquered by the Romans 25 B.
C.; overrun by the Goths, Vandals, etc. who divided it amongst themselves from
A. D. 400, to 476; when the Franks, another set of German emigrants, completed
the foundation of the late kingdom of that country, under Pharamond. It was
peopled by the natives of Germany, who crossed the Rhine to invade the Gauls.
The assemblies called the States General, first met 1302, and continued till
1614. This country had long been subject to the most despotic government, and
their national debt had become so enormous, that it was impossible to pay the
interest. The clamours of the public creditors and of the people at large,
arrested the attention of the court, and to appease them, a meeting of
representatives of the Clergy, Nobility, and people was called, who convened at
Paris, May 5, 1789. The Tiers etats or representatives of the people, after
using various effects to obtain an union with the clergy and nobility, without
success, declared themselves the National Assembly, and proceeded to business,
June 17, following; and on the 19th they were joined by a majority of the
Clergy. On the 20th the representatives of the people, were repulsed from the
door of their usual place of meeting, by an armed force sent thither, by order
of the court. Determined to persevere in the regeneration of France, they then
assembled in a Tennis court, where, in the midst of applauding thousands, they
took a solemn oath "never to separate, till the constitution should be
completed," on the 23d the king held, a royal session, when he declared null
the deliberations and resolves of the 17th, and ordered the deputies
immediately to separate and to appear before him next day. When the king
retired, he was followed by the nobility and a part of the clergy; but the
deputies of the commons remained on the benches, and declared "that they were
there by the voice of the people, and that nothing should expel them but the
power of the bayonet." The Bastille was taken by the national guards, and the
governor and a number of other officers killed by the populace, on account of
their perfidy, July 14. In November the Assembly abolished the use of Lettres
de Catchet, and the distinction of orders; on the 4th Feb. 1790, the king
voluntarily appeared before the National Assembly, and declared, "that he would
defend the new constitution to the last moment of his existence;" and on June
20, 1791, as a proof of his sincerity, departed privately with his family, from
Paris, with a view, as was universally believed, of levying war against his
country, and left a paper behind him, revoking all his protestations of
attachment to the new constitution. He was, however, intercepted at Varennes
and reconducted back to Paris, June 25; on July 17, a great concourse of people
assembled in the Champ de Mars, with the professed design of petitioning,
against the re-establishment of the king. These were however dispersed by the
National guard under La Fayette, but not before 12 men were killed, and 50 or
60 wounded; on September 13, the king appeared in the Assembly and solemnly
swore, "to be faithful to the nation and to the law, and to employ the powers
vested in him for the maintenance of the constitution, and the due execution of
the law." The Assembly soon after passed a decree authorizing the banishment of
nonjuring priests, and another for the establishment of a camp in the
neighborhood of Paris, to both of which the king gave his constitutional veto.
From this unpopular measure, his flight, etc. his attachment to the new order
of things was much questioned; hence petitions were presented to the assembly
for his deposition on 3d, 6th, and 7th of August 1792, in consequence of which,
and of the massacre at the Thuillieries on the 10th following, of which he was
accused as being the author, he was suspended from his office and committed to
the Temple; the assembly also decreed the calling of a convention, which met on
September 20, and pronounced "the eternal abolition of royalty in France. On
December 11, the king was brought to trial. He was afterward condemned and
beheaded, on January 21, 1793; on June 23, following, the convention agreed
upon a constitution purely democratic, which, however, amidst the din of arms,
and the jarring of contending parties, it has been hitherto found impracticable
to put in execution. The different battles, etc. fought by the French people,
have been already mentioned under the article battles, sieges, etc. From their
continued successes, it is obvious, that they have nothing to fear from
without, and as their military have uniformly adhered to the convention,
notwithstanding the various changes which that body has undergone, it is to be
expected, that there is no great danger from internal commotions. The
convention has at different periods, been rent by the most furious factions,
and the contention has generally terminated by the vanquished party The
following is a list of the most remarkable, of the different parties who have
been brought to the scaffold; Brissot and twenty other deputies were beheaded,
October 30, 1793. Valaze was condemned at the same time, but stabbed himself in
court; Baily the first mayor of Paris, Barnave, St. Ettienne, etc. suffered in
the end of the year 1793.

The Herbertists to the number of twenty beheaded, March 1794.

Danton and his party, suffered a few days after.

Robespierre, and 19 of his associates were guillotined, July 28, 1794.

The Municipal officers and others, who had declared for Robespierre, to the
number of 68 were beheaded, on the 29th following.


, being brought to the scaffold. But moderation appears, at present, to be the
order of the day, and should this system continue, there is reason to believe
that peace will be speedily restored to that country, and that they will
establish and perpetuate upon the principles of equal liberty, a free and
energetic government.

GERMANY, was anciently divided into several independent States, which made no
figure in history till 25 B. C.; when they, with great bravery, withstood the
attempts of the Romans to subdue them. The Romans were only able to conquer
some parts of that country; but by the repeated efforts of the Germans, they
were entirely expelled A. D. 290. Charlemagne became master of the whole empire
A. D. 802. It was called Alleman i. e. in the German language, "every man"
denoting that all nations were welcome there." The first elected emperor was
912. Seven electors first appointed to choose an emperor 1258; viz. the three
ecclesiastical Mentz, Treves, and Cologne, and 4 secular viz. Bohemia, Saxony,
Brandenburg and the Palatine. In the year 1623, Bavaria was made an 8th
electorate, and in 1692, Hanover a ninth.

Grecian monarchy, commenced 329 B. C.

HANOVER, made the Ninth electorate 1692.

Holland, originally part of the territory of the Belgae conquered by the
Romans 47 B. C. A sovereignty was founded by Thiercy, first count of Holland
868, which continued till the year 1433, when they became subject to the house
of Burgundy. In 1534, they were transferred to the court of Spain; but finding
the tyranny of the Spaniards unsupportable, they revolted, 1579, and, after a
long contest, were at last acknowledged by their former masters as a free
people, under the name of the United Provinces. In bringing about this
important revolution, the Prince of Orange had been their principal leader, in
consequence of which he was elected Stadtholder, and his descendants continued
in that office till the year 1702, when it was suppressed and remained in
disuse for a period of 45 years. The regency of the republic, however, which
possessed the supreme authority, had committed great abuses. The people were
tired with their oppressions, and in 1747, they thoughtlessly elected William
of Nassau, a prince who had done nothing for them, and whose sole
recommendation was that he belonged to the house of Orange, as their supreme
Magistrate, and made the office hereditary in his family, not even excepting
the females. They soon repented of this inconsiderate act: a revolution was
projected in the year 1787; but was prevented from being accomplished by the
Prussians. The Dutch were restored to liberty by the arms of France, in January
1795; a convention soon after was called: the Stadholder fled to England, and
the office was abolished.

IRELAND, the history of this kingdom is carried up to about 500 years before
the Christian era, when it is said to have been settled by a colony of
Scythians immediately from Spain. It was formerly divided among a number of
petty sovereigns, which circumstance facilitated the reduction of the whole by
Henry II. of England 1172. The kings of England were called Lords of Ireland,
till 1542, when Henry VIII. took the title of king; Ireland was admitted to a
free trade by the British parliament 1779, and released from subserviency to
the Privy Council of Britain 1782. The minds of the Irish, however, appear to
be very far from being quieted; and by the last accounts from that country,
their uneasiness seems to have increased. How their dissensions may terminate,
is involved in the womb of futurity.

KENTUCKY, see United States.

MACEDON, the kingdom of, began 814 B. C.

Massachussetts, see United States.

Mogul empire, the first conqueror was Jenghis Khan, a Tartarian Prince, who
died 1226. Timur Bok became Great Mogul by conquest 1399, and the government
continued in his family till the conquest of Tamerlane in the 15th century,
whose descendants have kept the throne ever since; but Kouli Khan, the famous
Sophi of Persia, considerably diminished the power of the Mogul, carried away
immense treasures from Delhi, and since that time many of the Nabobs have made
themselves independent.

Morocco, the ancient Mauritania, first known 1008, and possessed by the Romans
25 B. C; by whom it was soon after reduced into a province. From this time it
underwent various revolutions. About 1116, Abdalla, the leader of a sect of
Mahometans began to reign, and the government continued in his family till the
year 1212, when the last sovereign of that dynasty was totally defeated in
Spain. At this period, Fez and Tremecen, then provinces of the empire, shook
off their dependence; but the descendants of Mahomet about 1550, united the
three kingdoms again, and formed, what is now called, the empire Morocco. The
emperors of this nation have, in general, been a set of bloody tyrants, and
have lived in almost a continued state of warfare, with all the Christian
powers, who, instead of fighting these petty tyrants of the ocean, do not
disdain to purchase peace by presents.

NAPLES, the ancient Capua and Campania, kingdom of, began 1020. Alphonsus king
of Arragon united Sicily to it, and the style of their kings has, since that
time, been king of the two Sicilies, annexed to Spain 1504; with whom it
continued till 1706, when it was taken by the Emperor; conquered by the
Spaniards, again 1734, and settled on Don Carlos, one of the king of Spain's
sons, 1736.

New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, see United States.

PENNSYLVANIA, see United States.

Persian Empire, the foundation of the, was laid by Cyrus, on his conquering
Medea 536, and ended in the conquest of Darius about 330. A new Empire, called
the Parthian, was, however, founded on its ruins by the Persians, under Arbaces
250 B. C. In 651, the Saracens put an end to that empire, and Persia became a
prey to the Tartars and a province of Indostan, till Nadir Shaw, who assumed
the named of Kouli Khan, usurped the government and once more raised Persia to
a powerful kingdom. The great principle of his government was to strike terror
into his subjects, by the most cruel executions. His conduct at last became
intolerable, and in 1747, his relations assassinated him, partly in self
defense. Since his death, the whole empire has been rent by commotions, as
different individuals, in the different provinces, have been struggling for
sovereignty, in order to obtain which, torrents of blood have been shed, and
the most shocking crimes committed with impunity.

Poland was once the country of the Vandals, who left it to invade the Roman
empire. It was originally divided into many small states or principalities,
almost independent of each other, though they generally had some prince, who
was paramount over the rest. About the year 700, the people, through the
oppression of their petty chiefs, gave the supreme command, under the title of
Duke, to Cracus, the founder of the city Cracow. This title was retained till
the year 999, when Boleslaus assumed the appellation of king. Perhaps, no
country has been more distracted by party or more injured by foreign influence
than Poland. In the year 1773, it was partitioned by the combined despots of
Prussia, Russia and Germany. From this dismemberment, Poland found herself
reduced to a humiliating state of dependence on Russia, from which the patriots
had, at different times, wished to extricate their country. The French
revolution held out a memorable lesson. A plan was accordingly projected for an
effectual improvement in their constitution, which was adopted on May 3, 1791;
but this plan has been since overturned by the Russians. According to the last
accounts, the good, the benevolent, and the virtuous Stanislaus king of Poland,
has retired from his country, to which he can be no longer useful, and means to
end his days in Rome as a private individual.

Portugal, the kingdom of, was anciently called Lusitania* in the year 713 it
became subject to the Moors, and continued so till conquered by Alphonso king
of Castile and Leon, who gave it, with the title of count, to Henry, grandson
of Robert king of France; his son in the year 1139, assumed the title of king
of Portugal; in the year 1580, it was conquered by the Spaniards; but in 1640,
the people shook off the Spanish yoke, and elected for their king the Duke of
Brajanza, in whose family the government has continued ever since.

Prussia, was anciently inhabited by an idolatrous and cruel people; about the
middle of the 13th century, it was overcome by the knights of the Teutonic
order; but the inhabitants weary of the extortions of their governors, revolted
to Jagello king of Poland 1219; after this the grand master of the Teutonic
order, conquered the Poles and kept possession under the title of Duke of
Prussia till 1701, when William the Great and Grandfather to the late king,
raised the duchy to a kingdom, and in a solemn assembly of the States of the
Empire, placed the crown on his own head.

RHODE Island, see United States.

Roman Empire, the, originated in a few shepherds building a small city, which,
after the name of their leader Romulus, they called Rome, according to most
chronologers 753 B. C.; but according to Sir Isaac Newton 627: being destitute
of wives, they seized and detained the Sabine women 750 B. C. Their first
government was monarchical, but Sextus Tarquin their seventh king having
ravished Lucretia, the kingly government was abolished and the republican
substituted in its stead under two Consuls, who were to be elected annually 500
B. C. A dictator was first appointed 493 B. C. In the year 451 B. C. Decemvirs
were appointed to form a body of laws. Censors were created 4^3, and the first
Praetor appointed 365 B. C. In the year 264 B. C.; before which time, the
Romans had never carried their arms beyond Italy, nor encountered their enemies
at sea, the first Punic war was declared. The second Punic war began 218, and
the third 149 B. C. In this last, the Romans, after a siege of three years took
Carthage and utterly destroyed it 146 B. C. In the year 59 B. C. Pompey and
Caesar began to contend for the supreme power over the commonwealth, which
produced a bloody civil war, in which Pompey was killed 41 B. C.; and Caesar
having afterward overturned the liberties of his country, became obnoxious to
the people, and was assassinated in the Senate house 44 B. C. This Catastrophe
was, however, so far from retarding, that it rather accelerated the intended
revolution; for the state being divided into two factions, between Octavius
Caesar and Mark Anthony, a civil war ensued 48 B. C. and in 27 B. C. the
republic was changed to an Empire, and the titles of Augustus and Imperator
conferred on Octavius Caesar, by the senate and people. The Goths, Vandals, and
other barbarous nations of the North, began to invade the Roman Empire about A.
D. 250. The seat of Empire was removed from Rome to Constantinople by
Constantine, 330; divided into the Eastern and Western Empires, 379; taken and
plundered by the Goths 410; by the Vandals 455; by the Heruli 456; recovered
for Justinian by Bellisarius 537; retaken by the Goths 547; reconquered for the
Emperor 533. In 726, it revolted from the Greek Emperors, became a free State
and was governed by a Senate. The Senate and people acknowledged Charlemagne,
king of France, as emperor of the West, who surrendered the city and duchy to
the Pope, reserving the sovereignty to himself A. D. 800; the Popes, however,
soon after made themselves independent, and obtained possession of that
renounced city and territories now called, The Ecclesiastical States.

Russia, or Muscovy, anciently Sarmatia, and inhabited by the Scythians. This
country was not renowned, till the natives attempted to take Constantinople
864. The Poles conquered it about 1058; but it is uncertain how long they kept
it. About 1200, the Mungles Tartars, conquered it, and held it subject to them
till 1540, when John Basilowitz restored it to independency. In 1721, it began
to be an Empire, when Peter the Great assumed the title of Emperor of all the
Russias, which title was admitted by the European powers, in their future
negociations with Russia.

SARDINIA, conquered by the Spaniards, 1303, in whose possession it continued
till 1708, when it was taken by an English fleet and given to the Duke of
Savoy, with the title of king. Their first king was Victor Amadoeus, who
abdicated the throne, in favor of his Son, 1730. and died in a prison 1732.

Savoy, part of Gallia ^^bonensis, submitted to the Romans 118 B. C. It ^^^red
the revolutions of Switzerland till 1040, when Conrad, Emperor of Germany, gave
it to Hubert, with the title of Earl. In 1417, it was erected into a Duchy,
and continued so till 1713, when it was annexed to Sardinia. In November 1792,
the whole country submitted to the arms of France, and, at present, continues
as a part of that republic.

Scotland, anciently Caledonia, has at least as great pretensions to antiquity
as any nation in Europe, having, according to their historians, possessed that
kingdom for about 2000 years, without ever being entirely conquered; though at
certain periods, they have been in part subdued and overrun by the Romans, the
English, and Danes. Their more early history is so enveloped in fable and
obscurity, that nothing certain can be drawn from it. Its true history began
328 B. C. when Fergus I. came from Ireland, and was received as their king. On
the death of Alexander III. in 1283, no less than 12 candidates disputed for
the sovereignty, and as they could not agree amongst themselves, they appointed
Edward I. of England, as Arbitrator, who very conscienciously set aside all
their claims, and took possession of the kingdom for himself; nor were the
Scotch able entirely to recover what they had lost, till 1314. In 1707,
Scotland was united with England, when the two kingdoms, thus united, assumed
the name of Great Britain.

South Carolina, see United States.

Spain, was probably first peopled by the Celtae, from Gaul, to which it lies
contiguous; or from Africa, from which it is only separated by the narrow
strait of Gibraltar. It had, at different periods, been overrun by different
powers, but was at last finally subdued by the Romans, 216 B. C. The Goths and
Vandals overturned the Roman power 409, and continued in possession of it, till
it was conquered by the Moors in 711. Spain had, hitherto, contained a number
of small kingdoms, all of which were swallowed up in Castille and Arragon 1492,
and in 1497, these two were united by the Queen of Spain, having married the
king of Arragon, who then assumed the title of Catholic majesty. The Moors had
been repeatedly overthrown, and a complete end was put to their dominion 1511,
and in the beginning of the 17th century, an edict was passed, whereby the
Moors and Jews, who would not become converts to the Christian faith, were to
the number of 170,000 families, driven out of Spain.

Sweden, anciently Scandinavia, the kingdom of, began 481; united to the crown
of Denmark and Norway 1394, till 1525, when Gustavus Vasa expelled the Danes.
In this kingdom there were no nobility till the year 1500. In 1772, their late
king Gustavus III. without bloodshed, changed the constitution from a limited
to an absolute monarchy. Gustavus was assassinated by Ankerstrom, March 16,
1793.

Switzerland, was formerly inhabited by the Helvetii who were subdued by Caesar
57 B. C. It remained subject to the Romans, till it was conquered by the
Alemans from Germany 395. These, however, were driven out by Clovis I. of
France 496, and Switzerland became part of the kingdom of Burgundy. Their
mountainous, uninviting situation formed a better security for their liberties,
than their forts or armies, hence their subjection to Burgundy and Germany, was
nominal, rather than real, till about the year 1300, when the Emperor Albert I.
treated them with so much rigor, that they petitioned him against the cruelty
of his governors. This, however, was so far from obtaining the desired effect,
that it only tended to double the hardships of the people, and one Gressler an
Austrian Governor, carried his tyranny so far, that he set up a hat upon a
pole, to which he ordered the people to pay the same obeisance as to himself.
Incensed at this treatment, the Swiss revolted, under William Tell, and formed
a government for themselves, on republican principles, 1315, which was ratified
by the different powers of Europe 1649.

UNITED Provinces, see Holland.

United States of America. At the conclusion of the war in 1763, between
Britain and France, the British colonies of North America, were in a state of
high political prosperity. Their population, commerce and wealth advanced with
a rapid pace. Their internal government was conducted with a degree of
steadiness, frugadity and wisdom, which have been seldom, or, perhaps never
equalled. But the war was scarcely finished, when Britain attempted to reduce
these colonies to a state of the most unconditional servitude. In March 1764, a
bill was passed in the British parliament, by which heavy duties were laid on
commodities imported, by the colonists, from such West India Islands, as did
not belong to Britan, and another bill was soon soon after passed, to restrain
the currency of paper money. The constant plea of the Americans, during the
whole course of the controversy, rested upon this doctrine, that taxation
without representation, was but another name for slavery. Their complaints were
loud; but the British parliament was so far from redressing their grievances,
that on March 22, 1765, the stamp act followed. The pretended reason of these
taxations was, that a sum might be produced, sufficient for the defense of the
colonies against a foreign enemy. To this, the Americans answered, that they
were fully able to defend themselves, and that, at any rate, as they were not
represented in the British parliament, that body had no right to tax them. To
this reasoning, however, the British ministry were inattentive; hence a tempest
of indignation burst out, at once, all over the colonies: non-importation
agreements were universally embraced, and, in consequence of the general alarm,
the first American Congress was held at New York 1765. Confounded at this
opposition, the British cabinet shrunk from its usurpation, and the stamp act
was repealed. They, however, issued a declaratory bill, setting forth the
authority of Britain, to bind the colonies, by laws and statutes, in all cases
whatever. And in June 1767, a bill laying a duty on tea, paper, painted glass,
and colors, was passed by parliament. This act excited still more universal
alarm and indignation, all over the continent, than even the stamp act itself.
Troops arrived at Boston, and it appeared to be the design of the British
government, to dragoon the Americans, by military logic, into such measures, as
they thought proper. The colonists, however, remained firm, and the ministry
repealed all the other parts of the obnoxious act, except the duty of 3 d per
lb. on tea: and this was left, to maintain, what was called, the dignity of the
crown. Grievances multiplied, particularly in Massachussetts, and petitions, in
the most respectful terms, were presented to the king, which, however, were
treated with contempt. In the midst of this confusion, three ships, laden with
tea arrived Boston and as, according to the act of parliament, it was subject
to a duty of 3 d per lb. 340 chests were destroyed by the populace, in November
1773. On March 25, 1774, the Boston port-bill was passed by parliament, by
which bill, that port was to be shut, from and after the first June ensuing,
till satisfaction should be made to the East India company for the tea
destroyed. The Ministry had expected, that the other seaport towns, the
commercial rivals of Boston, would rejoice in her calamity, and that by having
this opportunity of aggrandizing themselves, the whole country would soon be
reduced to submission. But here they were sadly disappointed, for contributions
poured in from every quarter, and the whole continent of America was thrown
into a ferment. On September 5, 1774, deputies met at Philadelphia, from the
different colonies, as the first General Congress, and, in November following,
petitoned the king for a repeal of grievances, to which, it is unnecessary to
add, that no attention was paid. The first action between the Americans and
king's troops was, at Lexington, April 19. 1775. On May 20, following, the
colonies agreed on Articles of confederation and perpetual union. June 16,
General George Washington, was unanimously appointed commander in chief of the
American army. July 6, Congress published a declaration, setting forth the
cause and necessity of their taking up arms; and on July 4, 1776, in
consequence of the repeated provocations which the colonies had received from
Britain, Congress declared these colonies to be free, sovereign and
independent, under the name of the UNITED STATES. The different battles they
fought, to obtain their liberty, have been mentioned, under the head of
battles, sages, etc. We shall, therefore only mention, that, after the
surrender of Cornwallis, the reduction of America appeared impracticable to the
British, and that, in consequence, an address was presented to the king,
against the further prosecution of offensive war in America. On May 5,
following, Sir Guy Carleton arrived at New York, with powers to treat of peace.
On November 30, provisional articles of peace were signed at Paris, between the
American and British commissioners, by which, the United States were declared,
by the king of Britain to be free, sovereign and independent, and the
definitive treaty was ratified by Congress, January 4, 1784. During the war,
the articles of confederation had served to keep the States united; but upon
the return of peace, the general government was found, by no means to possess
those powers, which are necessary for the right administration of a well
regulated republic. In 1785, Mr James Madison, at present a representative in
Congress, brought forward a motion in the house of Delegates of Virginia, to
appoint commissioners, who, in concurrence with others, to be appointed by the
different States, should form a system of commercial regulations, to be
recommended for adoption to the different State legislatures. In consequence of
this recommendation, commissioners from several of the States met at Annapolis
in 1786; but finding that the States were generally not represented, and that
the authority, given by such as were, fell far short of the objects to be
accomplished, they agreed to request of Congress, to recommend to the different
States, to send deputies to a general convention, to be held at Philadelphia,
in the following year, for the purpose of devising such a form of government,
as would best promote the welfare and happiness of their constituents. In May
1787, the Federal convention assembled, and on September 17, recommended to the
different States the new constitution, or present system of federal government.
This constitution underwent the most severe examination, and after a full
discussion, in the different State conventions, was at last adopted by all. The
new government was organized at New York, March 3, 1789, and George Washington
was the first President, John Adams the first Vice President, and Frederic
Augustus Muhlenburg the first speaker of the house of representatives. Under
this excellent and hitherto wisely administered constitution, the citizens of
the United States have experienced a degree of commercial and agricultural
prosperity, unknown to other nations, and while the different governments of
Europe, are at present convulsed to the very foundation, by the firm and
temperate conduct of our Executive, we have still enjoyed, that greatest of all
blessings, peace. One circumstance alone has tended to interrupt our
tranquillity, viz, the insurrection which broke out in the counties of
Allegany, Washington, Fayette, and Westmoreland in Pennsylvania, on account of
the excise, in 1794, This, however, was happily suppressed by the prudence of
the President of the United States, and the good conduct of the militia, who,
at his call, readily stepped forth in support of the violated laws of their
country, and order was restored without bloodshed. Having given this cursory
view of the foundation of the general government, we now proceed to the
individual States, taking them according to their geographical order, from
North to South.

VERMONT, State of, declared independent by its convention at Windsor, December
25, 1777; admitted into the federal union, March 4, 1791.

New Hampshire, grant of, by the Plymouth company 1621; and first began to be
settled 1623. It was put under the jurisdiction of Massachussetts 1650, and
separated from that government 1679. In 1692, the inhabitants again petitioned
to be united with Massachussetts, and were for a short time under their
jurisdiction. A provincial Congress took up the civil government, January 5,
1776, and on October 31, 1783, they established their present constitution.

Massachussetts, grant of, by the Plymouth company, to Sir Henry Roswell and
others 1627; a royal charter granted 1628. Emigration to this country was
prohibited by England 1633. The first general court held by representation was
1634. The Governor and assistants first sat in a separate apartment from the
Representatives 1644. In consequence of a proclamation issued by General Gage,
the representatives met at Salem, and resolved themselves into a provincial
Congress, October 5, 1774. A convention met for settling a constituion,
September 1, 1779, and continued by adjournment until March 2, 1780, when they
agreed on a constitution which was afterward ratified by the general court, in
June following. An insurrection headed by Shays, Parsons, etc. broke out in
this State in 1786, but was suppressed without much difficulty. The ringleaders
were convicted, but afterward pardoned by government.

Rhode Island, settlement of, first began by Mr. Roger Williams, and his
persecuted brethren 1635. Their first charter was granted 1662, which was
vacated 1684, and again resumed 1689. Through the whole of the late war, this
Statemanifested the most patriotic spirit. Since the peace they have uniformly
evinced an excessive jealousy for their rights, and, therefore, when it was
proposed to invest Congress, with power to levy an impost of five percent on
imports, by its pertinacious resistance, was the principal means of defeating
the measure. It also remained long obstinate against the adoption of the
Federal constitution. Its obstinacy, however, was at last overcome, and on May
29, 1790, it became a member of the Federal union.

Connecticut, the first grant of, made by the President and Council of Plymouth
to the Earl of Warwick 1630. The first charter was granted by Charles II. 1662.
The constitution of this State is founded on their charter, and as the people
have been contented with that form of government, they have not framed a new
constitution, since the declaration of Independence.

New York, state of, was first settled by the Dutch 1614, who surrendered to
the English, under Colonel Nichols, August 27, 1664, to whom it was confirmed
by the peace of Breda 1667. The first assembly of representatives of the people
was held 1683. On April 20, 1777, New York established an independent
constitution.

New Jersey, originally a Dutch settlement, had its first charter granted to
James Duke of York 1634, who afterward granted it to Lord Berkeley, and Sir
George Carteret 1644. The proprietors surrendered their rights to the crown
1702, and it continued a royal Government, until July 2, 1776, when the
inhabitants established an independent constitution.

Pennsylvania, charter of, granted to William Penn, March 4, 1680. The first
General Assembly met at Chester, December 4, 1682. At this time William Penn
effected an union of the lower counties, now the State of Delaware, with
Pennsylvania Mr. Penn granted a new charter, which was merely a constitution or
form of government; but as it was found inconvenient, it was given up in May
1700, and a new one granted, October 28, 1701. The inhabitants, of the lower
counties, refused to accept this charter, and thus separated themselves from
the province of Pennsylvania. They afterward had their own assembly, in which
the Governor of Pennsylvania presided. This State adopted an independent
constitution 1776; and established the present 1790.

Delaware, the State of, originally settled by the Swedes and Fins. The people
of this state, in September 1776, by their representatives, chosen for the
express purpose, assembled and established a form of government, which in 1792,
was superceded by their present constitution, see Pennsylvania.

Maryland, charter of, granted to Lord Baltimore, June 20, 1632. The first
regular assembly, was constituted by a law passed 1638; and in the year 1642,
was divided into two houses, In the year 1689, a rumor was artfully
disseminated, "that a Popish administration, supported by Papists had leagued
with Indians, to cut off the Protestants in the province; nor was it possible
for government to satisfy the people of the falsehood, folly and absurdity of
the report. The Proprietary, therefore found himself constrained to surrender
those prerogatives, which he had uniformly exercised, with an unexampled
attention to the rights of the people. In the year 1716, the government was
restored to the Proprietor, and continued in his and his successors hands till
the late revolution. The convention of this State, resolved on measures for
securing the province and providing for its defense, July 26, 1775, and on
August 14, 1776, agreed on their independent constitution.

Virginia, Virginia, according to its ancient limits, comprehended the greatest
part of the new United States, as it extended from the 34th to the 45th degree
of latitude.
first began to be settled 1584. King James I. of England, granted letters
patent to Sir Thomas Gage and his associates, for the settlement of this
country, April 10, 1606, and a second, on a more extensive scale 1609. In 1621,
two councils were appointed, the one to be called the council of State, and the
other the General Assembly. In 1624, king James suspended their charter, and in
1626, the government wholly reverted to the crown. In 1642, the Virginians
appear to have been uneasy with Cromwell's government, to which however, they
submitted in 1651, after having first secured their rights, by stipulation.
Their convention agreed on an independent constitution, July 5, 1776.

North Carolina, the inhabitants of, were but few, till the year 1700, when
their number was augmented by the arrival of a body of Palatines from Germany,
who had been reduced to the greatest indigence, by the calamities of war.
Previous to the year 1728, North and South Carolina had constituted one
government; they were then, however, divided, for the more commodious
administration of affairs. In 1775, North Carolina, united with the other
colonies against British oppression, and on December 16, 1776, established
their independent constitution.

South Carolina, including North Carolina and Georgia, the charter of, granted
1662. Their first legislative assembly convened 1669. They were at first
governed by a system framed by Mr. John Lock; but having found by experience,
that this system was inapplicable to their situation, it was abolished in 1692.
They agreed on an independent form of government in 1776, which was established
by act of the legislature, May 19, 1778. On May 11, 1779, the civil authority
proposed to general Prevost, that the state should remain neuter, till the
close of the war, and that they would then follow the fate of their neighbors,
provided, that the British army should be withdrawn. But as this proposal was
not excepted, a general revolt took place in favor of Congress, July 1780.

Georgia, the state of, obtained their charter 1732; acceded to the articles of
confederation, July 1775; and on May 6, 1789, they ratified their present
constitution, which is formed upon a plan similar to that of the United States.

Territory, N. W. of the Ohio, an ordinance of Congress was passed for its
temporary government, July 13, 1787.

Kentucky, the State of, has, perhaps, been one of the most growing colonies in
the world, as it only began to be settled in the year 1754; and in 1790,
according to the census contained 73,670 souls; but from the imperfect manner
in which that enumeration was made, the rapid increase of population, and the
continual migrations from the ^ther States, it is certain that at present, May
1795, the number must be more than double. This territory was erected into an
independent State, by act of Congress, December 6, 1790, and received into the
union, June 1, 1792.

Territory, South of the Ohio, an ordinance of Congress, for its temporary
government was passed by Congress 1787.

Wales, first inhabited by Britons, on their being expelled from England by the
Saxons 685; conquered by William I. 1091. The whole country was subdued by
Edward I. 1282. The Welsh, however were not entirely reconciled to this
revolution, till the Queen happened to be brought to bed of a son at Carnarvon,
in 1284, whom Edward styled Prince of Wales, which title, the heir apparent to
the crown of Britain, has borne ever since. Wales was incorporated with England
by act of parliament 1535.

Societies, Companies, Offices, etc.
ABOLITION Society, see Slavery.

African Company established in England, 1619.

Agricultural Society, the first in Europe, was established in Dublin about
1731, and incorporated 1750.

-- of Paris, 1761.

-- of Philadelphia, instituted 1785.

-- of the Highlands of Scotland, 1785.

-- of Massachussetts, incorporated 1792.

-- of New York, incorporated March 12, 1793.

American Academy of Arts and Sciences incorporated by the legislature of
Massachussetts, May 4, 1780. -- Philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia,
for promoting useful knowledge, formed in January 1769, by the union of two
literary societies, which then existed in Philadelphia, and were incorporated,
March 5, 1780.

Antiquarian Society incorporated at London, Nov. 2, 1751.

-- at Edinburgh, Dec. 18, 1780.

Artillery, the ancient and honorable company of, incorporated at Boston 1638.

Arts and Sciences, the society of, instituted at London 1753.

-- at New York, 1765.

-- at Boston, 1790.

BRANDYWINE Canal Navigation Company, instituted April 10, 1793.

British Herring Fishery Company, incorporated 1750.

British Society, incorporated, for extending the fisheries, 1786.

CHARITABLE Society of Massachusetts, incorporated Nov. 16, 1779.

Christian Knowledge Society for the promotion of, in foreign parts,
established in Britain 1791.

Christian Knowledge and Piety Society, for the promotion of, instituted, at
New York 1794. See Gospel.

Cincinnati, the society of, instituted by the officers of the American army,
May 13, 1783. Their first general meeting was held at Philadelphia, May 1784.

Clergymen's Widows and Orphans Corporation, established in England, July 1670.

-- for the relief of the poor and distressed of the Presbyterian Church, and
of their widows and orphans, in America 1761.

-- the Corporation for the relief of the widows and children of those in the
communion of the Protestant Episcopal Church in America, instituted May 12,
1768.

-- for the relief of the widows and orphans of those belonging to the
Congregational Church in Massachussetts, a society has been established at
Boston, but we are not certain with respect to the time of its institution.

Columbianum, or National Academy of Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, and
engraving, instituted in Philadelphia, 1795.

Conewago Canal Company of Pennsylvania, incorporated April 10, 1793.

DELAWARE and Schuylkill Canal Navigation Company, instituted in Pennsylvania,
April 10, 1792.

Democratic societies commenced, in the United States, early in the year 1793.

EAST India Company, the British Happy, thrice happy, would it have been for
India, if it had never been visited by these commercial tyrants. To relate the
many instances of rapine, desolation, and injustice which a lust of gain has
induced them to commit, would require many volumes. Let the following extracts
suffice. Lord Cornwallis, in a letter dated 18th September, 1789, has the
following remarkable words: "I can safely affirm, that one third of the
Company's territory in Indostan, is now a jungle inhabited by wild beasts;" and
Colonel Dow, a Scotch officer, who had been long in India, and who wrote the
history of Indostan, thus describes the effect of their barbarity in that
unhappy country. "The civil wars, to which our violent desire of creating
nabobs give rise, were attended with tragical events. Bengal was depopulated by
every species of public distress. In the space of six years, half the great
cities of this opulent kingdom were rendered desolate; the most fertile fields
in the world laid waste, and five millions of harmless and industrious people
were either expelled or destroyed. Want of foresight became more fatal than
innate barbarism; and men found themselves wading through blood and ruin, when
their only object was spoil."
established 1600.

-- the French, abolished by the National Assembly, and the trade laid open
January 6, 1789.

Emigrants from foreign parts. Society for their Information and Assistance,
instituted at New York 1793.

-- at Philadelphia, 1794.

-- at Boston, incorporated 1794.

Episcopal Charitable Society of Boston, established in 1724, and incorporated
Feb. 12, 1784.

FEUILLANS, a society formed in Paris, to counteract the operations of the
Jacobins, 1791. They were so called from the Feuillan convent, the place where
they held their meetings.

Freemasons excommunicated by the pope, Sept. 23, 1738.

GOSPEL, society for its propagation, instituted in Britain 1701.

-- society for its propagation among the Indians and others in North America,
incorporated in Massachussetts Nov. 19, 1787.

-- society of the Moravians, or United Brethren for propagating it amongst the
Heathens, incorporated by the state of Pennsylvania, Feb. 27, 1788.

HISTORICAL Society, established at Boston for the purpose of improving the
history of America, 1791, and incorporated 1794.

Humane Society None of these societies have been in existence 30 years, and
yet they have been the means of saving upwards of 1000 lives.
, for the purpose of recovering persons apparently dead from drowning,
strangling, etc. the first was instituted at Amsterdam 1769.

-- of London 1774.

-- of Philadelphia instituted 1780, and incorporated 1793.

-- of Boston, incorporated 1791.

INSURANCE Company of North America, and the Insurance Company of Pennsylvania,
incorporated 1794. There are also two other insurance companies in
Philadelphia, viz. the Philadelphia Contributionship, and the Mutual Insurance
Company.

JACOBIN societies in France, originated in a secret association of about forty
gentlemen and men of letters, who, for some years previous to the late
revolution, met for the purpose of disseminating political knowledge among the
people. Their meetings were held in the Jacobin Convent, and hence originated
the name. In the year 1791, these institutions were established all over France.

MARINE Society established in England 1756.

-- of Newport, Rhode Island, 1752.

-- of New York about 1770.

-- of Boston, about 1793.

-- of Charleston, S. C. 1793.

Manufactures Every friend to America must rejoice at the rapid progress of its
manufactures, and those gentlemen of affluence who employ their capital in
promoting them, may be said with propriety to deserve well of their country.
Amongst this number, there is none more conspicuous than John Nicholson, Esquire
late Comptroller General of the state of Pennsylvania, who is at present
concerned, as principal, in the following manufactures, now either in
operation, or contracted for, and in preparation, in and near the city of
Philadelphia; 1st. a factory for making the machinery and apparatus necessary
for carding and spinning cotton; 2d. a ditto for wool; 3d. two mills for
carrying on the carding and spinning of cotton, one of 2500 spindles, and the
other of 500; 4th. a cotton stocking factory, to consist of forty looms; 5th.
another ditto of a less number to be increased as it progresses; 6th. a factory
of weavers, to consist of 40 looms or more; 7th. a factory for making the
machinery for carding and spinning wool; 8th. a manufactory for making the
machinery for cotton printing and bleeching; 9th. a cotton printing and
bleaching factory; 10th. a factory for making cloths, without spinning or
weaving; 11th. a hat manufactory on an improved plan; 12th. a button
manufactory; 13th. a manufactory for clearing buttons; 14th. a manufactory for
making planes and all such kinds of edge tools; 15th. a glass manufactory;
16th. a manufactory for making oil cloths, floor cloths, etc. 17th. a newly
invented manufactory for weaving straps for carriages, hollow hose, for fire
engines, ships, etc. 18th. a foundery for casting; 19th. a manufactory for
constructing Rumsey's improvements on mills; 20th a manufactory to make steam
engines applicable to mills, breweries, watering cities, etc. with various
others on a less scale.
, the Pennsylvania society for encouraging, instituted 1787.

Manufactures, the New York society for, about the same time.

Manufacturing Society, the National, at Patterson, New Jersey, incorporated
1791.

Medical Society at Dublin, instituted 1785.

-- of Philadelphia, 1787; incorporated 1789.

-- of New York, 1787.

-- of New Jersey, Charleston, S. C. and Connecticut, about 1790.

-- of Philadelphia, 1793.

Military Society established at Tonlon 1682.

NORTHERN Inland Navigation Company of New York, incorporated 1792.

PARIS, the Sorbonne Academy for Divinity, instituted 1256: for painting 1359:
the Royal Academy of Inscriptions and Belles lettres, 1663.

Philadelphia and Lancaster Turnpike Company, instituted April 9, 1792.

Physicians, the College of, in Philadelphia, incorporated 1789.

-- in New York, instituted 1794.

Prisons, Society for alleviating the Miseries of, instituted at Philadelphia,
May 1787.

-- at New York about the same time.

REFORMATION of Manners, a Society for promoting the, instituted in England
School.

Royal Society, London, instituted Dec. 30, 1660; incorporated 1663.

SCHUYLKILL and Susquehannah Navigation, incorporated by the state of
Pennsylvania, Sept. 29, 1791.

Slavery The zeal and activity of this society has been crowned with uncommon
success, and has given rise to a number of similar institutions, not only in
the United States, but also in Europe. A convention of delegates from the
different societies in the United States, met at Philadelphia, January 1, 1794,
when they elected Joseph Bloomfield, New Jersey, as their president. In
consequence of a memorial which they presented to Congress, the citizens and
residents of the United States were, by a law, passed March 22, 1794,
prohibited from "procuring, from any foreign kingdom, place or country, the
inhabitants of such kingdom, place or country, to be transported to any foreign
country, port or place whatever, to be sold or disposed of as slaves." In
January 1795, delegates from the several societies again met in convention at
Philadelphia, when they elected Benjamin Rush, M. D. as president, and Walter
Franklin, Esquire of Philadelphia, secretary.

The members elected by the different societies to compose this convention,
were as follows:

From the Connecticut Society, Jonathan Edwards, Uriah Tracy, Zephaniah Swift.

-- Providence Society, (Rhode Island,) Theodore Foster, George Benson.

-- New York Society, John Murray, jun. William S. Johnson, Lawrence Embree,
William Dunlap, William Walton Woolsey.

-- New Jersey, Joseph Bloomfield, William Coxe, jun. James Sloan, John Wistar
and Franklin Davenport.

-- Pennsylvania Society, William Rawle, Robert Patterson, Benjamin Rush,
Samuel Coats, Caspar Wistar, James Todd, Benjamin Say.

-- Washington Society, in Pennsylvania, Thomas Scot, Absalom Beard, Samuel
Clark.

-- Delaware Society, Richard Basset, John Ralston, Allen M'Lane, Caleb Boyer.

-- Wilmington Society, state of Delaware, Cyrus Newlin, James A. Byard, Joseph
Warner, William Poole:

-- Maryland Society, Samuel Sterret, Adam Fonerdon, Joseph Townsend, Joseph
Thornburgh, George Buchanan, John Bankson, Philip Moore.

Chestertown Society, (Maryland), Edward Scott, James Houston.

There is also a society at Choptank, Maryland, and another at Richmond,
Virginia. The convention are again to meet on the 1st of January 1796. We may
add, that the Pennsylvania Society has the glory of having originated this
system of opposition to the traffic and commerce of our fellow creatures; and
that from a very extensive and regular correspondence kept up between it, and
those founded on similar principles, in the different parts of the world, there
is every reason to believe that their efforts will be finally crowned with
complete success. The French convention has already declared liberty to all men
without exception. Long debates have taken place in the British parliament on
the same subject, and it is likely, that, by that government, the trade will be
speedily abolished. In several of the American states there are few, and in
others no slaves. That there should be any under a government of equal liberty,
and which declares that all men are born alike free, must to the thinking part
of mankind, excite astonishment: but the present citizens of the United States
are too enlightened, for a much longer time, to tolerate such an enormity,
which experience has confirmed to be subversive of justice and morality,
incompatible with sound policy, repugnant to the principles of a republican
government, and contradictory to the benevolent spirit of the Christian
religion.


, the Society for promoting the abolition of, the first was formed in
Pennsylvania in 1774.

South Sea Company, London, incorporated 1556.

Stockholm, the Royal Academy of Sciences, instituted 1750.

Susquehannah, the Company for building a Bridge over it, instituted April
11th, 1793.

TURKEY Company incorporated by Britain, 1579.

VINES. Company for promoting their cultivation, instituted March 22, 1793.

WESTERN Inland Navigation Company of New York, incorporated 1792.

Earthquakes, Famines, Inundations, Storms, Tempests, Frosts, Accidental Fires,
etc.
ALEXANDRIA library, which contained 400,000 manuscripts, destroyed by fire 47
years B. C.

Amsterdam opera-house burnt, when 150 persons lost their lives 1772. The
admiralty house and its valuable stores were destroyed by fire, July 6, 1791.

Archangel, Russia, damaged by a dreadful fire, Oct. 16, 1777.

Ardschinschan, in Turkey, destroyed by an earthquake, when 12,000 inhabitants
were buried in the ruins, 1784.

Arequipo, in South America, almost ruined by an earthquake, 1584.

Avelino, a city in Naples, destroyed by an earthquake, Nov. 29, 1732.

BALBEC, Turkey, totally obliterated by an earthquake, Dec. 5, 1759.

Barbados, the island of, much damaged by fire in May and December 1766: much
damaged by a dreadful hurricane, which destroyed many houses, and left none on
the island undamaged, Oct. 10, 1780. A peregrination of the earth destroyed
several habitations, mills, etc. etc. October 16, 1784: much damaged by a
storm, Sept. 2, 1786: much injured by a hurricane, Oct. 23, 1793.

Berghen, in Norway, had 1600 families burnt out of their dwellings, 1756;
considerably damaged by fire, January 1795, when the flames were at last
extinguished by the intrepidity of the crews of some French frigates lying in
that harbor, to whom, on the 22d January, the magistrates and citizens
returned their public thanks.

Boston, Massachusetts, sustained a great loss by fire, in which 45 dwelling
houses, one meeting house, and several stores were consumed, 1676; again Aug.
8, 1679, when 80 dwelling houses, 70 warehouses, and several vessels were
consumed; sustained some injury by an earthquake, Oct. 29, 1727; sustained a
loss by fire, of its courthouse and records, Dec. 23, 1747; damaged by fire to
the amount of 444,000 dollars, March 20, 1760; again in 1761, 1764, and in
1775; upwards of 100 houses burnt, April 20, 1787; much damage sustained by
fire, Dec. 1794.

Brazil sustained some damage by an earthquake 1772.

Breast magazine destroyed by fire, to the value of at least 30,000,000 dollars,
Jan. 19, 1744; the marine hospital burnt with 50 galley slaves, Dec. 1, 1766;
the magazine destroyed by fire, to the value of between four and five millions
of dollars, July 10, 1784.

Bridgetown, Barbados, destroyed by fire, April 18, 1668; had 160 dwelling
houses destroyed by a fire, Feb. 8, 1756; much damaged by fire Feb. 14, 1758;
again May 14, 1766; again Dec. 27, 1767.

Brussels greatly damaged by a fire, and the ducal palace consumed, Jan. 31,
1730.

Burwell, in Cambridgeshire, England, had a barn with 160 persons in it, set
fire to by carelessness, when every soul, except six, perished in the flames,
Sept. 8, 1727.

CALLAO, in Peru, destroyed by an earthquake, Nov. 1746, when all the
inhabitants perished except one man, who was standing on an eminence, and to
whose relief the sea providentially threw a boat.

Carlscrone, Russia, had 1087 houses, two churches, all the merchants houses
except two, and all their magazines destroyed by fire, June 17, 1790.

Carolina greatly damaged by a storm 1722 and 1728.

Ceuta, in Barbary, had 200 houses blown down by a storm, Feb. 1752.

Chambersburgh, Pennsylvania, damaged by fire, Aug. 1, 1793.

Charlestown, New England, greatly damaged by a storm, 1761; burnt by the
British troops, June 17, 1775.

Charlestown, South Carolina, a hurricane at, and most of the town consumed by
fire, 1699; half laid in ruins by a fire Nov. 1740; infested and much
distressed with worms, June 1751; destroyed by a hurricane, Sept. 15, 1753; had
250 dwelling houses, besides out houses burnt, to the amount of 444,000
dollars, Jan. 15, 1778.

Chelm, in Poland, had 268 dwelling houses, and 107 ware houses destroyed by a
fire, May 4, 1788.

Chester, England, nearly destroyed by an accidental fire 1471: a great number
of people killed by an accidental explosion of gun powder, Nov. 5, 1722.

Chigi, a principality in Italy, had a fire which extended upwards of 12 miles,
not leaving the vestige of a tree or even a vine, Aug. 1788. The cause was
unknown.

Chili, almost the whole kingdom of, swallowed up by an earthquake, together
with its capital St. Jago, 1730.

Cologne, Germany, received great damage by a flood, and had its bridge, with
100 persons, besides carts, etc. carried away, Dec. 1, 1747.

Colossus of Rhodes, which weighed 720,000 lbs. weight, thrown down by an
earthquake, 214 B. C.

Constantinople had above 12000 houses and 7000 inhabitants destroyed by a
fire, Sept. 27, 1729; again which burnt five days, May 31, 1745; again which
destroyed 12,000 houses, Jan. 29, 1750; again which consumed about 10,000 in
June following; 7000 persons killed by the plague, 1751; nearly destroyed by an
earthquake, and 3000 inhabitants killed, Sept. 2, 1754; 500 houses burnt 1756;
considerable havoc made by fires in 1761, 1765, 1767, 1769, and 1771; 600
houses were burnt Feb. 19, 1782; and 7000 on the 10th June following; had
10,000 houses burnt Aug. 5, 1784; and in the year 1791, some time between March
and July, there were no less than 32,000 houses destroyed.

Copenhagen burnt 1778, when 77 streets were destroyed. Its palace totally
consumed by fire, December 1794.

Corah, Da^han and Abiram swallowed up by the earth, 1489 B. C.

Crediton in Devonshire, England, had 460 houses destroyed by a fire, Aug. 14,
1753.

Crementz in Hungary, totally destroyed by a fire, 1777.

Constadt, near Petersburgh, Russia, greatly damaged by a fire, 1791.

Cuba island damaged by an earthquake, 1530; again by an earthquake and storm
of rain, June 21, 1791, when 3000 persons and 11,700 cattle perished.

DAMAS, in Barbary, nearly destroyed by an earthquake, with 60,000 inhabitants,
Dec. 3, 1759.

Danbury, Connecticut, burnt by the British, with large quantities of
Continental stores, April 26, 1777; much damaged by lightning, July 6, 1793.

Deerfield, Massachusetts, burnt, and the inhabitants carried off as prisoners,
by the French and Indians, Feb. 1703.

Delaware river, a great flood in, which swept away several dwelling houses
situated on the low grounds about the falls, 1692.

Delft in Holland, nearly destroyed by a fire, 1536.

Deluge of Ducalion, in Thessaly, 1529 B. C.

-- the general, threatened, in the year of the world 1546, i. e. 2348 before
Christ, Noah being then about 600 years old, and continued 377 days. Noah left
the ark Dec. 18, 2347 B. C.

Diana, the temple of, at Ephesus, burnt 1148 B. C.

Domingo St. the isle of, nearly destroyed, and the town of Port au Prince
almost consumed by the revolting negroes, Oct. Nov. and Dec. 1791.

Drury Lane theater, London, with near 60 houses destroyed by a fire, Jan. 1672.

Dublin House of Commons, etc. destroyed by fire, Feb. 27, 1792.

EARTHQUAKE, one in Asia, which overturned 12 cities 17; Herculaneum buried by
one 79; four cities in Asia, two in Greece, and three in Galatia, overturned
107. Antioch destroyed by an earthquake, 115; one swallowed up Nicodemia and
several other cities, 120; one in Macedonia swallowed up 150 cities, 357; a
terrible one, with an inundation, when 50,000 persons were destroyed at
Alexandria, July 1, 365; one which continued from September to November, and
swallowed up several cities in Europe, 394; one which swallowed up several
villages in the neighborhood of Cybyra, 417; one which destroyed Antioch,
Sept. 14, 458; one at Constantinople, which lasted 40 days, and overturned
several edifices, 480; another at Antioch, which destroyed 4800 inhabitants,
528; one which shook France, Germany, and Italy, and threw down St. Paul's at
Rome, April 801; one throughout all England, which was afterward followed by a
scarcity, 1090; one which swallowed up the city of Catania, and more than 1500
hundred souls, 1137; in Hungary and England, 1179; one at Calabria in Sicily,
when a city and its inhabitants were lost in the Adriatic sea, 1186; the
greatest ever known in England, Nov. 14, 1318; a dreadful one in Germany, 1346;
a dreadful one at Lisbon, which continued eight days, overthrew 1500 houses,
and killed 30,000 persons, Feb. 1531; a whole province in China was, in one
moment, absorbed into the earth, and all the towns and inhabitants buried in an
immense lake of water, 1556; one in Naples and Sicily, which swallowed up
several towns and 30,000 persons, 1638, one in Chili, when several whole
mountains sunk into the earth, one after another, 1646; 100,000 people perished
by an earthquake in Sicily, Jan. 1693; Palermo, in Sicily, nearly destroyed,
and 6000 persons lost their lives, Sept. 2, 1726; in New, Jersey Nov. 1726 and
1732; again Dec. 7, 1737, Nov. 18, 1755, and Oct. 30, 1763; a remarkable one at
Massachussetts, and other places in New England, Oct. 29, 1727; the whole of
the kingdom of Chili swallowed up, and also St. Jago, 1730; four provinces in
China swallowed up July 31, 1731; in Calabria in Sicily, when the territory of
Nova Casa sunk 29 feet without destroying a building, April 18, 1733; in
Ireland, which destroyed five churches and upwards of 100 houses, Aug. 1734;
one in the beginning of the present century, which laid waste the whole country
of Peru in a quarter of an hour, 300 leagues long and 90 wide; a terrible one
at Lima, which entirely destroyed that city, and 5000 persons lost their lives;
there were 74 churches, 14 monasteries, and 15 hospitals thrown down, and the
loss in effects reckoned immense. This earthquake continued from Oct. 27, to
Nov. 20, 1746, and extended to Callao, which was also destroyed; in London Feb.
8, and March 8, 1750, and in several other places in the south of England,
April 2, 1750; Grand Cairo had two-thirds of the houses, and 40,000 inhabitants
swallowed up, Sept. 2, 1754; the city of Quito, in Peru, destroyed April 24,
1755; a terrible one Nov. 1, 1755, which did considerable damage at Oporto in
Portugal, and Seville in Spain, but more particularly at Lisbon, where, in
about eight minutes, most of the houses, and 50,000 inhabitants were destroyed;
the cities of Coimbra and Bruga suffered, and St. Ubes was swallowed up; the
calamities occasioned by this earthquake were immense, as it extended no less
than 5000 miles; at the Azores islands, when 10,000 were buried in the ruins,
and the island divided into two, July 9, 1757: at Bourdeaux in France, Aug. 11,
1758; Truxillo in Peru, was swallowed up by one Nov. 1759; at Martinico, Aug.
1767, when 1600 persons lost their lives; Guatimala in New Spain, entirely
swallowed up, and many thousand inhabitants perished, Dec. 15, 1773; at Tauris
in Persia, when 15,000 houses were thrown down, and great part of the
inhabitants perished, March 3, 1780; great part of Calabria in the island of
Sicily was destroyed, and 30,000 people lost their lives, Feb. 25, 1783;
another in the same island did great damage 1784; one in the North of England,
Aug. 11, 1786; in Mexico, and in other parts of New Spain, April 18, 1787; in
Scotland Oct. 1791; a slight shock perceived in Pennsylvania, early in 1792.

Edinburgh burnt, 1544.

Egg Island, in the river St. Lawrence, eight English frigates wrecked upon,
and 1000 men perished, Aug. 23, 1711.

E^erghan, on the confines of Armenia, destroyed by an earthquake, with 6000
inhabitants, July 18, 1784.

FAIRFIELD, town of, in Connecticut, burnt by the British, July 7, 1779.

Falmouth, in New England, destroyed by the British, Oct. 18, 1775.

Famine, which lasted seven years, 1708 B. C.; at Rome, when the distress was
so great that many people threw themselves into the Tiber, and were drowned,
440 B. C.; in Britain, so that the wretched inhabitants were glad to eat the
barks of trees, A. D. 272; one in Scotland, when thousands of the inhabitants
were starved, 306; in England and Wales, when 40,000 people perished, 310; all
over Britain, 325; at Constantinople, 446; in Italy, when parents eat their
children, 450; in Scotland, 576; all over England, Wales, and Scotland, 739;
another in Wales, 747; in Wales and Scotland, 792; again in Scotland, 803, and
in 823; a severe one in Wales, 836; in Scotland which lasted four years, 954;
famines were in England, 864, 974, 976, 1005; in England and France from 1193
to 1195; in England 1251, 1315, 1318, 1335, 1348; in England and France, called
the dear summer, 1353; in England 1389 and 1348; in Scotland from 1695 to School,
when thousands perished, and according to a writer, Mr. Fletcher.
of these times, the distress was so great, that 200,000 people were begging
from door to door; great scarcity in Scotland and Ireland, 1783, when the poor
suffered greatly; famine in Paris, and diverse parts of France, 1789; great
scarcity at present (1795) in Britain, Poland, and diverse parts of Europe.

Flushing, in Zealand, damaged by fire, and the prince of Orange's house burnt,
Jan. 1749.

Fog, a, so remarkable in London, that several chairmen mistook their way in
St. James's park, and fell with their fares into the canal; many persons fell
into Fleetditch; and considerable damage was done on the Thames, Jan. 1, 1729.

-- a remarkable, in Long Island, which seemed to be sent by Divine Providence
to cover the retreat of the American army, after the battle of Flatbush, Aug.
27, 1776.

-- at Amsterdam, so great that 230 persons perished by falling into the
canals, Jan. 10, 1790.

Frosts, remarkable; a severe one in Scotland, which lasted for 14 weeks, 359;
the sea of Pontus, and that between Constantinople and Scutari, 401; so severe
a frost all over Britain, that the rivers were frozen up for above two months,
508: one so great, that the Danube was quite frozen over, 558; carriages were
used on the Adriatic sea, 859; the Mediterranean sea was frozen over and
passable in carts in 860; most of the rivers in England frozen for two months,
908; the Thames frozen for 13 weeks, 923; a frost in England on midsummer day
so vehement, that the corn and fruits were destroyed, 1035; the Mediterranean
sea was frozen over, and the merchants past their merchandise in carts, 1234;
the Cattegat sea, between Norway and Denmark was frozen 1294; the sea from
Sweden to Gothland frozen 1296; the Baltic was passable for foot passengers and
horsemen for six weeks, in 1323; again in 1402; the sea between Constantinople
and Iskodar was passable on ice, in 1620; a great frost in England for three
months, with heavy snows, from December to March 1709; again, when a fair was
held on the Thames in 1716; a very severe frost in Russia, 1747; in America so
severe in the winter of 1780 and 1781, that in January the pas^^ge between New
York and State^ Island was practicable for the heaviest cannon; in England
January 1789, when the Thames was crossed on the ice opposite the custom house,
the tower, etc. This frost was at the same time general in Europe, particularly
in Holland; frost and snow, with hail, in different parts of England at
midsummer 1791; and in Italy and Spain in December following; the most
remarkable frost in Europe which has happened in this century, was in the
present winter 1794 and 1795, when the Zuyder sea in Holland was frozen over, a
circumstance which has not happened in the memory of man. This frost was also
intensely severe in Britain, Ireland, etc.

GABEL in Bohemia, a large town, totally destroyed by fire, May 11, 1788.

Gera, near Leipsic in Germany, totally destroyed by a fire Sept. 18, 1780.

Gibraltar nearly destroyed by a storm, Feb. 3, 1766.

Goodwin sands, on the coast of Kent, in England, occasioned by an inundation
of the sea, 1100.

Gottenburgh had 120 houses destroyed by fire, March 2, 1792.

Grand Cairo nearly destroyed by an earthquake, and 40,000 inhabitants lost,
June 2, 1754.

Greenwich hospital, London, had its chapel and one quadrangle of the whole
building destroyed by a fire, Jan. 2, 1779.

Grenada, a dreadful fire there, by which the town of St. George was entirely
consumed, Nov. 1, 1772.

Groton, town of, in Connecticut, burnt by Benedict Arnold, Sept. 6, 1781.

Guatimala, in New Spain, much damaged by an inundation, Sept. 1541; entirely
swallowed up by an earthquake. Dec. 15, 1773.

HAIL, a remarkable shower of, at Philadelphia, accompanied with thunder and
lightning, May 22, 1794; several hailstones measured from two to two and a
half inches in circumference. See Storms.

Herculaneum, in Italy, totally overwhelmed by an eruption of Mount Vesuvius,
Nov. 1, 79: its ruins discovered 1747; 150 volumes of MSS. found there, 1754.

Honiton, in Devonshire, England, nearly destroyed by a fire, July 19, 1747;
140 houses burnt there, 1765; 37 houses destroyed there, May 1790.

INUNDATIONS, one of the sea, which overflowed 4000 acres of Earl Goodwin's
estate in Kent, England, since called the Goodwin sands, 1100; one in Holland,
when the sea broke in at Dert, and drowned 72 villages and 100,000 people;
another in 1421, by which the Zuyder sea was formed; one in Catalonia, Spain,
from continued rains, attended with a storm, which destroyed more than 50,000
persons, 1617; one at New Castle on Tyne, in England, by which upwards of 120
persons were drowned, 1633; one in Yorkshire, England, in which a rock visibly
opened, and water was thrown into the air, to the height of an ordinary church
steeple, 1686; an inundation of the Delaware, which swept away several dwelling
houses, 1692; in Zealand, when the sea broke the dykes, and covered the whole
country with water, 1300 people lost their lives; at Naples, where it carried
away a whole village, and drowned 200 of the inhabitants, Nov. 10, 1773; in
different parts of Germany and in England, in the fall of 1785, when some
thousands had their houses and property destroyed; in Spain, Sept. 17, 1787,
when 2000 people lost their lives, and all the buildings of several villages
were swept away by the currents from the mountains. A terrible inundation by
the Liffey in Ireland, which did considerable damage in Dublin and its
environs, Nov. 12, 1787; of the North river at New York, which considerably
damaged the docks, etc. Sept. 1788; dreadful inundations in Scotland and the
North of England, March 1795.

JAGO St. a storm at, which did much damage, and the hail stones were as large
as oranges, July, 1772.

Jamaica, an earthquake at, June 7, 1692, which shook the whole island to the
foundation, and totally destroyed the city Port Royal, so as not to leave in
one quarter not even the smallest vestige standing; a dreadful hurricane here,
August 30, 1722; again Sept. 1, 1734, and Oct. 1744; another which did much
damage, Aug. 10, 1751; October 3, 1780. This island was greatly damaged by a
dreadful hurricane, which almost overwhelmed the little seaport town of
Savannah la Mer, and great part of the adjacent country. It also overturned
almost every house, and killed a great number of people; another did
considerable damage July 30, 1784; and again in 1790. Five ships, three brigs,
a snow, two schooners, many wharves, etc. destroyed by an extraordinary swell
of the sea, Oct. 21. 1793.

John's Town, St. Antigua, destroyed by a storm, Aug. 17, and 31, 1772; by fire
1769.

KINGSTON, Jamaica, greatly damaged by fire, Feb. 9, 1782.

-- in Ulster county, New York, burnt by the British, 1777.

Kitts St. alias St. Christopher's, damaged by a storm, and 30 ships left on
its coast, 1733; greatly damaged by fire, 1768; suffered an immense loss by
storm, and the town of Bassaterre destroyed by fire, Sept. 5, 1776.

LIGHTNING, see Storms.

Lima, a terrible earthquake there, 1586; another, Oct. 28, 1746, which
continued from Oct. 27, to Nov. 20, by which 50,000 persons lost their lives,
and 74 churches, 14 monasteries, and 15 hospitals were thrown down.

Lisbon destroyed by an earthquake, 1531, again Nov. 1, 1755, when in a few
minutes most of the houses, and 50,000 inhabitants were destroyed; considerable
damage done by one, Nov. 27, 1791.

Liverpool, England, much damaged by a storm, June 29, 1789.

London, great part of it destroyed by fire, 982; a fire on London bridge,
which destroyed 2000 persons, July 10, 1212; the remarkable fire there, which
commenced Sept. 2, 1666, eastward from the monument erected to perpetuate its
memory, at the distance of 202 feet (the height of that column). It began about
midnight, and being driven on by a high wind, not only wasted the adjacent
parts, but also very remote places, with incredible fury. It consumed 89
churches, the city gates, Guildhall, many public structures, hospitals,
schools, libraries, a vast number of stately edifices, 13,000 dwelling houses,
and 400 streets. Of the 26 wards, it utterly destroyed 15, and left eight
others shattered and half burnt. To the estates and fortunes of the citizens it
was merciless, but to their lives very favorable. Three days after its
commencement, when this fatal fire had baffled all human councils and
endeavors, in the opinion of all, it stopped, as it were by a command from
heaven, and was on every side extinguished; 150 houses were burnt there, Dec.
4, 1716; Collon's wharf burnt there, August 12, 1751; King Street, Covent
Garden, had 50 houses burnt, Dec. 23, 1759; the Opera house, in the Hay-market,
was burnt June 17, 1789; at the foot of Westminster bridge, a fire happened,
Feb. 18, 1790, when 20 people were killed; 60 houses, and several vessels were
burnt there, Sept. 14, 1791; the Pantheon, in Oxford street, burnt, Jan. 14,
1792; a dreadful fire there, which in a short time consumed some hundreds of
houses, toward the end of the year 1794.

Lucia St. the island of, had 900 inhabitants destroyed by an earthquake, Oct.
12, 1788.

MADRID, Spain, had 80 houses destroyed by fire, Jan. 15, 1790.

Martinico greatly damaged by an earthquake, when 1600 persons lost their
lives, August 1767.

Medfield, town of, in Massachusetts, about half burnt by the Indians, Feb.
1675.

Messina in Sicily, destroyed by an earthquake. 1693; again by an earthquake,
which spread desolation far and wide, Feb. 5, 1783, when upwards of 40,000
persons perished; it again sustained considerable damage, 1784.

Meteline, island, in the Archipelago, had 2000 houses, etc. destroyed by an
earthquake, May 27, 1755.

Montreal, Canada, greatly damaged by fire, 1765 and 1768; and again in the
winter of 1794.

Moscow, Russia, had 2000 houses destroyed by a fire, July 1736; again in 1750,
and in 1752, when no less than 18,000 houses were burnt.

NEWBERN, North Carolina, had 160 houses destroyed by fire, Sept. 21, 1791.

Newfoundland, a terrible storm on the coasts of, Sept. 1775; had a
considerable part of its woods burnt, near St. John's, 1776.

Newgate, a prison in London, burnt by those rioters who assumed the name of
the Protestant Association, June 6, 1780,

New England greatly damaged by a hurricane, August 15, 1788.

New London, Connecticut, burnt by Benedict Arnold, Sept. 13, 1781.

New Orleans almost entirely destroyed by fire, March 19, 1788; again Dec. 1794.

New York, the government house, etc. burnt Dec. 29, 1773; it surrendered to
the British forces, Sept. 15, 1776, at which time a terrible fire broke out,
and 1000 houses were consumed; an accidental fire destroyed 300 houses, August
7, 1778; a severe hurricane there, which did considerable damage to shipping,
etc. and 16 people in boats on the river were drowned, August 16, 1792.

Norfolk, Virginia, burnt by sailors, negroes, etc. by order of Lord Dunmore,
Jan. 1, 1776.

Northampton, and several other towns in Massachussetts, burnt and plundered by
the Indians, March 1, 1676.

Norwalk, Connecticut, burnt by the British, July 7, 1779.

Nova Castello, in Italy, and several villages, destroyed by an earthquake,
Sept. 30, 1789.

ORAN, on the coast of Barbary, with the greatest part of its inhabitants,
destroyed by an earthquake, Oct. 8, 1790.

Oxford, England, a terrible fire at, April 25, 1671.

PALERMO, in Italy, destroyed by an earthquake, August 21, 1726.

Panama, a city built at the isthmus of, totally destroyed by fire, 1737.

Paris consumed by fire, 558; the Concergierie prison burnt, and much damage
sustained otherwise, January 1766.

Patrasse, in the Morea, swallowed up by an earthquake, April 18, 1785.

Peru, South America, a terrible earthquake there, which destroyed several
towns and villages, stopped the currents of rivers, and overturned mountains,
1581.

Petersburgh, Russia, had 2000 houses destroyed by a fire, August 12, 1736;
much damaged by an inundation and storm, Sept. 23, 1777. It suffered
exceedingly by fire, August 26, 1780; again Nov. 28, when it had 11,000 houses
destroyed.

Petersburgh, Virginia, the shipping and some stores at, destroyed by the
British, April 26, 1781.

Philadelphia, much distressed by the yellow fever, 1699; again 1762; much
damaged by fire, May 9, 1791; again May 10, 1793. The printing office of T.
Dobson, and several other houses, destroyed by fire, Sept. 8, 1793; the
Lutheran church burnt there, Dec. 26, 1794. See Yellow fever.

Phillipoli, in Romania, had 4000 persons destroyed by an earthquake, Feb. 1750.

Pieree, in Martinico, had 700 houses burnt, Oct. 1752.

Plague, almost the whole world visited by one 767 B. C.; one so dreadful at
Rome, as to carry off 10,000 people in a day, 78; a terrible one all over
Europe, Asia, and Africa, which lasted near fifty years, 577; in England, which
carried off 30,000 people, 772; in Scotland, which swept away 40,000
inhabitants, 954; in England 1025, 1247, and 1347; in Germany, which cut off
93,000 people, 1348; in France and England very dreadful, 1362: again 1379; in
London, which killed 30,000 persons, 1407; again 1477 and in 1499, which cut
off 30,000 people; throughout England so terrible, that half the people died,
1517; in London, which carried off 30,578 persons, 1604; at Constantinople,
when 200,000 persons died, 1611; at London, which carried off 35,417
inhabitants, 1625; again 1631; at Lions, in France, which carried off 60,000
people, 1632. The great plague, as it was emphatically called, at London, was
brought there in some Levant goods, which came from Holland, about the close of
the year 1664. These goods were carried to a house near Drury Lane, where they
were first opened, and here two Frenchmen died in a few days after. The
disorder speedily communicated to other houses in the neighborhood, when
several of the inhabitants, being struck with terror, removed to different
parts of the city, and thus the plague began to spread. Its further progress
was checked by a hard frost, which set in this winter, and continued till the
month of March 1665, when its virulence again revived. As soon as the
magistrates sound that the contagion extended into different parts of the city,
an order was issued for shutting up infected houses, to stop the communication
of the disorder. These houses had red crosses painted on the doors, with this
inscription, Lord, have mercy upon us! and watchmen were placed before them, to
hand the afflicted, necessaries and medicines, and to prevent them from coming
abroad, until 40 days after their recovery. But notwithstanding every caution,
the contagion continued to spread; so that in the first week of July the bills
of mortality rose to 725; the next week to 1089; the third week to 1843; and
the next week to 2010: in August the deaths amounted to between 8 and 10,000
per week. Toward the fall, the disorder became less frequent, and yielded to
the force of medicine; and in the winter this great enemy of mankind received
an effectual check. According to the bills of mortality, the number of burials
this year was 97,306; of which number 68,596, were attributed to the plague.
The registers were, however, very inaccurately kept; and it was the opinion of
eyewitnesses, that at least 100,000 perished by the plague.

The great plague at Marseilles, in France, was brought there from Syria, in
May 1720; its progress was at first extremely slow, and the physicians, who had
opened some dead bodies, and declared the dangerous nature of the disorder,
were insulted by the rabble: nor was it, till the end of July, that the
inhabitants began to perceive their danger. A variety of expedients were then
adopted to prevent the spreading of the distemper, as well as the progress of
famine, which, likewise, began to stare them in the face. Fires were kindled in
different parts of the city, but, from experience, at Marseilles and other
places, fires appear rather to have the effect of spreading, than checking the
progress of contagious disorders. On the 21st of August the number of dead
increased so prodigiously, that the magistrates found it impracticable to get
them carried out of town to be thrown into the pits: they were, therefore,
under the necessity of getting the assistance of the galley slaves, and having
them buried in the vaults of the churchyards. In the month of September the
disease raged with unabated fury; in the month of October, it began to decrease
without any visible cause. In November the contagion continued to decrease; and
by the first of December, the danger was supposed to be at an end. It was not,
however, entirely removed till the month of March following. The deaths were
estimated at between 50 and 60,000.

A plague at Messina in Italy, Feb. 1743; at Algiers, 1755; at Bassera in
Persia, when 80,000 persons perished, 1773; at Smyrna, which carried off about
20,000 inhabitants, 1784; at Tunis, in Barbary, 32,000 people were carried off,
1784. The plague raged in the Levant, 1786; again 1791; carried off 300,000
people in Egypt, 1792; at Algiers, which carried off several of our American
brethren, 1794; according to the last accounts from Europe, it at present,
1795, rages in Turkey and Poland. It would be endless to mention how often it
has been at Constantinople, as it appears to be seldom absent from that city.

Plagues, the ten of Egypt, 1494 B. C.

Portland isle, near England, had 100 yards of its north end sunk into the sea,
Dec. 20, 1735. The pier, with part of the land, near half a mile square, was
washed into the sea, Feb. 1792.

Port Royal, in Jamaica, destroyed by an earthquake, June 7, 1692; by a fire,
1703; by a hurricane, Aug. 28, 1722; again by a storm, Oct. 20, 1744; sustained
damage by a fire to the amount of between 4 and 500,000 dollars, 1750;
destroyed by a terrible storm, July 30, 1784.

Port-au-Prince, in St. Domingo, had 150 houses burnt, June 29, 1784; nearly
the whole town was burnt by the insurgents, Dec. 1, 1791.

Portsmouth dock yard, England, received damage to the amount of nearly
2,000,000 dollars, July 3, 1760; again July 27, 1770, which did damage to the
amount of 450,000 dollars; again Dec. 7, 1776.

Portsmouth, in Virginia, destroyed by the British forces, Jan. 1, 1776; again
May 11, 1779.

Posing, in Hungary destroyed by a fire to the number of 107 houses, Sept. 7,
1784.

Providence, Rhode Island, destroyed by the Indians, 1675.

QUITO, in Peru, much injured by an earthquake, 1600; destroyed by one, April
24, 1755.

RAIN, violent, in Scotland, for five months, 553; a continual rain in Scotland
for five months, 918; a violent one in London, 1222; again 1233; excessively
violent in the fall of 1330; so heavy that the corn was spoiled, 1338; in
England from midsummer to Christmas, so that there was not one day or night dry
together, 1348; a violent rain in the north of England, which did considerable
damage, 1789; in the island of Cuba, when 3000 persons, and 11,700 cattle of
various kinds perished by the torrents occasioned by the rain, June 21, 1791.

Richmond, in Virginia, destroyed, with a quantity of public stores, by
Benedict Arnold, Jan. 5, 1781: had 100 houses to the value of nearly 500,000
dollars destroyed, Dec. 17, 1786.

Rokitzau, in Bohemia, totally destroyed by fire, to the value of about
7,000,000 dollars, Sept. 10, 1784.

Rome burnt by Nero, 65; the capital burnt 83 B. C. Pompey's theater burnt 250
B. C.; an alarming fire there, which destroyed many houses, Jan. 1795.

Ruppin, in Brandenburgh, destroyed by fire, when 600 houses were burnt, Sept.
1787.

SARDINIAN Ambassador's chapel, near Lincoln's Inn Fields, burnt by accident,
Nov. 30, 1759; again by a number of wretches, who assumed the name of the
Protestant Association, June 2, 1780.

Savannah la Mar, in Jamaica, much injured by a storm, Oct. 17, 1780. This
storm prevailed through every part of the West Indies, and did immense damage.

Savannah, in Georgia, much damaged by fire, July 4, 1758.

Scarborough, town of, in New England, much damaged by fire, Sept. 11, 1762.

Shenactady, state of New York, destroyed by Indians, with amazing cruelty,
1690.

Smallpox, very fatal to the Indians in New England, 1633; at Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, 1692; in Charleston, South Carolina, 1699; at Boston, 1721, when
inoculation was, for the first time, tried in America.

Smyrna nearly destroyed by an earthquake, April 1730; and by a fire, June 20,
1742; by a plague 1743; again 1752; by a fire, May 14, 1753; much distressed by
the plague, 1758 and 1760; much injured by fires 1763 and 1772; sustained great
damage, both by earthquakes and fires, in 1778.

Snow, a remarkable, in England, in 1731 and in 1736; in a storm of snow upon
the mountain of Rudel and Tidel, in their march to attack Drontheim 7000 Swedes
perished, in 1719.

Sodom and Gommorah, burnt 1897 B. C.

Springfield, in New Jersey, burnt by the British, June 1780.

Stockholm, in Sweden, had 1000 houses burnt 1751; 250 August 31, 1759.

Storms, a remarkable one at Canterbury, in England, which threw down 200
houses, and killed several families, 234; 420 houses in Carlisle, England, were
blown down, and many people killed, 349; in 459, hail stones fell in most parts
of Britain above three inches in diameter, and killed many people; in London,
which threw down many houses, and killed 250 inhabitants, 569; in London, which
threw down 1500 houses, 944; at London 500 houses were thrown down, October 1^*
1091; a violent storm almost desolated a great part of Denmark and Norway, in
1194; many lives were lost in England, and houses overthrown, and the corn in
the fields destroyed by hail as large as hen's eggs, 1205; in England it
thundered for 15 days together, with terrible tempests of thunder and rain,
1233; when Edward I. of England was on his march toward Chartres, in France,
there happened a storm, accompanied with a tempest of rain, lightning, and hail
stones, so prodigious, as instantly to kill 6000 of his horses, and 1000 of his
troops, 1359; a violent storm in England, which threw down many houses,
destro^ed much cattle, and rooted up trees, 1389; this was followed by a great
mortality, and also a famine; hail stones fell at Dorchester, in England, which
measured seven inches in circumference, August 22, 1651; in Italy, a storm of
hail, which destroyed all the fish, birds, and beasts of the country, some of
the stones weighing nearly 100 pounds, in 1510; a violent one in Denmark, which
rooted up whole forests, Jan. 1, 1515; a violent one in the river St. Lawrence,
when eight British frigates were lost on Egg island, and 1000 men perished,
Aug. 23, 1711; the day on which Oliver Cromwell died, there arose one which
extended all over Europe, Sept. 3, 1658; in 1696, two hundred sail of British
colliers, and some coasters, were lost in a hurricane, with all their crews, in
1696; May 4, 1697, hailstones fell in England 14 inches in circumference, which
destroyed trees and corn in a dreadful manner; the most terrible storm ever
known in England, attended with flashes of lightning, Nov. 27, 1703, which was
so terrible, that it frightened the whole kingdom, when 10 ships of war were
lost, and 1500 seamen; the damage sustained at London amounted nearly to
5,000,000 dollars. Port Royal, Jamaica, destroyed by a storm, August 28, 1722;
again Oct. 20, 1744; Carolina sustained much damage by storms, August 1722;
again 1728; one of the most tremendous over heard of, was at the mouth of the
Ganges, in the East Indies, Oct. 11, 1737, when 20,000 vessels of different
kinds were cast away, and 300,000 people lost their lives; one at Nantz, in
France, when 66 vessels, and 800 sailors were lost, March 7, 1751; a terrible
one happened at Jamaica, which did damage to more than 1,000,000 of dollars,
March 7, 1751; at Cadiz, in Spain, 100 ships were lost, Dec. 8, 1751; one at
Charleston, South Carolina, which overflowed the town, and almost destroyed it
and the neighborhood, Sept. 15, 1752; again, which did damage to the shipping
to the amount of nearly 100,000 dollars; a dreadful one at the island of Malta,
which killed and wounded near 200 persons, Oct. 29, 1757; one at the Havannah,
when 96 public buildings, and 4084 houses were destroyed, and 1000 persons lost
their lives, Oct. 25, 1768; at Girgenti, in Italy, when the hailstones weighed
20 ounces, April 18, 1722; at St. Jago, when it did great damage, and the
hailstones were as big as oranges, July 16, 1722; a violent storm at
Charleston, South Carolina, in which ships were lost to the value of nearly
1,000,000 dollars, May 1761; in the same year, Charlestown, New England, also
sustained much injury; a terrible one at St. Kitts, which did immense damage in
that and the adjoining islands, Aug. 30, 1772; one at Cuba, which did much
damage, July 1773; a most terrible one near Boston, Massachusetts, Aug. 1773;
in Holland, where the hail weighed three quarters of a pound, killed several
horses, etc. and destroyed the fruits of the earth, June 11, 1776; one of the
severest storms ever known happened in the West Indies, Sept. 6, 1776; again,
which did immense damage through all the West India islands, particularly at
Savannah la Mar, in Jamaica, and at Barbados, in Oct. 1780; a severe storm all
over England, Jan. 1779; a violent hail storm at Madrid, in Spain, which broke
a vast number of windows, and did other damage, July 26, 1782; great damage
sustained by a storm in different parts of New England, 1784; at Iran, in the
Pyrennees, on the borders of France, when hailstones fell which weighed 23
ounces each, July 18, 1784; 131 villages and farms laid waste in France by a
storm, Aug. 5, 1785; one in the British channel, when the Halswel East
Indiaman, and a number of other ships were lost, Jan. 1786; a remarkable storm
in Devonshire, England, removed 13 elm trees upwards of 200 yards from their
original place, and they remained standing upright in a flourishing state, July
1786; a rock at the same place was divided upwards of eight feet asunder, and
all the poultry and c^rn for several miles were destroyed by the thunder and
lightning. At St. Germain en Lay, in France, hail fell as large as a quart
bottle, and all the trees from Vallance to Lisle were torn up by the roots,
July 13, 1788; about August 1792, a violent hurricane happened in the United
States, which, in the river at New York, sunk several boats, and drowned 16
people; at Philadelphia it tore up trees, and in many other places did
considerable damage; a great storm at Kent, in England, April 13, 1792; a
dreadful gust of rain at Wilmington, North Carolina, which did considerable
damage, Aug. 17, 1793; a violent hurricane, accompanied with lightning and
rain, destroyed a number of houses at Montreal, July 22, 1793; a number of
vessels destroyed at Jamaica, in an extraordinary swell of the sea, Oct. 21,
1793; a violent storm of hail at Philadelphia, which demolished many of the
windows, and did other damage, May 22, 1794; much injury was sustained by a
hurricane in Long Island, State of New York, June 3, 1795.

Suffolk, in Virginia, destroyed by the British forces, May 1779.

Sun stood still at the command of Joshua, 1456 B. C.

TRIPOLI, in Barbary, almost destroyed by an earthquake, Dec. 13, 1759.

VESUVIUS, a volcano in Italy, eruptions of, 79, 203, 272, and 472; again, when
all Campania was destroyed, 512. There were likewise eruptions of this volcano
in 685, 993, 1036, 1043, 1048, 1136; in 1158 there was an eruption, when 4000
persons lost their lives, and a large tract of land was destroyed. To
recapitulate all the eruptions of this volcano, would far exceed our bound^; we
shall, therefore, only mention the most remarkable, viz. 1660, 1682, 1694,
1701, 1704, 1712, 1717, 1730, 1737, 1751, 1754, 1760, 1766, 1767, 1770, 1771,
1779, 1785, 1786, 1787.

Volcano in the island of Fe^^ ^^ke out Sept. 13, 1777, which threw out an
immense quantity of red water, that discolored the sea for several leagues.

WATERFORD, in Ireland, experienced a violent storm, April 4, 1792.

Williamsburgh, South Carolina, much damaged by a storm, July 17, 1758.

YELLOW fever, in Philadelphia, which committed great devastation, 1699; the
West Indies, 1732, 1739, 1745, and 1748; in Philadelphia again, when the
disorder raged with great violence, in the fall of 1762; in New York 1791, it
prevailed in a part of Water-street, and according to the sphere of its action,
was exceedingly fatal. It began in August, and continued till the middle of
September, when it totally disappeared; during which short time it cut off
between 2 and 300 people. It began in Philadelphia 1793, and committed dreadful
havoc. As many of our readers may not have had an opportunity of perusing the
volumes which have been written on that disorder, we shall here subjoin the
following short acaccount, which, we trust, will prove acceptable to our
readers.

This disorder made its first appearance toward the latter end of July, in a
lodging house in North Waterstreet; and for a few weeks seemed entirely
confined to that vicinity. Hence it was generally supposed to have been
imported, and not generated in the city. This was the opinion of Doctors
Currie, Cathrall, and many others. It was however combated by Dr. Benjamin
Rush, who asserts, that the contagion was generated from the stench of a cargo
of damaged coffee, which had been landed near the same place where it first
made its appearances, on a supposition that vegetable putrefaction might
produce such a disorder. For this opinion he has given his reasons at large, in
a volume of which he has lately published the second edition.

As the most eminent physicians have differed on this subject, we shall not
offend by hazarding an opinion. To those who wish for particular information,
we refer to their respective writings.

But from whatever fountain we trace this poisoned stream, it has destroyed the
lives of many thousands -- and many of those of the most distinguished worth.
Its characteristic or leading symptoms were sudden debility in the voluntary
powers, oppressive pain, giddiness, sense of fullness and distention in the
vessels of the fore part of the head, and an oppressive weight about the heart
and lungs, accompanied with great anguish and restlessness. During the month of
August, the funerals amounted to upwards of three hundred. The disease had then
reached the central streets of the city, and began to spread on all sides with
the greatest rapidity. In September its malignance increased amazingly. Fear
pervaded the stoutest heart; flight became general, and terror was depicted on
every countenance. In this month 1400 more were added to the list of mortality.
The contagion w^^ still progressive, and toward the end of the month, 90 and
100 died daily. Until the middle of October, this mighty destroyer went on with
increasing havoc. From the 1st to the 17th, upwards of 1400 fell as victims to
the tremendous malady. From the 17th to the 30th the mortality gradually
decreased. In the whole month, however, the dead amounted to upwards of 2000 --
a dreadful number, if we consider that at this time near one half of the
inhabitants had fled. Before the disorder became so terrible, the garlic which
many chewed as a preventative, could be smelled at several yards distance;
whilst others hoped to avoid infection by a recourse to smelling bottles,
handkerchiefs dipped in vinegar, camphor bags, etc. so that few individuals
could be seen in the streets without one or other of these applied to his
nostrils.

At last, however, experience had proved that these were inefficacious. A
reliance on Divine Providence succeeded, and in the most terrible stage of the
disorder the citizens discovered the most decent fortitude and the greatest
resignation. These imaginary preventatives were therefore thrown aside.

From the 1st to the 7th of November, the mortality gradually decreased. On the
9th, the burials, which had hitherto been so exceedingly numerous, were reduced
to six. The fugitive citizens now began to return, and the streets resumed
their wonted life and activity.

During this awful calamity, as has been already observed, terror and dismay
generally pervaded the citizens. Some were found, however, who, at the risque
of their own lives, were highly instrumental in saving the lives of their
fellow creatures. An hospital was erected at Bushhill, at the distance of about
one mile from the inhabited part of the city. Thither the infected were sent in
great numbers, but from? want of cleanliness and good order, the hospital and
the grave were nearly the same thing.

A committee had been appointed to assist the guardians of the poor in the
legal discharge of their duty. It was one of the first objects of their care to
remedy this evil. To search into the horrors of this dismal receptacle required
the fortitude of (...) Howard. Men, however, stepped forth, and voluntarily
undertook the arduous task. Stephen Girard, a native of France, a wealthy
merchant of this city, and Peter Helm, a native of Philadelphia, both members
of the committee, offered their assistance. Thanks to Heaven! their invaluable
lives were preserved, and their generous labors crowned with success. The poor
now no longer considered Bushhill as the antichamber of the grave; but as a
humane provision for the necessitous sick: and now many recovered.

So great a mortality of course left a great number of orphans in very
destitute circumstances. Here again was a large field of labor open for the
benevolent. The children were to be provided with nurses, provisions, and other
accommodations. The committee, however, to their former burdens undertook
this, and procured the Loganian library, which was fitted up as an
orphan-house, where about two hundred children were admitted, sixty of whom
were infants.

The accumulating expenses of this institution, with that of Bushhill and many
others, obviously required considerable sums of money. Liberal contributions
were sent from different quarters, amounting in the whole to 29,085 dollars.

During this melancholy period the city lost ten of her most valuable
physicians, and most of the others were sick at different times. The number of
deaths in all, amounted to about 5000.

To omit recording the names of those by whose benevolent exertions, under
Divine Providence, the city was saved from utter destruction, would be highly
culpable in any annalist. To perpetuate the falsely acquired fame of those who
have made themselves conspicuous by butchering thousands of their
fellow creatures, statues have been often erected; but what rewards, what
statues, what language can sufficiently describe the merits of those, who, at
the imminent danger of their own invaluable lives, have so eminently conduced
to the safety of a great city? In March 1794, the citizens of Philadelphia and
its suburbs assembled at the City Hall to express their gratitude, and
appointed a committee, consisting of Thomas M'Kean, Alexander James Dallas,
Anthony Morris, Jonathan Bayard Smith, John Swanwick, Charles Biddle, and
William Rogers, to draw out an instrument expressive thereof, which, as it well
expresses the sentiments of the Philadelphians toward their deliverers, we
shall here lay it before our readers.

"Whereas it has pleased the Supreme Ruler and Governor of the universe to
permit, during the months of August, September, and October last, a most
dreadful visitation, or epidemic malady, to afflict the city and liberties of
Philadelphia in such manner, that it is supposed not less than 5000 of the
inhabitants thereof have fallen victims to the same; and whereas the following
citizens of Philadelphia, Matthew Clarkson, Stephen Girard, John Letchworth,
John Haworth, Thomas Savery, Henry Deforest, Jonathan D. Sergeant, Caleb
Lownes, Peter Helm, James Kerr, James Swain, Jacob Witman, John Connely, Daniel
Offley, Thomas Wistar, Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Matthew Carey, Samuel
Benge, Andrew Adgate, and Joseph Inskeep,
totally disregarding their own personal preservation, and only intent on
arresting the progress of the malignant disorder, with a magnanimity and
patriotism meriting the highest eulogiums, stood forth, and by every generous
and endearing exertion, preserved the lives of many of their fellow-citizens
from death, by conveying them to a suitable hospital, which they had provided
at Bushhill for their reception, where, under the meritorious exertions and
peculiar care of Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, two of the citizens above
named, every possible comfort was provided for the sick, and decent burials for
those whom their efforts could not preserve from the ravages of the prevailing
distemper; in order, therefore, to perpetuate the memory of such distinguished
usefulness to distant times, and to serve as an example and encouragement to
others to emulate the like beneficent virtues, should it ever unfortunately
again become necessary to practice them, -- the citizens of Philadelphia, etc.
do, by this instrument, present to the above named Matthew Clarkson, Caleb
Lownes, Thomas Wistar, Stephen Girard, Peter Helm, Israel Israel, John
Letchworth, James Kerr, James Sharwood, John Haworth, James Swain, Matthew
Carey, Thomas Savery, Jacob Witman, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest, and John
Connely,
their most cordial, grateful, and fraternal thanks for their benevolent and
patriotic exertions in relieving the miseries of suffering humanity, on the
late mournful occasion; and as Andrew Adgate, Jonathan D. Sarjeant, Joseph
Inskeep, and Daniel Offley, unfortunately fell victims to their generous
exertions for the preservation of the inhabitants, it is hoped, that their
great services will be held in everlasting remembrance by the citizens to whose
welfare they so nobly devoted themselves, even unto death; and that this will
be evidenced, on all proper occasions, in a suitable attention to their
surviving relatives.

" Ordered, That a copy of this instrument be duly engrossed upon parchment,
signed by the chairman of the meeting, and presented to each of the persons
above named, and to the representatives of the deceased members of the
committee, to remain with them as a memorial of the sense their fellow citizens
entertain of the services rendered them during the late dreadful calamity."

It was also resolved, that thanks should be given to William P. Spragues,
William Gregory, Jacob Witman, James Swain, Joseph Burns, George Forepaugh,
Casper Snyder, Peter Smith, Jeremiah Paul, James Cummins, Casper W. Morris,
Thomas Carstiers, Adam Brittle, Ferguson M'Elvaine, Wm. Robinson, sen. John
Pattison. Richard Whitehead, Joseph Kerr, John Ettries, William Sansom,
Justinian Fox, Amos Wickersham, Arthur Howell, Alexander Cochran, Thomas
Dobson, George Rutter, Benjamin W. Morris, John Wood, William Eckhard, William
Innis, John Graham, Thomas Willis, Daniel Dawson, Peter Thompson, Thomas
Allibone, Lambert Wilmer, Samuel Coats, John Olden, Samuel Pancoast, jun. John
Woodside, Levi Hollingsworth, William Watkins, Thomas Dixcy, Richard Moseley,
Clement Humphreys, Joseph Ogden, and John Savage,
who, as an assistant committee, aided the later exertions of the committee of
health, and that they be assured the citizens retain a just sense of their
meritorious conduct on that occasion."

Neither ought the meritorious exertions of some others to be omitted. The
conduct of Mrs. Saville, matron of the hospital at Bushhill, and of Mary
Parvin, to whom the care of the orphans had been committed, was above all
praise. The names of Richard Allen, William Gray, and Absalom Jones, three men
of color, ought likewise to be mentioned, who were incessant in their labors
in burying the dead, procuring nurses for the sick, etc.

The yellow fever again made its appearance in Philadelphia, about July 1794,
but disappeared after having sacrificed a few lives: same year it raged greatly
at Fell's point, near Baltimore. For the last three years it appears to have
been prevalent in several of the West India islands.

York city, in England, with its cathedral and 39 churches, destroyed by a
fire, June 3, 1137.

Presidents of Congress.
PEYTON Randolph, elected September 5, 1774, but being unable to serve on
account of indisposition, Henry Middleton was elected in his stead, October 22,
1774.

Peyton Randolph re-elected May 10, 1775, but being under the necessity of
returning home on business, May 24, John Hancock of Massachusetts was
unanimously chosen to supply his place Mr. Randolph died October 23, 1775.
. On the resignation of John Hancock, October 29, 1777, Charles Thompson, the
secretary of Congress, was appointed President pro tempore.

Henry Laurence was elected November 1, 1777; resigns December 9, 1778, and

John Jay is appointed, December 10, 1778.

Samuel Huntington, September 28, 1779.

Thomas M'Kean, July 10, 1780.

John Hanson, November 5, 1781.

Elias Boudinot, November 4, 1782.

Thomas Mifflin, November 3, 1783.

Richard Henry Lee, November 30, 1784.

Nathaniel Gorham June 6, 1786.

Arthur St. Clair, February 2, 1787.

Cyrus Griffin, January 22, 1788.

From the commencement of Congress, till the adoption of the Federal
Constitution, Charles Thompson continued as secretary.

On the adoption of the new constitution, George Washington was unanimously
elected President of the United States, John Adams was elected Vice President,
and Frederic Augustus Muhlenburgh, Speaker of the House of Representatives.

The present Governors of the different States.
New Hampshire, John Tailor Gilman. Vermont, Thomas Chittenden. Masschussetts,
Samuel Adams. Connecticut, Samuel Huntington. New York, John Jay. New Jersey,
Richard Howell. Pennsylvania, Thomas Mifflin. Delaware, Joshua Clayton.
Maryland, Thomas Sim Lee. Virginia, Edward Brook. Kentucky, Isaac Shelby. North
Carolina, Richard Dobbs Spraight. South Carolina, William Moultrie. Georgia,
George Matthews. Territory north-west of the Ohio, Arthur St. Clair. Territory
south of the Ohio, William Blount.
Memorable Accidents.
THE amphitheatre at Fidonia fell in and killed 50,000 people, A. D. 26; the
ruins of it still remain.

The town of Fleurus, in Italy, was buried by a part of the Alps falling on it,
and 2200 persons were killed, 1618.

The roof the church at Fearn, in Scotland, fell in during divine service, and
killed 60 persons, October 19, 1742.

The Victory, a British man of war of 100 guns, war lost, with all her crew,
October 1744.

Three British ships of war, with Sir Admiral Cloudesley Shovel, wrecked on the
rocks of Scilly, and all perished, October 1777.

A scaffold build for spectators to see Lord Lovat beheaded, at London, fell
down, which killed several, and maimed a great many, 1704.

Bath stage wagon burnt on Salisbury plain, England, with its valuable lading
occasioned by the wheels taking fire, May 20, 1758.

Prince George, a British ship of war, was burnt off Lisbon, when 458 of her
crew perished, August 11, 1758.

At the fireworks exhibited at Paris, in honor of the Dauphin's marriage, the
passages being stopped up occasioned such a crowd, that the people, seized with
panic, trampled upon one another till they lay in heaps; a scaffold erected
over the river also broke down, and nearly 1000 persons lost their lives, April
21, 1770.

Twelve hundred and forty people were killed in the island of Java by an
electrified cloud, 1772.

The Randolph, an American frigate of 36 guns, and 305 men, was blown up in an
engagement with the Yarmouth, a British 64, and every person on board was
drowned, except four, March 7, 1778.

The London East Indiaman run down by the Russel man of war, when she funk, and
110 persons perished, December 28, 1778.

Bourbon les Baines, in Bassigni, France, had the vault under the church give
way during the celebration of mass, which occasioned the death of 600 persons,
September 14, 1778.

The bridge at Puerta, St. Maria, near Cadiz, Spain, fell down as soon as
finished, while receiving the benediction, and killed several hundred persons,
February 22, 1779.

The Royal George, a British ship of 100 guns, being heeled to one side for the
purpose of cleaning her bottom, and her lee ports not being shut, gave a sudden
lurch, and was instantly filled with water; by which misfortune Admiral
Kempenfelt, by far the greater part of the crew, between 2 and 300 women, and a
great many traders were drowned, June 28, 1782.

Montpellier at, in France, a booth, wherein a play was performing, fell, and
killed 500 persons, July 31, 1786.

Halsewell East Indiaman wrecked near Portland, in England, when 100 people
perished, January 6, 1786.

Le Scipio, a French ship of 74 guns, got on fire at Leghorn, in Italy, and 200
of her crew perished, November 26, 1794.

Several French vessels of war were wrecked in the English channel, in
consequence of very severe storms, in the winter of 1794 and 1795.

The Boyne, a British 98 gun ship, lying at Spithead, accidentally got on fire,
May 1, 1795, and notwithstanding every exertion to save her, was totally
consumed; several hundred seamen, a number of women, children, traders, etc.
were either drowned or perished in the flames.

Accidents occasioned by Explosions.
SIXTY houses blown up, including a tavern full of company, opposite Barking
church, Tower-street, London, by the accidental blowing up of some barrels of
gunpowder at a ship-chandlers, January 4, 1649: a child in a cradle was found
unhurt on the leads of the church.

Gravelines, France, had 3000 peopled killed by an explosition of a magazine,
1654.

At Dublin, Ireland, above 100 men were killed by the blowing up of a magazine
of 218 barrels of gunpowder, 1693.

Bremen, greatly damaged by an explosion of gunpowder, when 1000 houses were
destroyed, September 10, 1739.

Charleston, South Carolina, greatly damaged by an explosion, August 11, 1762.

Trinchinopoli, in the East Indies, blown up by the magazine of powder having
taken fire, when 300 inhabitants lost their lives, 1772.

Abbeville, in France, nearly destroyed by an explosion of gunpowder, when 150
of the inhabitants perished, and 100 houses were destroyed, Nov. 1773.

Brescia, in Italy, nearly destroyed by an explosion of gunpowder, August 28,
1779.

Civita Vecchia, in Italy, nearly destroyed by an explosion, September 1779.

At Corfus, a magazine was destroyed by a fire, when 72,000 lbs. of powder, and
600 bomb-shells blew up, and killed 180 men, March 11, 1789.

The powder mills in the plains de Granelis, France, were blown up, September
3, 1793, when the explosion was so great, that windows were broken at the
distance of three leagues, and nearly 1000 people were killed or wounded.

Remarkable Occurrences.
MOUNT Vesuvius, in Italy, threw out such a quantity of flame and smoke, that
the air was darkened, and the cities of Pompeia and Herculaneum were
overwhelmed by the burning lava, A. D. 79; (Herculaneum was discovered in 1737,
and several curiosities have been dug up from time to time since that period.)

A column of fire appeared m the air, at Rome, for 30 days, 390.

The country of Palestine infested with such swarms of locusts, that they
darkened the air; and after having devoured the fruits of the earth, and
afterward died, they caused a stench which occasioned a pestilential fever,
406.

In the month of August 873, such a prodigious swarm of large grass-hoppers
settled upon the lands of France, that in one night they devoured every thing
green, even to the leaves and bark of young trees; they died soon after, and
their stench occasioned a pestilential fever.

A prodigious number of snakes formed themselves into two bodies, in a plain,
near Tournay, in France, and fought with such fury, that one of the parties was
almost destroyed, and the other was afterward killed by the peasants, 1059.

At Oxenhall, near Darlington, England, the earth suddenly rose to an eminence
resembling a mountain, and remained so for several hours, when it suddenly sunk
in, with a tremendous noise, 1179.

Gulen river, in Norway, buried itself under ground, 1344, but burst out soon
after, and destroyed 250 persons, with several churches, houses, etc.

Markeley hill, near Hereford, England, was moved from its situation, February
17, 1751, and continued its motion for three days, during which time it carried
along with it the trees, hedges, and cattle on its surface, and in other
respects did much damage.

In 1583, a similar prodigy happened in Dorcetshire, England, when a field of
three acres, with the trees and fences, moved from thence, passed over another
field, and settled at the distance of some miles from its original station.

An unacountable darkness at noonday in England, so that no person could see
to read, January 12, 1679.

A great comet appeared in Europe, which continued from November 3, to March 9,
following, and from its nearness to our earth, occasioned much alarm, 1680.

In 1694, there was a remarkable eruption of Mount Vesuvius, in Italy, which
continued near a month, when burning matter was thrown out with so great force,
that some of it fell at thirty miles distance, and a vast quantity of melted
mineral mixed with other matter, ran down like a river for three miles, carryng
every thing before it which lay in its way.

Borge, a seat near Fredorickstadt, in Norway, sunk into an abyss of 100
fathoms deep, which instantly became a lake. By this occurrence 14 persons were
drowned, and 240 head of cattles, 1702.

A great eruption of Mount Vesuvius took place, which threw out such quantities
of cinders and ashes, as to occasion darkness at Naples at noonday, 1767.

A body of light appeared in England, in the north east quarter, which formed
several columns, or pillars, and threw the people into great consternation; it
lasted from the evening of March the 6th, till three the next morning, 1715.

A flash of lightning penetrate the theater at Venice, Italy, during the
representation which killed several people; it out the candles, melted a lady's
gold watch-case, the jewels in the ears of others, and ^plit several diamonds,
August 1769.

The planet Mercury passed over the sun's disk, visible to the naked eye, from
twelve to two o'clock, at London, November 25, 1769.

Frequent explosions of fire were observed to proceed from West river mountain,
state of New Hampshire, 1730.

Solway moss, near Carlisle, in England, began to swell, owing to heavy rains,
and upwards of 400 acres of it rose to such a height above the level of the
ground, that at last it rolled forwards like a torrent, and continued its
course above a mile, sweeping along with it houses, trees, and every thing in
its way; it then divided into islands of different extent, from one to ten
feet, upon which were found hares, wild fowl, etc. It covered nearly 600 acres
at Netherly, the place to which it moved, and in its progress destroyed 30
small villages. It continued its motion from Saturday to Wednesday, December
31, 1771.

The river Pever, in Gloucestershire, England, suddenly altered its course, and
ten acres of land, with every thing on its surface, were removed with the
current, 1773.

When the American Army were defeated at the battle of Flat-Bush, Long Island,
a very thick fog saved them from being cut off in their retreat, August 28,
1776.

A remarkable dark day in New England, May 19, 1780.

In May 1783, a remarkable change was made in Poultney river, state of Vermont,
when it turned its course suddenly to the north-east, and by degrees wore a
channel 60 feet drep, leaving its former channel perfectly dry.

A large plantation in the island of Barbados, with all its buildings,
destroyed by the lands removing from a former seat to another, and covering
every thing in its way, October 16, 1784.

An unaccountable dark day at Quebec, on Sunday, September 16, 1785.

The ground at Brixton, in Norfolk, England, sunk near 30 feet, for a very
considerable extent, June 1788.

European Princes The insertion of this List appeared necessary from this
consideration, that in history certain transactions are said to have happened
in some particular reign; by having recourse to this List, the time of that
reign may be ascertained.
.
ENGLISH KINGS FROM THE YEAR 872.
Alfred distinguished by the title of Alfred the Great, began to reign 872.

Edward, his son, 899.

Athelstain, his son, 929.

Edmund I. the son of Edward, 940.

Edred, the brother of Edmund, 947.

Edwy, the son of Edmund, 955.

Edgar, the brother of Edwy, 959.

Edward, the eldest son of Edgar, 973.

Ethelred II. brother of Edward, 979.

Swain, from Denmark, after having subdued the country, was proclaimed king,
1013.

Canute, son of Swain, 1014. This prince was soon after forced to leave the
kingdom, and Ethelred, who had been obliged to retire, again reassumed the
reins of government, at the invitation of his subjects.

Edmund Ironside was crowned, April 1016, but was soon after defeated by
Canute, who again obtained the sovereignty.

Harold, son of Canute, began to reign 1036.

Hardicanute, his brother, succeeded him, 1041.

Edward the Confessor, 1042.

Harold II. son of the earl of Kent, 1066.

William I. duke of Normandy, a descendant of Canute, invaded the kingdom, and
defeated the English at the battle of Hastings, October 11, 1066, when Harold
was slain, and William assumed the title of Conqueror.

William II. son of the former, began to reign September 27, 1087.

Henry I. brother of the former, August 5, 1100.

Maude, daughter of Henry I. 1126.

Stephen crowned, 1135.

Henry II. grandson of Henry I. 1135.

Richard I. son of Henry II. 1189.

John, his brother, 1199.

Henry III. crowned, 1216.

Edward I. succeeded to the crown, 1272.

Edward II. who was the first king of England's son to whom the title of Prince
of Wales was given, began to reign 1307.

Edward III. succeeded 1327.

Edward, the Black Prince, son of Edward III. was the first in England who
assumed the title of Duke, brought the king of France prisoner to England, 1356.

Richard II. son of Edward the Black prince, succeeded his grandfather 1377.

Henry IV. grandson of Edward III. was crowned October 13, 1399.

Henry V. his son, succeeded April 9, 1413.

Henry VI. crowned at Paris, December 17, 1430.

Edward IV. was crowned at Westminster, June 28, 1461.

Edward V. began to reign 1483. He was, however, conveyed to the tower. May
1483, and deposed June 20, following. He was afterward, together with the Duke
of York, his brother, smothered by his uncle, who succeeded him, under the name
of Richard III.

Richard III. brother to Edward IV. murdered prince Edward, son of Henry VI. in
cool blood, 1471, and afterward married his widow.

Henry VII. after much bloodshed, was crowned king of England, October 30, 1485.

Henry VII. the most bloody monster that ever disgraced royalty, married his
brother's widow 1509; began to reign June 24th, 1510; received from the Pope
the title of Defender of the Faith, for having written a book against Luther,
1521; renounced the Pope's authority, and assumed the title of Head of the
Church, 1531; divorced his first queen, and married Anne Bulleyne, May 23,
1533; excommunicated by the Pope, August 30, 1536; put Anne Bulleyne to death,
and married Jane Seymour, May 20, 1536, who died soon after: married Anne,
sister to the Duke of Cleves, December 1539, and divorced her, July 10, 1540;
married Catharine Howard, August 8, following, and put her to death February
12. 1543; his last wife was Catharine Parr. The world got rid of him by his
death, January 28, 1547.

Edward VI. his only son, succeeded Oct. 12, 1537.

Jane Gray, cousin of Edward VI. proclaimed queen July 6, 1553; she was,
however, in three days after, deposed and beheaded, together with her husband,
Lord Dudley, and her father, February 12 following, by the order of

Mary, who was proclaimed queen July 9, 1553; and died November 17, 1558. She
was succeeded by her half sister

Elizabeth, who commenced her reign November 17, 1558; she beheaded Mary queen
of Scotland, February 8, 1587; died March 24, 1603, and was succeeded by

James VI. of Scotland, who was the great grandson of Henry VII. and I. of the
Stuart family in England. He died March 27, 1625, and was succeeded by his son

Charles I. who having conspired against the liberties of his country, was
brought to trial January 20, 1649, condemned on the 27th, and beheaded on the
30th following, when the Commonwealth commenced, which might be said to
terminate on the commencement of the Protectorate of

Oliver Cromwell, who was made Protector for life, December 12, 1653. September
3, 1658, and was succeeded by his son

Richard Cromwell, who was proclaimed protector September 4, 1658; deposed,
April 22, 1659, when he retired from the bustle of public life, and lived in
quiet till he attained the age of 89.

Charles II. son of Charles I. was crowned, April 13, 1661; died February 6,
1685; when he was succeeded by his brother

James II. On June 11, 1685, the Duke of Monmouth, the natural son of Charles
II. landed in England, and was proclaimed king in Somersetshire, June 20th
following: he was defeated by James's army, July 5, and beheaded on the 15th
following. James left England December 23, 1688, and was succeeded by his
son-in-law

William III. Prince of Orange, who was declared king, February 13, 1689; he
died March 8, 1702, and was succeeded by his sister-in-law

Anne, who was crowned April 13, 1704; she died, August 1, 1714, and was
succeeded by

George I. Elector of Hanover, who died June 11, 1727.

George II. the son of George I. began his reign, June 11, 1727, died October
25, 1760, and was succeeded by the present king,

George III. the son of Frederic, prince of Wales, and grandson of George II.

KINGS OF SCOTLAND FROM THE YEAR 968.
Duphus 968 Cullenus 972 Kennet III. 973 Constantine IV. 994 Grimus 996 Malcolm
II. 1004 Duncan 1034 Macbeth 1040 Malcolm III. 1057 Donald VII. 1093 Duncan II.
1095 Donald VII. again 1095 Interregnum 1096 Edgar 1097 Alexander I. 1107 David
I. 1124 Malcolm IV. 1153 William 1165 Alexander II. 1214 Alexander III. 1249
Interregnum 1215 John Baliol 1292 Robert I. 1306 David II. 1329 Edward Baliol
1332 David II. again 1341 Robert II. 1371 John Robert 1390 James I. 1405 James
II. 1437 James III. 1460 James IV. 1488 James V. 1513 Mary Stuart 1542 James
VI. 1567
James VI. on the death of Elizabeth, queen of England, ascended that throne in
1603, and his descendants were the kings of England also till 1707, when the
two kingdoms were united under the title of Great Britain.

KINGS OF FRANCE FROM THE YEAR 987.
Hugh Capet 987 Robert 996 Henry I. 1031 Philip I. 1059 Lewis VI. 1106 Lewis
VII. the younger 1137 Philip II. the August 1180 Lewis VIII. 1223 Lewis IX.
1226 Philip III. the hardy 1271 Philip IV. the fair 1285 Lewis X. 1314 John
1316 Philip V. 1316 Charles IV. the fair 1322 Edward of England crowned Philip
V. the courtier 1328 John 1350 Charles V. the wise 1364 Charles VI. the well
beloved 1380 Charles VII. the victorious 1422 Henry VI. of England proclaimed
Lewis XI. 1461 Charles VIII. 1483 Lewis XII. 1498 Francis I. 1515 Francis II.
1559 Charles IX. 1560 Henry III. 1574 Henry IV. 1589 Lewis XIII. 1610 Lewis
XIV. 1643 Lewis XV. 1715
Lewis XVI. the last king of France, succeeded his grandfather 1770: he was
beheaded January 23, 1793.

KINGS OF SPAIN FROM THE YEAR 1027.
Ferdinand the great under whom Castile and Leon were united 1027 Sancho the
strong 1065 Alphonso the valiant 1072 Alphonso VII. 1109 Alphonso VIII. 1122
Sancho III. 1157 Ferdinand 1158 Alphonso IX. 1158 Henry I. 1214 Ferdinand III.
1216 Alphonsus X. 1252 Sancho IV. 1284 Ferdinand IV. 1295 Alphonso XI. 1312
Peter the cruel 1350 Henry II. 1368 John I. the bastard 1279 Henry III. 1390
John II. 1406 Henry IV. 1454 Ferdinand and Isabella, the first styled Catholic
1474 Philip I. 1504 Charles I. 1516 Philip II. 1555 Philip III. 1591 Philip IV.
1621 Charles II. 1665 Philip V. resigned 1700 Lewis 1724 Philip reassumed, died
1725 Ferdinand VI. 1746 Charles III. 1759 Charles IV. the present king, 1788.
EMPERORS OF GERMAMY FROM THE YEAR 800.
Charlemagne 800 Lothario I. 840 Lewis II. 855 Charles the bald 874 Lewis III.
875 Charles the fat 879 Arnold 888 Guy and Lambert 891 Lewis the infant 899
Conrad I. 911 Henry the fowler 918 Otho the great 936 Otho II. 973 Otho III.
983 Henry II. 1002 Conrad II. 1024 Henry III. 1039 Henry IV. 1056 Henry V. 1106
Lothario II. 1125 Conrad III. 1137 Frederick I. 1151 Henry VI. 1190 Philip 1197
Otho IV. 1208 Frederick II. 1212 William or Conrad IV. 1250 Rodolphus of
Hapsburgh 1273 Adolphus of Nassau 1291 Albert I. of Austria 1298 Henry VII.
1309 Lewis V. 1314 John and Philip V. the long 1317 Charles VI. 1342 Gunther of
Schwartzburgh 1349 Wenceslaus 1778 Frederick and Robert Palatine 1400 Joseph
Moravia, Sigismund of Luxemburg 1410 Albert of Austria 1438 Frederick III. 1440
Maximilian I. 1493 Charles V. 1519 Ferdinand I. 1558 Maximilian II. of Hungary
1564 Rodolphus II. 1576 Mathias 1612 Ferdinand II. 1619 Ferdinand III. 1639
Leopold I. 1656 Joseph I. 1705 Charles VI. 1711 Charles VII. of Bavaria 1742
Francis I. of Lorraine 1745 Joseph II. 1765 Leopold II. 1790 Francis 1792 The
present emperor.
EMPERORS AND EMPRESSES OF RUSSIA FROM THE YEAR 1682.
Peter the Great 1682 Catharine I. 1725 Peter II. 1727 Anne 1730 John V. 2
months old 1740 Elizabeth 1741 Peter III. 1762 Catharine, the present empress,
1763.
KINGS OF POLAND FROM THE YEAR 1583.
Sigismund III. 1583 Uladislaus VII. 163^ John II. 1648 Michael, a Russian
prince 1669 John III. Sobieski 1674 Frederick II. ELector of Saxony 1697
Stanislaus I. 1704 Frederick II. again 1710 Frederick III. 1733 Stanislaus II.
Count Poniatowsky the present king 1764.
KINGS OF SWEDEN FROM THE YEAR 1592.
Sigismund I. 1592 Charles IX. 1606 Charles XI. 4 years old 1660 Char. XII.
aged 15 1699 Gustavus II. Adolphus, 1611 Christina, aged 6 1633 Ulrique, sister
to Charles aged 15 1718 Adolphus of Holstein 1715 Gustavus III. 1771 Gustavus
IV. the present king 1792.
KINGS OF DENMARK FROM THE YEAR 1523.
Frederick I. 1523 Christian III. 1554 Frederick II. 1559 Christian IV. 1588
Frederick III. 1648 Christian V. 1670 Frederick IV. 1699 Christian VI. 1730
Frederick V. 1746 Christian VII. the present 1766.
KINGS OF PORTUGAL FROM THE YEAR 1640.
John IV. 1640 Alphonso 1646 Peter II. 1683 John V. 1706 Joseph 1750 Mary the
present queen 1777.
KINGS OF PRUSSIA FROM THE YEAR 1701.
Frederick I. 1701 Frederick II. 1713 Frederick III. 1740 Frederick IV. the
present king 1786.
Miscellaneous Articles.
ADULTERY, punished in England by public whipping, cutting off the nose and
ears, etc. 1031; an act passed in England for making this crime capital for the
first offense, and fornication capital for the second, May 14, 1650. Soon after
a law was passed in New England, by which adultery with a married woman was
made capital to both parties, even though the man was unmarried, and several
have suffered under this law.

America, the United States of, declared indepentent, July 4, 1776.

Birds nests, the destroying them, forbidden in Sacred Writ, Deuteronomy. 22, 6.

Burial, the first idea of, was supposed to be taken by Adam, on his observing
a live crow covering a dead one with leaves.

Burning of the dead, in practice 1225 B. C.

Bushes of evergreen were anciently signs of taverns, hence the expression
"good wine needs no bush."

Caps first worn 1449; a law was enacted in England, that every person should
wear a cap made of wool on Sundays and holidays, under a considerable penalty;
1571.

Christmas-boxes, were originally for money collected in a box for masses.

Coventry, Lady Godvia rode through the town naked, 1057.

Custom, according to the English law, is binding when it can be traced back 40
years, in ecclesiastical matters, and 60 with respect to civil matters.

Death, sudden, considered in France as a mark of infamy, and proof of
damnation, 1280.

Diamonds, the nine of, called the curse of Scotland, from a Scotch member of
parliament (part of whose family arms was the nine of diamonds) voting for the
introduction of the malt tax into Scotland.

Don, the title of, first assumed by kings of Spain in the 8th century.

Executions at London, removed from Tyburn to Newgate 1783. Tyburn had been the
place of execution for upwards of 650 years.

Faustus, or Faust, one of the earliest printers, who, from concealing his art,
was supposed to deal with the devil; hence the common expression, "the devil
and Doctor Faustus."

Grace before and after meat is a very ancient practice, even in the heathen
world.

Harpies, mentioned in the ancient poems, supposed by some to be locusts:
Buffon thinks they were batts, and Bryant thinks they were intended for a
college of priests.

Healths, the custom of drinking, was in fashion so early as 1134 B. C.

Highlanders, the Scotch, their dress prohibited by act of parliament, 1746.
(That statue, we believe, however, has been since repealed.)

Hocus pocus derived from these Latin words "Hoe est corpus."

Hospitality, in England, appears, for some centuries previous to the 15th, to
have been enforced by statue.

Hurley-burley, the expression of, is said to have derived its origin from
Hurleigh and Burleigh, two neighboring families, who filled the country round
about where they lived with contest and violence.

Jury, trial by, introduced first into Denmark about 820; established in
England 970; and in France, in criminal cases, 1793.

Literature was so little known in Britain, from almost the 9th to the 14th
century, that few men, either in church or state, could read or write.

Merry Andrew, the character of, arose from one Andrew Forde, a droll
physician, who attended markets, and in a humourous manner harangued the
people, 1547.

Millenium, the doctrine of the, first inculcated during the third century.

Museum, the most valuable collection of the subjects of natural history to be
met with in America, is kept by Mr. Peale in the city of Philadelphia. The
utility of this institution is constantly becoming more and more extensive,
from the frequent additions which the indefatigable efforts and perseverance of
Mr. Peale is constantly making. There is also a museum of considerable
importance established by the Tamany society, or Columbian order of New York.

Polygamy forbid by the Romans, 393.

Pressing, either for the sea or land service, declared to be illegal by the
British parliament, December 1641.

Prisoners of war, the custom of enslaving them, abolished in Europe in the
13th century.

Prophet, one Brothers, who pretends to be "the nephew of the Almighty," has
given so great uneasiness to the British nation, as to occasion his examination
before the Lord Chancellor, in the present year 1795.

Receipts, in Britain, ordered to be on stamped paper, 1783.

Rizzia, a musician, paramour of Mary queen of Scots, killed by her husband
Lord Darnley, March 9, 1556.

Salute, of other nations to a British ship of war, was first enjoined by king
Arthur.

Self murder was fashionable, amongst the Romans, in the reign of Tiberius,
when numbers put themselves to death to avoid the persecution of the emperors.

Shrove Tuesday, the custom of eating pancakes on, probably arose from the
Greek Christians eating eggs, milk, etc. on the first week of lent.

Slavery commenced immediately after the deluge (see Genesis ix. 25.)

Slaves obtained their freedom in England by act of parliament, 1772. The slave
trade abolished in Polish Prussia, June 26, 1782; in Pennsylvania, 1784; in
Massachussetts, 1788. The propriety of abolishing this infernal traffic was
debated in the British parliament, 1789, and again at different periods. The
trade was totally abolished in the dominions of the French republic, 1793. An
act was passed by Congress, prohibiting the citizens of the United States, or
foreigners residing therein, from carrying on the slave trade, March 22, 1794.

Theft, in the time of Homer, was reckoned honorable. Lycurgus, the Spartan
legislator, even encouraged it.

Treaties, commercial, the first made by England with any foreign nation was
with the Flemings, 1272.

Treaties, American, the most remarkable,

-- with France, Feb. 6, 1778.

-- with Holland, Oct. 8, 1782.

-- definitive, with Britain, laid before Congress Dec. 13, 1783, and ratified
Jan, 4, 1784.

-- of amity and Commerce with Sweden, April 3, 1783.

-- of amity with the Creek Indians, August 1790.

-- of peace and friendship with the Cherokee Indians, July 2, 1791.

-- of amity, commerce, and navigation with Britain, November 1794. This treaty
is not yet ratified, but is at present, June 1795, under consideration of the
Senate of the United States.


We, first used instead of I, by king John of England, 1199.

Subscribers' Names.
A.
REV. James Abercrombie, Philadelphia. John Adams, LL. D. Vice President of the
United States, and President of the Senate, 6 copies. George Adams, merchant,
Patterson, 30 copies. Arthur Adams, New York. Lewis G. Affleck, Philadelphia, 2
copies. John Aitken, Philadelphia. Arthur Aitken, do. John Alexander, sen.
Carlisle. William Alexander, do. John Allen, New York, 6 copies. Richard Allen,
Philadelphia. James Anderson, Princeton. Thomas Anderson, do. John Anderson,
Philadelphia. William T. Anderson, Princeton. Hugh Andrews, Philadelphia.
Christopher Appleton, do. John Armor, Carlisle. Rev. James T. Armstrong,
Trenton. John Arthur, New York. Rev. Michael Arthur, Pittsburgh. Thomas
Ashmore, Philadelphia.
B.
Benjamin Franklin Bache, Philadelphia. Eleazer Ball, Newark. Israel Ball, do.
Justus Baldwin, do. Caleb Baldwin, Newark. J. Barker, Pittsburgh. William
Bayley, Alexandria. Robert Bayley, Philadelphia. George Barclay, do. Nathaniel
Beach, Newark. Joseph Beach, do. Samuel Beaven, Salem. Stephen Beaseley,
Philadelphia. John Berwick, do. William Bell, Reading. John M. Berrien,
Princeton. Jacob Benjamin, Trenton. William Bingham, M. C. from Pennsylvania.
John Bishop, Reading. Thomas Bines, Salem. John Bicknel, Newark. George Black,
Philadelphia. Robert Black, Carlisle. Robert Blaine, do. Rev. Robert Blackwell,
Philadelphia. Joseph Bloomfield, Burlington. J. Boger, Reading. Joseph Boggs,
Philadelphia. Robert Boggs, New Brunswick. Jesse B^ Massachussetts. Henry
Bowls, Philadelphia. George Booth, do. James Booth, do. George Bowie,
Princeton. William Brody, New York, 2 copies. Robert Boyne, Philadelphia. John
Boush, do. Hugh Boden, Carlisle. Charles Bovard, do. Andrew Brown,
Philadelphia. John Brown, do. Job Brown, Newark. James Brown, Carlisle. Elijah
Brown, Philadelphia. James Bruce Reading. Matthias Bruen, Newark. Anthony
Buckley, Philadelphia. Smith Burnet, Newark. John Burnet, do. James Burnside,
Philadelphia. David Burke, do. Israel Butler, do. Samuel Burkhart, Reading.
C.
Alexander Calder, Philadelphia. John Cameron, New York. Silas Candit,
Princeton. John C. Caldwell, Pittsburgh. Robert Callender, Carlisle. William
Campbell, Reading. Matthew Carey, printer, Philadelphia, 100 copies. George
Carter, do. John Campbell, do. 3 copies. George Cart, Carlisle, John Carr,
Salem. John Cappee, New Brunswick. William Caine, Alexandria. Israel Carney,
Newark. Aaron Camp, do. Nathan Cambey. Lamberton. Thomas Carstairs,
Philadelphia. Alexander Christie, do. Samuel Clarkson, New Brunswick. Jacob
Chalwell, do. John Clark, Philadelphia. John Christ, Reading. Thomas Clifford,
Philadelphia. Samuel Coats, do. 2 copies. John Connelly, do. Patrick Connelly,
do. Henry Connelly, Pittsburgh. Samuel Congar, Newark. James Corkrin,
Philadelphia. John Cook, do. Samuel Coxe, do. William Coleman, do. John Cook,
do. William Cornman, do. William Kerr Cole, New Brunswick. Nathan Cole. do.
Conant Cole, Princeton. Samuel Cooper, Philadelphia. Isaac Collins, printer,
Trenton, 6 copies. Thomas Collins, Reading. Thomas Condie, Philadelphia.
Archibald Crary, Massachussetts. Charles Crawford, Philadelphia. William
Crawford, Bristol. Archibald Craige, New Brunswick. Samuel Crane, Newark. David
D. Crane, do. John Creige, Carlisle. David Crowell, Newark. Edward Cutbush,
Philadelphia. Steward Cummin, do.
D.
Robert Davidson, Carlisle. William Davis, Philadelphia. James Davis, Carlisle.
Alexander James Dallas, Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Bartholomew Dandridge, Secretary to the President of the United States. Mathias
Day, printer, Trenton, 12 copies. David Deas, New York. James Deas, 12 copies.
Gideon Decamp, Princeton. Jonathan Dennis, Philadelphia. James Johnson Denoon,
do. Samuel Dennison, do. John B. Delaney, Alexandria. Rev. John Dickins,
Philadelphia, 3 copies. Amos Dickenson, Reading. Henry Diehl, do. Thomas
Dobson, printer, bookseller, and stationner, Philadelphia, 50 copies. Francis
Donnelly, Philadelphia. Nathan Douglass, printer, Danbury, Connecticut, 24
copies. John Dougherty, Philadelphia. Benjamin Duffield, M. D. do. 3 copies.
James Duncan, Carlisle. Daniel Dunlap, do. William Duncan, New York, 12 copies.
Aaron Dunham, Trenton.
E.
Alexander Eagles, Newark. William Eaken, Carlisle. Nicholas Edmunds,
Princeton. Jacob Eglee, Philadelphia. James Elliot, do. David English,
Princeton. John Evans, do. Jacob Evans, do. Jesse Evans, Reading. Charles
Evans, do. Thomas Evans, do. James Ewing, Trenton.
F.
Ferdinando Fairfax, Philadelphia. Anthony Fenner, do. Thomas Farrel, do.
Conrad Feger, do. John Field, do. 2 copies. Peter Filbert, Reading. John
Fimeton, Philadelphia. William Finley, M. C. from Pennsylvania. Miers Fisher,
Philadelphia, 2 copies. Thomas Fisher, Philadelphia. Henry Fisher, New
Brunswick. Nathaniel Fist, do. John Fitzgerald, Princeton. William Fletcher,
Philadelphia. Matthew Flammery, do. William Fleming, Princeton. Robert M.
Forsyth, do. Alexander Forest, Philadelphia. Theodore Foster, M. C. from Rhode
Island. Dwight Foster, M. C. from Massachussetts. John Fox, Pittsburgh. George
Fox, do. Richard Freeman, Philadelphia. Donald Frazer, New York, 12 copies.
Daniel Frazer, Philadelphia. J. Frailey, Reading.
G.
William P. Gardner, Philadelphia. Godfrey Gebler, do. George Gihart, do. John
Giffard, Newark. Alexander Gilmore, Salem. James Given, Carlisle. John Glen,
do. Calvin Gobble, Newark. John Gofline, Bristol. Elijah H. Gordon, Trenton.
Peter Gordon, do. John Gordon, jun. do. William F. Gordon, Princeton. Peter
Gordon, Philadelphia. George Gowan, Elizabethtown, 6 copies. Vincent Gray,
Alexandria. Ebenezer Grant, New Brunswick. Doctor Amos Gregg, Bristol. Daniel
Green, Reading. George Green, Philadelphia. Isaac Green, Pittsburgh.
Cadwallader Griffith, Philadelphia. Samuel Griffin, do. David Griffith,
Maryland. Thomas Griffith, Newark. John Grubber, Reading. Charles D. Grun, New
Brunswick.
H.
Jacob R. Hardenburgh, New Brunswick. Lewis Hardenburgh, do. Melchior Haffa,
Reading. John Harrison, Princeton. James Hamilton, Reading, Robert Hartshorn,
Philadelphia. John Hanna, Pittsburgh. Seth Hastings, Massachussetts. Joseph
Hayes, Carlisle. Luke Hashart, New Brunswick. Abraham Harris, Salem. Ebenezer
Hedden, Newark. Simon Hedden, do. Moses Hedden, do. T. Hewson, Bristol. Daniel
Henderson, Pittsburgh. John Henry, Perth Amboy. John N. Hight, Princeton. Henry
Hill, Philadelphia. Thomas Hill, New Brunswick. George Hill, Philadelphia, 6
copies. John Hirth, Salem. Mathias B. Higgins, Newark. John Hindman,
Philadelphia. John H. Hobard, Princeton. George Hog, Philadelphia. Isaac
Horner, jun. Bristol. Benjamin Harvie, Philadelphia. Theodorus Householder, do.
James Holland, do. Jacob Hofner, do. George Hoffner, Philadelphia. Patrick
Houston, Princeton. Isaac Hough, Philadelphia. Aaron Howel, Trenton. John H.
Huston, Bristol. Joseph Huber, Philadelphia. David Humpreys, do. Clement
Humphreys, jun. do. Joshua Humphreys, do. Ralph W. Hunt, Princeton. John
Hunter, Reading. Dalzel Hunter, Philadelphia. Harvey Hurst, do.
I.
William Jackson, Bristol. Samuel Jennings, Newark. Gattlick Jemman, Reading.
Samuel Jenner, Newark. James Irvine, Carlisle. Israel Israel, Philadelphia.
Samuel Israel, do. David Johnson, Newark. John Johnson, Philadelphia, 2 copies.
Walter Johnson, do. Caleb Jones, Reading. William Jones, do. Michael Jones,
Pittsburgh.
K.
Rev. Christopher V. Keating, Philadelphia, 4 copies. Charles Keir,
Philadelphia. John Kerr, Pittsburgh. Hugh Kerr, Princeton. Richard Kerr, do.
John Kerr, Philadelphia. Francis Kennedy Kerr, do. Michael Kennedy, do. George
Kemp, do. Benjamin Kite, do. 3 copies. William Killach, Philadelphia. John
Kincaid, Newark. Burnet R. Kingsland. Robert Kinnear, Reading. George Kline,
printer, Carlisle, 12 copies. Benjamin F. Knapp, Newbury Port. Miles Klossey,
Philadelphia.
L.
John Lamb, M. D. New York. John Lareum, jun. Philadelphia. John Lawson, New
Brunswick. Shrive Lawrason, Alexandria. Michael Leib, M. D. Philadelphia.
Edmund Lee, Alexandria. Aaron Levy, Philadelphia. Library Company of
Philadelphia. James Little, do. John Little, do. Nicholas Lotts, Reading.
William Love, Philadelphia. Thomas Lukens, do. Nancy Lukens, Pittsburgh. Henry
Lupp, New Brunswick. John Lion, jun. Carlisle. William Lion, do. 2 copies.
M.
James Madison, M. C. from Virginia. Charles Marshal, jun. Philadelphia. I. K.
Massersmith, Reading. George Maxwell, Trenton. George Meade, Philadelphia. John
Mearns, do. Jacob Merkel, do. Stephen Meker, Newark. Pliny Merrick,
Massachussetts. Benjamin M'Elroy, Philadelphia. Hugh M'Elroy, do. Archibald
M'Elroy, Bristol. Sarah Ann M'Dowell, Pittsburgh. James M'Dowell, do. John
M'Dowell, do. Edward M'Gauran, Carlisle. John M'Larey, do. John M'Lenachan,
Philadelphia. Blair M'Lenachan, do. James M'Inley, do. Thomas M'Euen, do. John
M'Euen, do. James M'Glassin, do. Samuel M'Farren, Lower Mount Bethel Township,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, 40 copies. Samuel M'Caskery, Carlisle.
William M'Caskery, do. Eli M'Cartey, Newark. Thomas Mifflin, Governor of the
State of Pennsylvania. Thomas Mifflin, jun. Philadelphia. Samuel Mifflin, do.
Walter Minto, LL. D. Professor of Mathematics, Princeton. Robert Miller,
Philadelphia. John Miller, Newark. Philip Miller, Reading. John Miller,
Philadelphia. William Miller, Carlisle. George Mitchel, Philadelphia. Joseph
Minnick, Bristol. James Monroe, Minister Plenipotentiary from the United States
to the French Republic. Robert Montieth, Philadelphia. Benjamin Morris,
Reading. Abraham Morrow, do. 2 copies. Charles Morford, Princeton. Stephen
Morford, do. Rees Moore, Reading. John Montgomery, Carlisle. William Moore, do.
Frederic Augustus Muhlenberg, Speaker of the House of Representatives of the U.
S. Hugh Robert Murray, New York.
N.
Ruben Neily, Princeton. James Neily, Philadelphia. John Noble, Carlisle. James
Norris, Philadelphia. Michael Nourse, do.
O.
Jesse Oat, Philadelphia. Thomas Ogle, do. William O'Bryant, do. John Ormrod,
printer and bookseller, Philadelphia, 25 copies. Jacob Overstack, Philadelphia.
P.
Charles Page, Alexandria. Philip Pancake, Philadelphia, 2 copies. John Parker,
New Brunswick. Joseph Parrish, Philadelphia. George Pattison, Carlisle. Charles
Pattison, do. William Pattison, do. Joseph Parrot, Princeton. Henry W. Paxton,
Philadelphia. Levi Pawling, Reading. William Petriken, Carlisle, 6 copies.
Charles W. Peale, Philadelphia. Abner Penton, Salem. Philip Phoenix, New York.
Thomas Phoenix, do. Rev. Lawrance Sylvester Phelan, Philadelphia. Napthali
Philips, do. Ralph Philips, Princeton. John Pinkerton, jun. Philadelphia.
William Pidgeon, do. John Plum, Newark. Jacob Plum, do. John Plum, New
Brunswick. John Powell, Philadelphia. John Polhemus, jun. Pittsburgh. Henry
Polkenhorn, Alexandria, 2 copies. John Pool, Raritan Landing. Daniel Prase,
Reading. William Price, Newark. General Thomas Proctor, Philadelphia. James Ph.
Phuglia, do.
R.
Edmund Randolph, Secretary of State for the United States. Lawrence Raven,
Princeton. Archibald Ramsey, Carlisle. Alexander Reinagle, Philadelphia. James
M. Ray, do. Rev. Charles Reichel, Nazareth. James Rees, Philadelphia. James
Read, Reading. Samuel Richards, Newark. George Richardson, Philadelphia. Murick
Rice, Massachussetts. Marks John Riddle, Reading. Robinson and Gowan, printers
and booksellers, New York. Rev. William Rogers, D. D. Professor of the English
language and the Belles Lettres in the University of Pennsylvania. James
Rowney, Carlisle. David Ross, Newark. Jared Russel, do. Benjamin Rush, M. D.
Philadelphia. Jacob Rush, President of the third District Court of
Pennsylvania, Reading.
S.
William Sarjeant, Philadelphia. Robert Seaborn, do. Allen Sergeant, Newark. P.
Seatur, Reading. Jacob Schneider, do. John Scott, Philadelphia. Joseph Scott,
do. Joseph Warren Scott, Princeton. William Scott, Reading. Jasper Scull, do.
Thomas Scull, do. John M. Simpson, Princeton. Walter Simm, Bristol. George
Simm, New York. Lawrence Sink, Philadelphia. Philip Skemer, Reading. George
Slacum, Alexandria. John Spaghn, Reading. Matthew Spillard, Philadelphia, 2
copies. William Spotswood, printer and bookseller, Boston, 12 copies. John
Spigker, Reading. Benjamin Spigker, do. Benjamin Smith, Trenton. Isaac Smith,
do. Uriah Smith, Philadelphia. James Smith, do. John Smith, do. William P.
Smith, Newark. Robert Smith, Carlisle. Robert Smock, do. John Smiley, M. C.
from Pennsylvania. David Snowden, Trenton. John Snell, Reading. William
Summers, Alexandria. Edward Styles, Philadelphia. John Stagg, jun. principal
clerk in the War Department. Ephraim Stelle, Carlisle. Robert Stewart,
Philadelphia. James Stewart, do. William Stewart, do. James Stephenson,
Carlisle. Thomas Stephens, bookseller, Philadelphia, 25 copies. Cleon Stephens,
Alexandria. Joseph Stretch, Philadelphia. Charles Stenicke, Carlisle. John C.
Stroebels, Reading. John Swanwick, M. C. from Pennsylvania, 2 copies.
T.
Benjamin Tailor, Philadelphia. John Tailor, Princeton. George Tailor,
principal clerk in the Department of State. Samuel Tate, Carlisle. Jacob
Talman, New Brunswick. Cornelius Tenbrook, do. John Tice, do. James Thackara,
Philadelphia. Richard B. Thompson, Philadelphia. Jacob Oreas Thompson, M. D.
do. Thomas Timings, do. George Till, Reading. Richard Throckmorton, Trenton.
James Traquair, Philadelphia. Thomas Tresse, do. Benjamin Tucker, do.
U.
John Urquhart, President of the Academy, Newark.
V.
E. Valette, Philadelphia, 3 copies. George Vaux, do. John Valence, do. Thomas
I. Vandyke, Pittsburgh. Abraham Voorhies, Trenton.
W.
Benjamin Watson, Bristol. Nicholas Waln, jun. Philadelphia. John Wallace,
Princeton. Gustavus B. Wallace, do. Nathaniel Weakley, Carlisle. Godfrey
Welser, Philadelphia. Thomas Wignell, do. Isaac Wikoff, do. Doctor Thomas
Wiggins, Princeton. Thoras Wildbahn, Reading. Frederic Wildbahn, do. Jesse
Willet, do. John Witman, do. William Witman, do. Right Rev. Bishop White,
Philadelphia. William White, do. Hugh Wilson, Carlisle. Oliver Woolcot,
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. Obediah Woodruff, Newark. John
Wood, Newark.
Z.
Peter Zeiber, Reading.

