GRANT TO THE GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI COMPANY, THE CONSTITUTION THEREOF, AND
EXTRACTS RELATIVE TO THE SITUATION, SOIL, CLIMATE, AND NAVIGATION OF THE
WESTERN TERRITORY OF THE STATE OF GEORGIA; AND PARTICULARLY OF THAT PART
THEREOF IN WHICH THE COMPANY's LANDS ARE SITUATED.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE DIRECTORS.

AUGUSTA: PRINTED BY JOHN ERDMAN SMITH. MDCCXCV.

AND REPRINTED WITH AN APPENDIX, BY DESIRE OF THE PURCHASERS IN CONNECTICUT.

THE GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI COMPANY having purchased from the government of the
state of Georgia, that part of its western territory, lying between the rivers
Mississippi and Tom Bigby, and extending from thirty-one degrees eighteen
minutes to thirty-two degrees forty minutes North Latitude, computed to be, at
least, one hundred and eighty miles in length, and ninety-five miles in
breadth, did obtain a grant for the same, under the great seal of the said
state, bearing date the twenty-sixth day of January, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-five in the following words:

STATE OF GEORGIA.
By His Excellency GEORGE MATHEWS, Captain General, Governor and Commander in
Chief in and over the said State, and of the Militia thereof.
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING:
KNOW YE, That in pursuance of the Act of the General Assembly entitled, An
Act supplementary to an Act entitled, 'an Act for appropriating a part of the
unlocated territory, of this state, for the payment of the late state troops,
and for other purposes therein mentioned,' declaring the right of this state to
the unappropriated territory thereof, for the protection and support of the
frontiers of this state, and for other purposes, passed at Augusta, on the
seventh day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, and, of the sovereignty and independence of the United States of
America, the Nineteenth, and by virtue of the powers in the vested, I HAVE
given and granted, and, by these presents, in the name and behalf of the said
state, DO give and grant, under and by virtue of the beforementioned
supplementary Act, and securing to the state, according to the directions,
reservations and stipulations therein contained and expressed, unto NICHOLAS
LONG, THOMAS GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and THOMAS CUMMING and their associates,
their heirs and assigns forever, in see simple, as tenants in common, and not
as joint tenants, ALL THAT tract or parcel of land, including islands, situate,
lying and being within the following boundaries, that is to say, BEGINNING on
the river Missisippi, at the place where the latitude of thirty-one degrees and
eighteen minutes north of the equatar intersects the same; thence a due east
course to the middle of Don or Tom Bigby river; thence up the middle of the
said river, to where it intersects the latitude of thirty-two degrees and forty
minutes north of the equator; thence a due west course along the Georgia
Company's line, to the river Missisippi; thence down the middle of the same to
the place of BEGINNING, together with all and singular the rights, members and
appurtenances whatsoever, to the said tract or parcel of land, including
islands, belonging, or in any wise appertaining; and also all the estate,
right, title, interest, claim and demand of the state aforesaid, of, in, to, or
out of, the same; reserving, nevertheless out of the said tract of land, six
hundred and twenty thousand acres, to be subscribed by, and for the use and
behoof of other citizens of the said state, who shall choose to do the same, at
such time, at such rates, and to such effect, and in such form and manner as
are pointed out and expressed in the before mentioned supplementary Act;
provided also, that the sad NICHOLAS LONG, THOMAS GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and
THOMAS CUMMING and their associates, shall not be entitled to dispose of the
said territory, in part or in whole, in any way or manner to any foreign King,
Prince, Potentate or Power whatever; TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said tract or
parcel of land, and all and singular the premises aforesaid, with their and
every of their rights, members and appurtenances, unto the said NICHOLAS LONG,
THOMAS GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and THOMAS CUMMING and their associates, called
the GEORGIA MISSISIPPI COMPANY, their heirs and assigns forever, in fee simple,
as tenants in common, and not as joint tenants.

GIVEN under my hand and the great seal of the said state, this twenty-sixth
day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, and in the nineteenth year of American Independence. GEO. MATHEWS.
SIGNED by his EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, the twenty-sixth day of January, 1795.
EDWARD WATTS, S. E. D.



The Grant being obtained, and the grantees having declared their associates,
and their names being registered as proprietors in the Company's stock, the
following Constitution, pointing out the manner in which the Company's property
is held, or may be transferred, and other regulations concerning the same, was
adopted.

CONSTITUTION OF THE GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI COMPANY.
ARTICLE I.
Section I.
THE name of the Company shall be the GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI COMPANY.

Sect. 2. Every person who shall subscribe this Constitution, shall be
considered a member, and subject to the conditions and limitations herein
expressed.

Sect. 3. The Company shall be composed of the proprietors of shares therein,
and the government of it shall be, as follows:

Fifteen persons being proprietors of not less than four shares each, shall be
annually elected to form a board of directors, which shall meet, at least, once
in a year, at such time and place, as they shall appoint, to be elected as
follows: Each proprietor shall send or deliver enclosed to the President, one
month before the day of annual meeting, a list of fifteen qualified persons,
for whom the Secretary shall, in the prefence of the President, admit for every
proprietor of not more than eight shares or less than four shares, one vote;
for every proprietor of twelve, and not more than twenty shares, two votes, and
for every proprietor of twenty shares or more, three votes; and no proprietor
shall have more than three votes; and the fifteen persons having the highest
number of votes shall be notified of their election, and summoned by the
President to attend the Board at the time and place appointed; or, any
proprietor may constitute another proprietor, by a power in writing, to vote
for him, and in either case, a vote being once delivered cannot be recalled.
Eight or more besides the President shall make a Board and exercise its powers.
The President of the Company shall be President of the Board of Directors.

The Board of Directors shall have authority to make all rules and ordinances,
for regulating the settlement intended to be made in the territory purchased,
for laying off, surveying and disposing of the same, for keeping up a friendly
intercourse with the Indian tribes, and preventing or causing to be punished
such frauds and abuses in trading with them, as the laws of the United States
have or shall provide for, and generally, all matters whatsoever for the
management and direction of the Company's affairs, not contrary to this
Constitution.

They shall have power to examine into the conduct of any officer or agent
employed in the Company's affairs, and remove or suspend such officer or agent
at pleasure; provided, that the President shall not be removed unless
two-thirds of the members present concur.

They may six the compensations of such officers and agents from time to time,
as may be employed in the company's affairs.

Sect. 4. There shall also be an Executive Board who shall consist of the
President and six Members, who shall be proprietors of not less than four
shares each, to be elected by the Board of Directors, by ballot, and to
continue one year and until the next meeting of the Board, which Executive
Board shall be considered to form a part of the Board of Directors in all
general deliberations.

The Executive Board shall have meetings quarter-yearly or oftener. It shall
have power to appoint agents not herein otherwise appointed, give instructions
to agents, and remove them at pleasure. The President shall preside at the said
Board, and a majority of the members present shall concur before any order can
be made, and two members besides the President shall constitute a Board, except
in such cases wherein a majority is required by the Constitution, in which
case, three must be present and concur.

The Executive Board may summon a special meeting of the Board of Directors if
they think necessary.

The President shall summon all the members of the Executive Board to attend
each meeting.

It shall be the duty of the Executive Board to carry into effect all
resolutions and ordinances of the Board of Directors.

Sect. 5. No person shall be eligible as a Director in this Company whose
property therein is not greater than in any other Company, Grantees excepted,
who now are, or hereafter may be purchasers of lands in the western territory
of this state; and every Director, not being a Grantee, before he enters on the
duties of his appointment, shall take and subscribe an oath, to be administered
by any justice of the peace, and filed as a record of the said Company, in the
following words: I A. B. do solemnly swear (or assirm) that I am not in my own
right possessed of a greater interest in any other company having purchased
lands in the western territory of this state, than I hold in the Georgia
Mssisippi Company, and if by purchase or otherwise, at any time during the
period of my appointment I should acquire an interest to a greater degree in
value, than in my own opinion I may at that time possess in the said Georgia
Missisippi Company, I will resign my said appointment, and the same is hereby
declared void.

Whenever vacancies shall happen in the Board of Directors, by resignation or
otherwise, they shall be filled up by the said Board, and the person or person
to elected, shall continue in office, until the then next annual election.

Sect. 6. There shall be a President of the Company elected by the Board of
Directors for one year, and to hold his appointment until a new election. He
shall be a proprietor in the Company's stock, at least four shares; he shall
have only a casting vote in the two Boards; he may call a special meeting of
the Executive Board as often as he may deem it necessary; he shall endeavor to
obtain and communicate to both Boards, all the information in his power that
may be of advantage to their affairs.

In case of the death, absence or other incapacity of the President, the Board
shall appoint a successor out of their own body, who shall exercise the powers
and perform the duties of President until the then next annual election.

Sect. 7. There shall be a Secretary appointed by the Board of Directors,
removeable at their pleasure, who shall be a proprietor: he shall keep true
minutes of the proceedings of both Boards, record their proceedings, and obey
all directions received from either.

He shall keep the register, and take an oath to discharge his duty faithfully;
he may be a member of either Board.

Sect. 8. The Board of Directors may appoint a Treasurer, who must be a
proprietor. He shall receive and pay all moneys belonging to the Company, and
keep all accounts of receipts and disbursements, and exhibit them to either
Board when required.

He shall pay no money without a warrant from the President.

He shall give bond with security for the use of the Company, in the sum of
fifty thousand dollars, with condition to keep true accounts, and to pay and
account for all moneys, securities, property and effects, that may come into
his hands, belonging to the Company, in such manner as he may be directed by
the proper Boards, and shall take an oath to that effect.

Sect. 9. So soon as may be convenient after this Constitution shall be
ratified and signed by such members as are present, the Company shall proceed
to elect by ballot, agreeable to the form prescribed by the third section of
this article, a Board of fifteen Directors, who shall hold their appointments
until the first Monday in November next, which day, and the same in each
succeeding year, shall be the stated period for all future elections.

The Board of Directors shall meet at Augusta so soon as they can be notified
of such appointment, to make choice of the Executive Board, appoint a Treasurer
and Secretary, and adopt such other regulations as the interest of the Company
may require.

ARTICLE II.
Sect. 1. ALL territory and rights, granted or conveyed to, or for the use of
the Company in whosoever's name or names the same may be granted or conveyed,
shall be an aggregate stock divided into sixteen hundred shares or equal parts,
and the sum to be paid for the same, shall likewise be divided into sixteen
hundred equal parts or quotas.

Sect. 2 Each person admitted a member, shall subscribe this Constitution, and
the Secretary shall register his name and the number of shares held by him, in
a book to be kept for that purpose only, to be called "The Register," and the
President shall deliver to the said subscriber, a certificate under the
following form: STATE OF GEORGIA.
THE Georgia Mississippi Company having purchased from the state aforesaid, a
certain tract of territory, lying between the rivers Mississippi and Tom Bigby,
and extending from thirty-one degrees eighteen minutes to thirtytwo degrees and
forty minutes North Latitude, computed to be one hundred and eighty miles in
length and ninety-five miles in breadth, (subject to a reservation of six
hundred and twenty thousand acres for other citizens,) The Grantees of the said
Company do hereby certify that A. B. or his assigns is entitled to share or
sixteen hundredth part in said Company, to be held agreeably to the rules and
regulations prescribed under the Constitution thereof.

Grantees of the Georgia Mississippi Company.

Which said certificate shall be subscribed by the Grantees, countersigned by
the Secretary, and indented, to guard against counterfeits.

Sect. 3. No certificate of any share or shares that has been heretofore issued
shall be valid, except such certificate be delivered up, and a new one obtained
in the name of the original holder or his assignee, subscribed and
countersigned as aforesaid; on obtaining which, and subscribing this
Constitution, the said original holder or his assignee, shall become a member,
be entitled to the privileges and advantages, and subject to the same
conditions, debts and demands the assignor was entitled to, or liable for, in
respect only of the shares so assigned.

Sect. 4. If any proprietor of a share or shares in the Company's stock, shall
fail so pay the full amount of the purchase money, or such share or shares, in
the proportion of a sixteen hundredth part for each share, punctually, on or
before the first day of August next, such share or shares whereon the whole
purchase money has not been so paid by the said first day of August, shall,
and the same are hereby declared to be, by the consent and agreement of the
said proprietor, absolutely revested in the said Company, and shall thenceforth
be considered as part of their stock, and to be disposed of by them as they may
think proper; and such proprietor, shall no longer be a member of the Company,
in respect of such revested shares, but a proprietor having several shares, may
hold as many of them as the whole money actually paid by him will fully pay
for; giving up only the remaining share or shares.

Sect. 5. All expenses incurred in procuring the grant and taking up the
mortgage to the state, and in carrying into effect, from time to time, such
measures as may be adopted by the proper Boards, shall be liquidated, from time
to time, by either of the said Boards, and paid by each proprietor in
proportion to the number of shares held by him; and if the sum so directed to
be paid, shall not be paid within three months after due notice given for that
purpose, as many of the shares of the said proprietor, on which the purchase
money shall have been paid, if any such there be, as will be sufficient to pay
the quota, shall be sold by the President, for the most that can reasonably be
got for it, to such person as the Executive Board approves, under the condition
herein before mentioned of being admitted a member on a transfer; and if there
be no share whereon the purchase money has been paid, or no purchaser can be
had, then, all the share or shares of such proprietor, shall be revested in the
Company's stock, in like manner as for non-payment of the purchase money, and
such proprietor shall cease to be a member: Provided, that no appropriation of
money, exclusive of such profits as each proprietor may have received or be
entitled to receive from the Company's fund, shall in the whole exceed the sum
of one hundred dollars for each share; and if any appropriation, or quota for
such expenses shall be made or called for, which shall exceed the said sum,
exclusive of profits as aforesaid, the members of the Board who made the same,
shall be liable for the excess in their private capacities.

Sect. 6. The right of each proprieter in the Company's stock, shall not (until
a division is made, as herein after mentioned) be a right to any proportion of
soil as of a real estate, but only a right to a dividend of any profits that
may be made in the proportion of a sixteen hundredth part for each share, after
payment of all expenses; but the Board of Directors, if eight shall concur,
may, by an ordinance, direct an apportionment and survey of the unappropriated
lands to the proprietors according to the number of shares possessed by each,
by an equal division in value, and the Company shall provide that the same be
duly conveyed accordingly, on the full completion of which, the said Company
is, and shall be thenceforth dissolved.

Sect. 7. The President and a majority of the whole Board of Directors and
Executive Board collectively, shall have power, and they are hereby fully
authorized to sell, and the grantees shall convey any part or parts, or the
whole of the territory and rights, granted and conveyed to the Company, to any
person or persons in fee simple, giving to the said purchaser all the
privileges and exemptions, and subject to all the provisoes and conditions,
contained in the Act for granting or conveying the same.

Sect. 8. No agent shall be engaged, nor instructions given to any agent, nor
any contract made to bind the company, or effect its interests, or new members
admitted, nor any agent removed or suspended, contract vacated, money paid or
debt contracted, unless by the direction of the Board of Directors, or the
Executive Board.

Sect. 9. The territory purchased by this Company, and held in sixteen hundred
equal shares as before mentioned, is hereby declared to be exclusive of the six
hundred and twenty thousand acresreserved for the subscription of citizens: And
it is further stipulated and agreed, that any subscriber to a part or parts of
said reserved land, who will deposit a legal certificate of such subscription
with the Board of Directors of this Company, with a relinquishment in writing,
of all rights and advantages thereby obtained, and subscribe to this
Constitution, shall thereupon become entitled to be a member of this Company,
subject to all the conditions of the same in the proportion of one share for
every five thousand acres of the subscription so relinquished, and the grantees
are required to issue a certificate accordingly; and every five thousand acres
so subscribed for, and relinquished to this company, shall be considered to
constitute one additional share over and above the sixteen hundred shares;
provided, that such additional shares shall not exceed one hundred and
twenty-four for the six hundred and twenty thousand acres aforesaid: But if any
of the subscribers to such reserved lands, shall refuse to relinquish his right
to the same for the consideration and in the manner herein proposed, such
subscriber shall remain subject to his due proportion of all expenses which the
Company shall pay on their purchase, and become entitled to the proportion of
such subscription when the Company shall make a division by actual survey of
their own lands.

Sect. 10. Any person admitted to become a proprietor, may subscribe this
Constitution by his attorney, duly authorized for that express purpose; the
power of attorney being deposited with the Secretary, and notice in any case to
such attorney, shall be as effectual as to the principal.

Sect 11. All moneys arising from a sale of any part of the Company's property,
after deducting the necessary expenses, shall be duly apportioned to each
share, within one month after such moneys shall have been received, and due
notice thereof shall be given, in at least two of the public newspapers, after
which notice, the holders of shares shall be entitled, either by personal
application, or power of attorney legally executed, to draw their dividend of
such money, agreeable to the number of shares so held by them, out of the
treasury of the Company.

DONE, ratified and signed at Augusta, in the state of Georgia, this fourteenth
day of January, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five.

EXTRACTS FROM "AN HISTORICAL NARRATIVE". WRITTEN BY THE LATE THOMAS HUTCHINS,
ESQUIRE, GEOGRAPHER TO THE UNITED STATES; AND PUBLISHED IN THE YEAR 1784.
IN his account of the river Mississippi and the adjacent country, he says:

"Is it not amazing, true as it is, that few amongst us know this to be the key
to the northern part of the western continent? It is the only channel through
which that extensive region, bathed by its waters, and enriched by the many
streams it receives, communicates with the sea. And here let us further
observe, that the Mississippi river may truly be considered as the great
passage made by the hand of nature for a variety of valuable purposes, but
principally to promote the happiness and benefit of mankind; amongst which, the
conveyance of the produce of that immense and fertile country, lying westward
of the United States, down its stream to the Gulf of Mexico, is not the least.

"The slime which the annual floods of the river Mississippi leaves on the
surface of the adjacent shoses, may be compared with that of the Nile, which
deposits a similar manure, and for many centuries past has insured the
fertility of Egypt. When its banks shall have been cultivated as the excellency
of its soil and temperature of the climate deserve, its population will equal
that, or any other part of the world. The trade, wealth and power of America
will at some future period, depend and perhaps center upon the Mississippi.

"An objection has been often made by misinformed men, otherwise of great
abilities, who too credulously believed that the navigation of the Mississippi
river, on account of its rapid current, was more difficult than it is in
reality. It appears from the calculation made by several skilful and
experienced travelers, that in the autumn when the waters are low, the current
descends at the rate of about one and a half or two miles in an hour; and that
the waters are in this state more than one half of the year. In the spring when
the freshes are up, or at their greatest height, the current runs at the rate
of five or six miles. It is true that the navigation would be difficult at that
season, to those who sail or row up against the stream; but there is no example
of such folly. When the waters of this river are high, the commodities and
produce of the interior country are gathered and prepared for exportation with
the descending current. And when the waters are low, the produce of the
interior country is growing to maturity. This is the time for the navigator's
importation. Great advantages are likewise taken then from eddy currents. At
present there are few builders skilful enough to construct vessels better
calculated for that navigation, than those already mentioned. -- Time and
experience will doubtless produce improvements, and render the navigation of
this river nearly as cheap as any other. But that the Mississippi can answer
every purpose of trade and commerce, is proved to a demonstration, by the rapid
progress the French, German, and Acadian inhabitants on that river, have made.
They have attained a state of opulence never before so soon acquired in any new
country. And this was effected under all the discouragements of an indolent and
rapacious government. It may be further asserted, that no country in
North America, or perhaps in the universe, exceeds the neighborhood of the
Mississippi in fertility of soil and temperature of climate. Both sides of this
river are truly remarkable for the very great diversity and luxuriancy of their
productions. They might probably be brought, from the favorableness of the
climate, to produce two annual crops of Indian corn as well as rice, and with
little cultivation would furnish grain of every kind in the greatest abundance.
But their value is not confined to the fertility and immensity of champaign
lands; their timber is as fine as any in the world, and the quantities of live
and other oak, ash, mulberry, walnut, cherry, cypress and cedar, are
astonishing. The neighborhood of the Mississippi, besides furnishes the
richest fruits in great variety, particularly grapes, oranges, and lemons in
the highest perfection. It produces silk, cotton, saffafrass, saffron and
rhubarb; is peculiarly adapted for hemp and flax, and in goodness of tobacco
equals the Brazils; and indigo is at this present a staple commodity, which
commonly yields the planter from three to four cuttings. In a word, whatever is
rich or rare in the most desirable climates in Europe, seems natural to such a
degree on the Mississippi, that France, though she sent few or no emigrants
into Louisiana but decayed soldiers, or persons in indigent circumstances, (and
these very poorly supplied with the implements of husbandry) soon began to
dread a rival in her colony, particularly in the cultivation of vines, from
which she prohibited the colonists under a very heavy penalty; yet soil and
situation triumphed over all political restraints, and the adventurers, at the
end of the war in 1762, were very little inferior to the most ancient
settlements of America in all the modern refinements of luxury."

Of the river Amit, which runs through a considerable part of the Company's
lands, he says:

"The river Amit falls into the Ibberville on the North side, about 21 miles
from the junction of the Ibberville with the Missisippi. The water of the Amit
is clear, with a gravelly bottom. It may be ascended with vessels drawing five
or six feet water, about half a dozen miles, and with batreaux 100 miles
further. Seventeen miles from the Ibberville this river forks; the western
branch, called the Commit, has its source near the country of the Natchez; and
the eastern branch, which is the most considerable, rises near the Pearl river:
both these branches run through a very fertile country, in some parts hilly,
which, as well as the low lands, is covered with canes, oaks, ash, mulberry,
hickory, poplar, cedar and cypress."

And of the river Pearl, which runs from north to south through the greater
part of the Company's purchase, he says:

"Near the entrance at the East end of the Regolets, and on the North side, are
the principal mouths of Pearl river, which rises in the Chactaw nation, and is
navigable upwards of 150 miles. There is 7 feet going into it, and deep water
afterward. In the year 1769, there were some settlements on this river, where
they raised tobacco, indigo, cotton, rice, Indian corn, and all sorts of
vegetables. The land produces a variety of timber fit for pipe and hogshead
staves, masts, yards, and all kinds of plank for ship building."

In his description of the river Tom Bigby, (the Company's eastern boundary)
and the adjacent country, he observes:

"The river is navigable for sloops and schooners about 35 leagues above the
town of Mobille. The banks, where low, are partly overflowed in the rainy
seasons, which adds greatly to the soil, and adapts it particularly to the
cultivation of rice. -- The sides of the river are covered in many places with
large canes, so thick that they are almost impenetrable; there is also plenty
of remarkable large red and white cedar, cypress, elm, ash, hickory and various
kinds of oak. Several people have settled on this river, who find the soil to
answer beyond expectation.

"The lands near the mouth of the Mobille river are generally low: As you
proceed upwards, the lands grow higher, and may with great propriety be divided
into three stages. First, low rice lands on or near the banks of the river, of
a most excellent quality. Secondly, what are called by the people of the
country second low grounds, or level flat cane lands about 4 or 5 feet higher
than the low rice lands. And, thirdly the high upland or open country. The
first or low lands extend about an half or 3 quarters of a mile from the river,
and may almost every where be easily drained and turned into most excellent
rice fields, and are capable of being laid under water at almost all seasons of
the year. They are a deep black mud or slime, which have in a succession of
time been accumulated, or formed by the overflowing of the river.

"The second low grounds being, in general, formed by a regular rising of about
4 or 5 feet higher than the low lands, appear to have been originally the edge
of the river. This second class or kind of land is in general extremely rich
and covered with large timber and thick strong canes, extending in width upon
an average three quarters of a mile, and in general a perfect level. It is
excellent for all kinds of grain, and well calculated for the culture of
indigo, hemp, flax or tobacco.

"At the extremity of these second grounds, you come to what is called the high
or upland, which is covered with pine, oak and hickory, and other kinds of
large timber. The soil is of a good quality, but much inferior to the second or
low land. It answers well for raising Indian corn, potatoes, and every thing
else that delights in a dry light soil. Further out in the country again, on
the West side of this river, you come to a pine barren, with extensive reed
swamps and natural meadows of savannahs which afford excellent ranges of
innumerable herds of cattle.

"Whenever portages are made between the Mobille and Cherokee (or Tennessee)
rivers, or their branches, which are probably but a few miles apart, the
Mobille will be the firstriver for commerce, (the Mississippi excepted) in this
part of the world, as it affords the shortest and most direct communication to
the sea."

There are many other rivers besides those already mentioned, running in
different directions through that part of the western territory; some falling
into the Mississippi, and others into the bay of Mobille; among which may be
numbered the Chactaw river running nearly parallel to the Tom Bigby; the Yazou,
which empties itself into the Mississippi just above the Walnut hills, and
within the Company's northern boundary; also the Big Black (remarkable for the
uniformly fertile soil in its neighborhood) which likewise falls into the
Mississippi below the Yazou, and above the Natchez; the whole forming a direct
and easy communication between the interior country and the sea board.

Mr. Hutchins in describing the soil of the Natchez district, (the whole of
which lies within the limits of the Georgia Mississippi Company's Grant) says:

"The soil, at this place, is superior to any of the lands on the boarders of
the river Mississippi, for the production of many articles. Its situation being
higher, affords a greater variety of soil, and is in a more favorable climate
for the growth of wheat, rye, barley, oats, etc. than the country lower down,
and nearer to the sea. The soil also produces, in equal abundance, Indian corn,
rice, hemp, flax, indigo, cotton, pot herbs, pulse of every kind, and
pasturage; and the tobacco made here is esteemed preferable to any cultivated
in other parts of America. Hops grow wild; all kinds of European fruits arrive
to great perfection, and no part of the known world is more favorable for the
raising of every kind of stock. The climate is healthy and temperate; the
country delightful and well watered; and the prospect is beautiful and
extensive, variegated by many inequalities and fine meadows, separated by
innumerable copses, the trees of which are of different kinds, but mostly of
walnut and oak. The rising grounds, which are clothed with grass and other
herbs of the finest verdure, are properly disposed for the culture of vines;
the mulberry trees are very numerous, and the winters sufficiently moderate for
the breed of silk worms. Clay of different colors, fit for glass works and
pottery, is found here in great abundance; and also a variety of stately timber
fit for house and ship building, etc."

The Company is not in possession of any documents at present by which the
exact limits of the Natchez district can be ascertained: It is, however,
material to the interest of those concerned, to know, that the Indian title has
been fairly and honestly extinguished, on a very considerable portion of the
Company's lands, and that, on such (...) therefore, settlements may lawfully be
formed at any time. In confirmation of which, the following extract is taken
from the Treaty concluded at Hopewell, between the Commissioners of the United
States and the Chactaw nation, on the third day of January, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-six.

"ARTICLE III.
"The boundary of the lands hereby allotted to the Chactaw nation to live and
hunt on, within the limits of the United States of America, is and shall be the
following, viz. Beginning at a point on the the thirty-first degree of north
latitude, where the eastern boundary of the Natchez district shall touch the
same; thence east along the said thirty-first degree of north latitude, being
the southern boundary of the United States of America, until it shall strike
the eastern boundary of the lands on which the Indians of the said nation did
live and hunt on the twenty-ninth of November, one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-two, while they were under the protection of the King of Great Britain;
thence northerly along the said eastern boundary, until it shall meet the
northern boundary of the said lands; thence westerly along the said northern
boundary, until it shall meet the western boundary thereof; thence southerly
along the same to the beginning."

To this circumstance so favorable to an uninterrupted settlement of the
Company's lands, may be added the pleasing prospect of a speeedy and amicable
adjustment of the controversy between the United States and the Spanish
government, concerning the free navigation of the Mississippi and other rivers
in that quarter, which, being accomplished, will not only make these lands more
accessable to settlers from abroad, and from the northern and middle states,
than the present circuitous rout by the Ohio, etc. but will open secure outlets
to the ocean for the immense productions of the western country.

APPENDIX.
Questions proposed to Mr. PURCELL, concerning the purchases of lands lying on
the Mississippi, by the Georgia Mississippi Company.
1. ARE you well acquainted with the countries in question, and what
opportunities and occasions have you had to acquire a knowledge of them?

2. What part of the river Mississippi will a line drawn in latitude 31, 18
north, intersect?

3. What is the distance on this last line, from the river Mississippi, to the
Donbigby or Tom-bigby?

4. How far above the mouth of the Yazou river will a line drawn in latitude
32, 40 north intersect the Mississippi?

5. What is the distance on the last line from the Mississippi to the Tombigby?

6. What is the extent, and the boundary lines of the Natchez District; when,
and by whom was it purchased from the Indians, and has it been actually
surveyed?

7. Is the big ball ground on the Yazou, south of the line beforementioned, to
be drawn in 32, 40, or is it north of that line?

8. What rivers or other principal water courses rise in, or run through the
district of country bounded by the rivers Mississippi, and Donbigby, and the
lines aforesaid; how far does the tides run up them, and which are large enough
to admit large batteaux?

9. What is the general face of the country, the soil, and timber; and how
supplied with water, particularly streams for erecting Saw, and Grist-Mills?

ANSWERS to the QUESTIONS proposed.
1. I AM well acquainted with the country in question, and have acquired that
knowledge, by being employed some years as surveyor to the southern Indian
department, under the direction of the superintendant of Indian affairs under
the British Government.

2. The parallel of latitude 31, 18, strikes the river Mississippi two miles
above the mouth of St. Catharine's Creek, at the upper end of the white Cliffs,
and eight miles below the Natche Fort.

3. The distance, from the Mississippi along said parellel of lat. 31, 18, to
the Tombeckbe, river is 213 miles.

4. The parellel of lat. 32, 40, intersects the Mississippi river 24 miles
above the mouth of Yazou river.

5. The distance along said parellel of lat. 32, 40, from the Mississippi to
the Tombecbe, is 188 miles.

6. The Natche district is bounded to the westward, by the Mississippi river,
and extends from Losthus's Cliffs up said river to the mouth of Yazou river the
distance being 110 miles. To the north on the then reputed boundary of Georgia,
extending from the mouth of the Yazou along said line, east 15 miles. To the
east, by the Chactow boundary line, extending along said line, south 100 miles,
to the Manchac district line. To the south, by the Manchac district line, along
said line westwardly 60 miles to the Lofthus's Cliffs on the Mississippi. The
said district was purchased from the Chactaw nation by the British
superintendant of Indian affairs at a Treaty held at Mobille in May 1777, and
the lines as above described, were marked and surveyed by me, in 1779.

7. The Attold, or big ball ground, on the Yazou river, lies 15 miles south of
lat. 32, 40.

8. Hateha Cornesa, the Hatcha, or Pearl river, and the Yazou river, runs
through the said district of Country, and Hoslap Hateha, Hatcha Oosee, Hooma
Chitto, and Loosan Chitto rivers, with St. Catharines Creek, Coals, Bayon
Pierre, and other smaller Creeks take their rise within said territory.

The Mobile or Tombeckbe is the only river that the tide runs up any distance,
its influence being felt at times as far up as the sun-flower, 180 miles from
the sea, and 16 north of lat. 31, 18.

The Mississippi, the Pearl, Pasca Oocoola, and Tombeckbe are the only rivers
in said tract of country that will admit the navigation of large batteaux.

9. The face of the country is in places hilly, with high ridges, not rocky nor
stony, and in places flat, and level, with extensive plains or Savannahs, and
low swamps; in general woody and well timbered: on the river banks, and for
some distance back, are large and thick Cane breaks, and on the top of the
ridges in many places, between the trees, is grown thick with reeds and small
cane.

The soil on the Mississippi, is in general of the first quality, and extends
from 20 to 50 miles back, the timber on the high lands consists of a variety of
oaks, black walnut, Mulberry, Hickory, wild cherry, etc. on the flat and level
ground grow different kinds of oak, beech, ash, maple, sasafras, pakan, the
cotton, the locust, etc. in general large and lofty, and mostly thick with
large canes: and the low swamps which are flowed by the river at every ordinary
fresh, abounds with large cypress trees, gum etc. in places thick with cane;
the plains or savanas, and Indian old fields, are covered with good grass, and
abundance of strawberries.

The lands on the Tombeckbe river, consists of high, and low swamps, the soil
good and rich, well timbered, and thick with canes, and high and flat lands,
the soil in some places good, in others light, and sandy, in general well
wooded with oaks, hicory, gums, beech, pines etc. in places thick with small
canes or reeds, and is in most respects, similar to Savannah river in Georgia.

The lands on the other rivers, consist of high and low swamps, and high and
flat land, the soil in places good, in others but indifferent, in general well
timbered with oaks, hicory, beech, pine, gum, cypress, tupelo, ash, maple etc.
and in places covered with large, and small canes.

The land and soil, on the ridges between said rivers and branches, is in
general light and gravelly, in places mixed with some small stones; the timber,
or woods, mixed with oak, hicory, pines etc.

The country in general is very well watered with numberless excellent springs,
but on the Mississippi in very dry seasons, most of the rivulets, and branches
run dry which make a great want of good water for drinking;but as the country
becomes more clear and settled, new, never failing springs are discoved which
promise a great plenty of good tasted and wholesome water, at any season. There
are a great number of good mill seats within the tract of country here
described; and has a most excellent range for cattle, it being interspersed
with a vast number of reedy branches and other good winter range.

Certified this 14th day of March, 1795, in the City of Charlestown, and State
of South Carolina. Sworn before me this 16th day of March 1795, to each
particular answer, By JOSEPH PURCELL.


I certify that the preceding Questions and Answers are copies of Questions
put by me to Mr. JOSEPH PURCELL of Charleston, in South Carolina, and of his
Answers sworn before JOHN MITCHELL, ESQUIRE. Justice of Peace, and all written by
the Deponent himself, which Questions and Answers are in my possession.

NATHANIEL PENDLETON.
Savannah, May 2nd, 1795.


[As some doubts have arisen whether the claim set up by the Court of Spain, to
a part of the territory purchased by the Georgia Mississippi Company, as well
as to the exclusive privilege of navigating the River Mississippi; might not be
so far founded in justice as to diminish the value of the purchase -- It has
been thought expedient to annex the following original papers, which will serve
to place in a clear point of view the extent and fallacy of this claim, as well
as to explain the opinion of our own government, officially expressed, on this
subject.]
Translation of a letter from the Duke of ALCUDIA, to Mess'rs CARMICHAEL and
SHORT.
GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE perused attentively your letter of the 7th instant, by which you
acknowledge my letter directed to you on the 26th of November last past, it
being an answer to yours of the same month. I fully accede to your opinion,
that it is a matter of the greatest importance to establish between the United
States and Spain, the wished for good understanding and friendship; and that
both governments ought, without reserve, to communicate their mutual
sentiments; and that it will in consequencee be indispensable that they be
explained clearly. However that very principle points out to me the propriety
to call your mind, that the demand made in your letter of the 21st, principally
purports to be informed whether this court intends to interfere, in case as it
was highly probable that the United States should find themselves obliged to
repel by force, the hostile aggressions of the southern Indian nations. As on
your part there has not been made, in your communications transmitted to me
till this day, a distinction between the Indians residing within the territory
of the United States, and those living in his Majesty's dominions; I do not
therefore see why you should, in the least, expect it in my answers. As little
do I conceive, how you could doubt, that in that letter those Indians alone
were treated of who reside within the territory of Spain, with whom his Majesty
has concluded a treaty of friendship; and that in no manner can be
comprehended, those Indians who live within the boundaries of the United
States. Therefore, Spain does not propose to herself, any other object, than
the maintaining of the legal power in the territories which belong to her, and
will not take a decided part in favor of the Indians, except when justice and
equity call for the same. I am as firmly persuided as you are, that he
uncertainty that has prevailed heretofore in those Indian affairs, originated
from the want of fixing positively, the limits between the United States and
Spain. And I can assure you, that his Majesty is likewise convinced of the same
truth; and being desirous to give to the United States, an unequivocal proof of
his sincere wishes to draw closer the bonds of friendship and of good
understanding between the two countries, he will not permit the decision of the
limits to be retarded, but will cause the same to be carried on with the utmost
dispatch. I participate in the professions of your letter on the 7th instant,
and repeat the assurance of my zeal to oblige you; remaining under prayers to
God to preserve you many years.

Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, THE DUKE OF ALCUDIA. (Signed)
Messrs. CARMICHAEL and SHORT. ST. LORENZO, Dec. 18 th, 1793.
LETTER from Mr. SHORT, dated Madrid, 21 st Jan. 1704.
WE received yesterday a letter from the Duke of Alcudia, saying, that since
his last of the 26th of November, and 18th December, the letters so long
expected from Louisiana and the Floridas, had arrived; and that by the
intelligence given in them by the Governor's of those Provinces, his Majesty
was satisfied that the Indians bordering on Spain and the United States, had
been really the aggressors against the peaceable inhabitants of Georgia, on
whom they had exercised their cruelty and barbarity; and that in consequence
thereof, his Majesty had given orders to those Governors to give no assistance
to the Indians, and had charged him to inform us thereof, that we might
communicate it to the President as a new proof of the justice and impartiality
of his Majesty, and of his desire to strengthen his friendship with the United
States. I have thought not a moment should be lost to give you notice of this,
and therefore without waiting for the delay of a joint letter, I send this by
the several channels of this days post. No mention was made by the Duke, of our
letter of December 22d, and therefore nothing furnished on the limits. We have
written to day to ask an answer on that subject -- beg leave to refer you to
our joint letter of January 7, by Col. Humphreys.

I have the honor to be, with the most profound respect, Sir, your most
obedient servant, WM. SHORT. The Secretary of State for the United States.

Explication of the Right of the United States to the navigation of the River
Missisippi, and to the jurisdiction of the western part of the State of Georgia.
THE conferences which the commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States
have hitherto had with his Excellency the plenipotentiary of his Catholic
Majesty, on the subjects of limits and the navigation of the Missisippi, have
not had the issue expected. It is hoped that a more perfect and full
examination of the right of the respective parties, and a comparison of the
documents on which they are founded, may give a different result.

WE, the commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States, therefore proceed
to reduce to a more permanent form the claims of the United States, which we
have heretofore stated and supported in the conferences, and to show the title
from which they are derived.

The several states now composing the United States of America, were from their
first establishments dependent on no other society of men whatever. They
continued at the head of their respective governments, the executive magistrate
who presided over the one they had left, and thereby secured in effect a
constant amity with that nation during the time of that connection. In this
stage of their government the several boundaries were fixed, and particularly
the southern boundary of Georgia, the one now brought into question by Spain.
This boundary was fixed by the proclamation of the King of Great Britain, their
chief magistrate, in the year 1763, at a time when no other power pretended any
claim whatever to any pars of the country through which it run. All the
territory on the left side of the Mississippi, except the town of New Orleans,
and the Island in which it is situated, having been previously yielded by the
treaty of Paris, to which H. C. M. was one of the high contracting parties.

The boundary of Georgia was thus established, to begin on the Mississippi in
310 of lat. north of the equator, and running eastwardly to the Apalachicola,
thence along the said river to the mouth of the Flint, thence in a direct line
to the source of St. Mary's river, and down the same to the ocean. The western
boundary originally the Pacific ocean, was by the treaty of Paris reduced to
the middle of the Mississippi.

In the late war which took place between Great Britain and the consederated
states, and in the course of which we were joined by France as an ally, and by
Spain and Holland as associates, having a common enemy this boundary was the
line of demareation to the south, between the country which engaged in the war
against Great Britain and that which continued under British government;
Georgia having entered into the consederation, and Florida having remained in
its former state. At the conclusion of hostilities Great Britain (the only
power against whom the United States had been engaged in war) acknowledged
their boundary, and that without extending it to the prejudice of Spain, as is
pretended; but on the contrary confirming that of Georgia in particular, as it
had existed from the year 1763: In the treaty afterward made with Spain,
Great Britain ceded the two Floridas (which had been defined in the
proclamation of 1763) and Minorca; and by an express article of the treaty,
Spain agreed to restore without compensation, all the territories conquered by
her, and not included in the treaty either under the head of cessions or
restitutions, that is to say, all except Minorca and the Floridas. According to
this stipulation Spain was expressly bound to have delivered up the possessions
she had taken within the limits of Georgia, to Great Britain, if they were
conquests only. Britain, who was to deliver them over to the United States, or
rather Spain, should have delivered them to the United States themselves as
standing quo ad hoe, in the place of G. Britain. Spain was bound also by
natural right to deliver them to the United States on a still stronger ground,
as the real and only proprietors of those places which she had taken possession
of, without having had any cause of war with the United States, to whom they
belonged, and without having declared any; but on the contrary conducting
herself in other respects as a friend and associate in a war against a common
enemy. It is an established principle that conquest gives only an inchoate
right, which does not become perfect till confirmed by the treaty of peace, and
by a renunciation or abandonment of the former proprietor. Had G. Britain been
that former proprietor, she was so far from confirming to Spain the right to
the territory of Georgia, invaded by Spain, that she expressly relinquished to
the United States any right that might remain in her, and afterward completed
that relinquishment by further procuring and consolidating the agreement with
Spain herself, to restore such territory, if comprehended within the conquests
of Spain, without compensation. It is still more palpable that a war existing
between two nations, as Spain and G. Britain, can give to neither the right to
seize and appropriate the tertory of a third which is even neutral, much less
which is an associate in the war, as the United States were with Spain. On the
conclusion of the general peace, the United States lost no time in requiring
from Spain an evacuation of their territory. This has hit her to been delayed
by means which need not be explained here, but which have been equally contrary
to the right, and to the consent of the United States. From what has been said
it results --:

1. That the boundary of Georgia now forming the southern limits of the UNITED
STATES, was lawfully established in the year 1763.

2. That it has been since confirmed by the only power who could at any time
have had pretensions to contest it, founded on a state of war.

3. That GREAT BRITAIN by the late treaty of peace obtained of Spain a
renunciation to all pretensions within this boundary so as to have removed
every pretext for questioning the right of GREAT BRITAIN, to have confirmed
that boundary to the UNITED STATES.

4. That Spain can have no right to any claim by conquest within the limits of
the UNITED STATES, having never been in a state of war with them.

The right of the UNITED STATES, to participate in the navigation of the
Mississippi rests on two separate and distinct foundations, either of which
would suffice to establish it clearly. These are

I. The treaties of Paris of 1763 and of 1782/3, the latter between the
United-States and Great Britain.

II. The law of nature and nations.

I. The war of 1755, 1763 was carried on jointly by Great Britain, and the
thirteen colonies now the United-States of America against France and Spain. By
the treaty of peace which was negociated by our common chief Magistrate, and to
which as has been observed, H. C. M. was one of the high contracting parties, a
right was secured to the subjects of Great Britain, (the common designation of
all those under his government) to navigate this river in the terms following.
"The navigation of the river Mississippi, shall be equally free to the subjects
of Great Britain, and those of France, in all its breadth and extent from its
source to the sea, and especially that part of it which is between the
abovementioned Island of New-Orleans, and the right bank of this river, as well
as the entrance and passage out through its mouth. It is moreover stipulated
that vessels belonging to the subjects of the one or the other nation, shall
not be arrested, visited or subjected to the payment of any duty whatsoever."

Spain soon after received from France, a Cession of the Island of New-Orleans,
and all country she held westward of the Mississippi, subject of course to our
right of navigating between that country and the Island previously granted to
us by France. Thus stood our right to navigate the Mississippi under the treaty
of Paris. In the course of the late war in which the United-States, Spain and
France were opposed to Great Britain, Spain took possession of several posts
held by the British in Florida. It is unnecessary to examine whether the
possession of half a dozen posts scattered through a country of seven or eight
hundred miles extent, could be considered as the possession and conquest of
that country. If it were, it gave still but an inchoate right as was explained
above, which could not be perfected but by the relinquishment of the former
proprietor at the close of the war. But certainly it could not be considered as
a conquest of the river even against Great Britain, since the possession of the
shores, to wit of the Island of New-Orleans on one side, and Louisiana on the
other, had undergone no change.

Still less can Spain be considered as having conquered the river as against
the United States with whom she was not at war. When this war commenced, we had
a common right of navigation in the part of the river between Florida, the
Island of New-Orleans, and the western bank; and nothing which passed between
Spain and Great Britain, either during the war, or at its conclusion, could
lessen that right. Accordingly at the treaty of Novemver 1782, Great Britain
confirmed the rights of the United States, to the navigation of the river from
its source to its mouth, and in January 1783 completed the right of Spain to
the territory of Florida, by an absolute relinquishment of all her rights in
it. This relinquishment could not include the navigation held by the United
States in their own right, because this right existed in themselves only, and
was not in Great Britain. It could only transfer that portion of right which
Great Britain had retained to herself in the treaty with the United States held
seven weeks before, to wit, a right of using it in common with the United
States.

So that as by the treaty of 1768 the United States had obtained a common right
of navigating the whole river from its source to its mouth, so by the treaty of
1781 that common right was confirmed to them by the only power who could
pretend claims against them founded on a state of war. Nor has that common
right been transferred to Spain either by conquest or Cession.

II. Independent of the right of the United States to navigate the Mississippi
as above established, they are entitled to it also by that code which is
founded in natural justice, sanctioned by the usuage of all civilized
countries, and strengthened by the morality of sovereigns. -- The law of nature
and Nations.

There is no principle of natural justice more strongly marked than that seas
are free to all men, and rivers to all their inhabitants. There is no man,
savage or civilized, unbiased by habit, who does not feel and attest this
truth. Accordingly in all tracts of country united under the same political
society, we find this natural right universally acknowledged and protected, by
laying the navigable rivers open to all their inhabitants. When their rivers
enter the limits of another society, if the right of the upper inhabitants to
descend the stream, be in any case obstructed, it is an abridgement of the
natural right effected by some act of society. -- Such an abridgement will
necessarily be considered by impartial observers, with a reference to the
comparitive numbers of persons above, and those below the limits of the two
countries, the nature and extent of the river, and other attending
circumstances.

It is easy to see that there are cases in which such an abridgement could be
only by an act of force in a stronger society against a weaker one, which would
be condemned by the Judgment of mankind.

Such an act of force is in some cases supposed to be modified by the upper
inhabitants, having bound themselves for some valuable consideration to
renounce their natural right of navigating the river.

It is not necessary to examine here how far this right be an alienable one,
and what circumstances of necessity can justify such an alienation so as to be
binding on themselves and their posterity.

The examples of history leave no doubt that this will unavoidably depend in
some degree on the progressive relations of times and countries.

Whenever it be pretended however that an (...) so contrary to natural justice,
has been made, it may be at least expected that the act of renunciation should
be produced. Such an act would of course have been a solemn one, negociated by
those duly authorized to act in the name of the society, and therefore easy to
be produced if it existed. Until it be produced, it is fair to suppose that the
rights of the upper inhabitants, anticedent thereto and founded on natural
justice, exist in all their integrity. With respect to the United States they
have been so far from assenating this right, that the only acts in which the
subject has been mentioned as respecting them, have as has been shown above,
expressly secured and confirmed to them by treaty, the rights of navigation to
which they are entitled by natural law.

So far as this sentiment of right in favor of the upper inhabitants depends on
a comparison of the numbers above and below the limits, or in other words, of
those certainly to be benefitted, and those supposed to be liable to injury
from the freedom of the navigation, there is no case in which it can be more
strongly marked than in the present.

The United States hold 600,000 square miles of habitable territory on the
Mississippi and its branches, and this river and its branches afford many
thousands of miles of navigable waters penetrating this territory in all its
parts. The inhabitable grounds of Spain, below our boundary and bordering on
the river, which alone can pretend any fear of being incommoded by our use of
the river, are not the thousandth part of that extent. This vast portion of the
territory of the United States, has no other outlet for its productions, and
these productions are of the bulkiest kind. And in truth their passage down the
river may not only be innocent as to the Spanish subjects on the river, but
from their nature might be made really advantageous to the commercial interests
of Spain.

If we appeal to the law of nature and nations as expressed by those writers on
the subject whose authority is admitted by all, it is agred by them that were
the river, where it passes between Florida and Louisiana the exclusive right of
Spain, still innocent passage along it, is a natural right in those inhabiting
its borders above; it would indeed be what those writers call an imperfect
right, because the modification of its exercise would depend in a considerable
degree on the convenience of the nation through which they are to pass. But it
is still a right as real as any other right however well defined: and were it
to be refused or to be shackled by regulations not necessary for the peace or
safety of its inhabitants, so as to render its use impracticable, it would then
be an injury of which they would be entitled to demand redress.

The right of the upper inhabitants to use this navigation, is the counterpart
to that of those possessing the shores below, and founded in the same natural
relations with the soil and water; and the line at which their rights meet, is
to be advanced or withdrawn, so as to equalize the inconveniences resulting to
each party, from the exercise of the right by the other.

This estimate is to be fairly made with a mutual disposition to make equal
sacrifices, and the numbers on each side are to have their due weight in the
estimate -- Spain holds so very small a tract of habitable land on either side
below our boundary, that it may in fact be considered as a straight of the sea.
For though it is 80 leagues from our boundary to the mouth of the river, yet it
is only here and there, in spots and slips, that the land rises above the level
of the water, in times of inundation. There are then, and ever must be, so few
inhabitants on her part of the river, that the freeest use of its navigation
may be allowed to us, without inconvenience to Spain.

WILLIAM CARMICHAEL. WILLIAM SHORT.

Madrid, Dec. 7th, 1793.

