A DEFENSE OF THE TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE, AND NAVIGATION, ENTERED INTO
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and GREAT BRITAIN, AS IT HAS APPEARED IN
THE PAPERS UNDER THE SIGNATURE OF CAMILLUS.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND CO. AND SOLD BY JAMES
RIVINGTON, AT No. 156, Pearl-street, also at the other (...) Stores of this
City. -- 1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE discussion of the present Book having been drawn out to an unexpected
length; the Publishers have been induced to offer the first twenty-two Numbers,
as embracing one principal subdivision of the whole matter (to wit) all that
relates to the adjustment of past controversies between the two countries.

The remaining Numbers will also be published as soon as they are finished.

THE DEFENSE.
No. I.
IT was to have been foreseen, that the Treaty which Mr. Jay was charged to
negociate with Great Britain, whenever it should appear, would have to contend
with many perverse dispositions and some honest prejudices. That there was no
measure in which the government could engage so little likely to be viewed
according to its intrinsic merits -- so very likely to encounter misconception,
jealousy, and unreasonable dislike. For this many reasons my be assigned.

It is only to know the vanity and vindictiveness of human nature, to be
convinced, that while this generation lasts there will always exist among us,
men irreconcilable to our present national constitution -- embittered in their
animosity, in proportion to the success of its operation, and the
disappointment of their in uspicious predictions. It is a natural inference
from this, that such men will watch with Lynx's eyes for opportunities of
discrediting the proceedings of the government, and will display a hostile and
malignant zeal upon every occasion, where they think there are any
prepossessions of the community to favor their enterprises. A treaty with
Great Britain was too fruitful an occasion not to call forth all their activity.

It is only to consult the history of nations to perceive, that every country
at all times, is cursed by the existence of men, who, actuated by an irregular
ambition, scruple nothing which they imagine will contribute to their own
advancement and importance. -- In monarchies, supple courtiers, in republics,
fawning or turbulent demagogues, worshipping still the idol power wherever
placed, whether in the hands of a prince, or of the people, and trafficking in
the weaknesses, vices, frailties, or prejudices of the one or the other. It was
to have been expected, that such men, counting more on the passions than on the
reason of their fellow citizens, and anticipating that the treaty would have to
struggle with prejudices, would be disposed to make an alliance with popular
discontent, to nourish it, and to press it into the service of their particular
views.

It was not to have been doubted, that there would be one or more foreign
powers indisposed to a measure which accommodated our differences with Great
Britain, and laid the foundation of future good understanding, merely because
it had that effect.

Nations are never content to confine their rivalsh^ps and enmities to
themselves. It is their usual policy to disseminate them as wide^y a^ they can,
regardless how far it may interfere with the tranqu^lity or happiness of the
nations which they are able to influence. Whatever pretensions may be made, the
world is yet remote from the spectacle of that just and generous policy,
whether in the cabinets of republics, or of kings, which would dispose one
nation in its intercourses with another, satisfied with a due proportion of
privileges and benefits, to see that others pursue freely, its true interest,
with regard to a third; though at the expense of no engagement, nor in
violation of any rule of friendly or fair procedure. It was natural that the
contrary spirit should produce efforts of foreign counteraction to the treaty,
and it was certain that the partisans of the counteracting power would second
its efforts by all the means which they thought calculated to answer the end.

It was known, that the resentment produced by our revolution war with
Great Britain had never been entirely extinguished, and that recent injuries
had rekindled the flame with additional violence. It was a natural consequence
of this that many should be declined to any amicable arrangement with
Great Britain, and that many others should be prepared to acquiesce only in a
treaty which should present advantages of so striking and preponderant a kind,
as it was not reasonable to expect could be obtained, and as under the coercion
of such a situation could have been, if obtained, but a short lived prelude of
a speedy rupture to get rid of them.

Unfortunately too the supposition of that situation has served to foster
exaggerated expectations, and the absurd delusion to this moment prevails,
notwithstanding the plain evidence to the contrary, which is deducible from the
high and haughty ground still maintained by Great Britain against victorious
France.

It was not to be mistaken that an enthusiasm for France and her revolution
throughout all its wonderful vicissitudes has continued to possess the minds of
the great body of the people of this country, and it was to be inferred, that
this sentiment would predispose to a jealousy of any agreement or treaty with
her most persevering competitor -- a jealousy so excessive as would give the
fullest scope to insidious arts to perplex and mislead the public opinion. It
was well understood, that a numerous party among us though disavowing the
design, because the avowal would defeat it, have been steadily endeavoring to
make the United States a party in the present European war, by advocating all
those measures which would widen the breach between us and Great Britain, and
by resisting all those which could tend to close it; and it was morally
certain, that this party would eagerly improve every circumstance which would
serve to render the treaty odious, and to frustrate it, as the most effectual
road to their favorite goal.

It was also known before hand that personal and party rivalships of the most
active kind, would assail whatever treaty might be made, to disgrace, if
possible, its organ.

There are three persons prominent in the public eye, as the successor of the
actual President of the United States in the event of his retreat from the
station, Mr. Adams, Mr. Jay, Mr. Jefferson.

No one has forgotten the systematic pains which have been taken to impair the
well earned popularity of the first gentleman. Mr. Jay too has been repeatedly
the object of attacks with the same view. His friends as well as his enemies
anticipated that he could make no treaty which would not furnish weapons
against him -- and it were to have been ignorant of the indefatigable malice of
his adversaries to have doubted they would be seized with eagerness, and
wielded with dexterity.

The peculiar circumstances which have attended the two last elections for
governor of this state, have been of a nature to give the utmost keenness to
party animosity. It was impossible that Mr. Jay should be forgiven for his
double, and in the last instance triumphant success -- or, that any promising
opportunity of detaching from him the public confidence should pass unimproved.

Trivial facts frequently throw light upon important designs. It is remarkable,
that in the toasts given on the 4th of July, wherever there appears a direct or
indirect censure on the treaty, it is pretty uniformly coupled with compliments
to Mr. Jerfferson, and to our late governor Mr. Clinton, with an evident design
to place those gentlemen in contrast with Mr. Jay, and decrying him to elevate
them. No one can be blind to the finger of party spirit, visible in these and
similar transactions. It indicates to us clearly, one powerful source of
opposition to the treaty.

No man is without his personal enemies. Pre-eminence even in talents and
virtue is a cause of envy and hatred of its possessor. Bad men are the natural
enemies of virtuous men. Good men sometimes mistake and dislike each other.

Upon such an occasion as the treaty, how could it happen otherwise, than
personal enmity would be unusually busy, enterprising and malignant?

From the combined operation of these different causes, it would have been a
vain expectation that the treaty would be generally contemplated with candor
and moderation, or that reason would regulate the first impressions concerning
it. It was certain on the contrary that however unexceptionable its true
character might be, it would have to fight its way through a mass of
unreasonable opposition; and that time, examination and reflection would be
requisite to fix the public opinion on a true basis. It was certain that it
would become the instrument of a systematic effort against the national
government and its administration; a decided engine of party to advance its own
views at the hazard of the public peace, and prosperity.

The events which have already taken place, are a full comment on these
positions. If the good sense of the people does not speedily discountenance the
projects which are on foot, more melancholy proofs may succeed.

Before the treaty was known, attempts were made to prepossess the public mind
against it. It was absurdly asserted, that it was not expected by the people,
that Mr. Jay was to make any treaty; as if he had been sent, not to accommodate
differences by negotiation and agreement, but to dictate to Great Britain the
terms of an unconditional submission.

Before it was published at large, a sketch, calculated to produce false
impressions, was handed out to the public through a medium noted for hostility,
to the administration of the government. Emissaries flew through the country,
spreading a^arm and discontent^* the leaders of clu^s were every where active
to seize the passions of the citizens and pre-occupy their judgments against
the treaty.

At Boston it was published one day, and the next a town meeting was convened
to condemn it; without ever being read, without any serious discussion,
sentence was pronounced against it.

Will any man seriously believe that in so short a time, an instrument of this
nature could have been tolerably understood by the greater part of those who
were thus induced to a condemnation of it? Can the result be considered as any
thing more than a sudden ebullition of popular passion, excited by the
artifices of a party, which had adroitly seized a favorable moment to surprise
the public opinion? This spirit of precipitation and the intemperance which
accompanied it, prevented the body of Merchants and the greatest part of the
most considerate citizens from attending the meeting, and left those who met,
wholly under the guidance of a set of men, who, with two or three exceptions,
have been the uniform opposers of the government.

The intelligence of this event had no sooner reached New York, than the
leaders of the clubs were seen haranguing in every corner of the city to stir
up our citizens into an imitation of the example of the Meeting at Boston. An
invitation to meet at the City Hall quickly followed, not to consider or
discuss the merits of the treaty, but to unite with the meeting at Boston to
address the President against its ratification.

This was immediately succeeded by a hand bill, full of invectives against the
treaty as absurd as they were inflammatory, and manifestly designed to induce
the citizens to surrender their reason to the empire of their passions.

In vain did a respectable meeting of the merchants endeavor, by their advice,
to moderate the violence of these views, and to promote a spirit favorable to
a fair dicussion of the treaty; in vain did a respectable body of citizens of
every description, attend for that purpose. The leaders of the clubs resisted
all discussion, and their followers, by their clamours and vociferations,
rendered it impracticable, notwithstanding the wish of a manifest majority of
the citizens convened upon the occasion.

Can we believe, that the leaders were really sincere in the objections made to
a discussion, or that the great and mixed mass of citizens then assembled had
so thoroughly mastered the merits of the treaty, as that they might not have
been enlightened by such a discussion.

It cannot be doubted that the real motive to the opposition, was the fear of a
discussion; the desire of excluding light; the adherence to a plan of surprise
and deception. Nor need we desire any fuller proof of that spirit of party
which has stimulated the opposition to the treaty, than is to be found in the
circumstances of that opposition.

To every man who is not an enemy to the national government, who is not a
prejudiced partizan, who is capable of comprehending the argument, and
dispassionate enough to attend to it with impartiality, I flatter myself I
shall be able to demonstrate satisfactorily in the course of some succeeding
papers --

1. That the treaty adjusts in a reasonable manner the points in controversy
between the United States and Great Britain, as well those depending on the
inexecution of the treaty of peace, as those growing out of the present
European war.

2. That it makes no improper concessions to Great Britain, no sacrifices on
the part of the United States.

3. That it secures to the United States equivalents for what they grant.

4 That it lays upon them no restrictions which are incompatible with their
honor or their interest.

5. That in the articles which respect war, it conforms to the laws of nations.

6. That it violates no treaty with, nor duty toward any foreign power.

7. That compared with our other commercial treaties, it is upon the whole,
entitled to a preference.

8. That it contains concessions of advantages by Great Britain to the United
States, which no other nation has obtained from the same power.

9. That it gives her no superiority of advantages over other nations with whom
we have treaties.

10. That interests of primary importance to our general welfare are promoted
by it.

11. That the too probable result of a refusal to ratify is war, or what would
be still worse, a disgraceful passiveness under violations of our rights,
unredressed and unadjusted; and consequently, that it is the true interest of
the United States, that the treaty should go into effect.

It will be understood, that I speak of the treaty as advised to be ratified by
the Senate -- for this is the true question before the public.

No. II.
PREVIOUS to a more particular discussion of the merits of the treaty, it may
be useful to advert to a suggestion which has been thrown out, namely, that it
was foreseen by many, that the mission to Great Britain would produce no good
result, and that the event has corresponded with the anticipation.

The reverse of this position is manifestly true.

All must remember the very critical posture of this country at the time that
mission was resolved upon. A recent violation of our rights, too flagrant and
too injurious to be submitted to, had filled every American breast with
indignation, and every prudent man with alarm and disquietude. A few hoped, and
the great body of the community scared, that war was inevitable.

In this crisis two sets of opinions prevailed, one looked to measures which
were to have a compulsory effect upon Great Britain, the sequestration of
British debts, and the cutting off of intercourse wholly or partially between
the two countries; the other to vigorous preparations for war and one more
effort of negotiation, under the solemnity of an extraordinary mission, to
avert it.

That the latter was the better opinion, no truly sensible man can doubt, and
it may be boldly affirmed, that the event has entirely justified it.

If measures of coertion and reprisal had taken place, war in all human
probability would have followed. National pride is generally a very intractable
thing. In the councils of no country does it act with greater force, than in
those of Great Britain. Whatever it might have been in her power to yield to
negotiation, she could have yielded nothing to compulsion, without self
degradation, and without the sacrifice of that political consequence which, at
all times very important to a nation, was peculiarly so to her at the juncture
in question. It should be remembered too, that from the relations in which the
two countries have stood to each other, it must have cost more to the pride of
Great Britain to have received the law from us than from any other power.

When one nation has cause of complaint against another, the course marked out
by practice, the opinion of writers, and the principles of humanity, the object
being to avoid war, is to precede reprisals of any kind, by a demand of
reparation. To begin with reprisals is to meet on the ground of war and puts
the other party in a condition not to be able to recede without humiliation.

Had this course been pursued by us, it would not only have rendered war
morally certain, but it would have united the British nation in the vigorous
support of their government, in the prosecution of it: while on our part, we
should have been quickly distracted and divided. The calamities of war wou^d
have brought the most ardent to their senses, and placed them among the first
in reproaching the government with precipitation, rashness and folly; for not
having taken every chance by pacific means to avoid so great an evil.

The example of Denmark and Sweden is cited in support of the coercive plan.
Those powers it is asserted, by arming and acting with vigor brought Great
Britain to terms.

But who is able to tell us the precise course of this transaction, or the
terms gained by it? Has it appeared that either Denmark or Sweden has obtained
as much as we have done -- a stipulation of reparation for the violation of our
property contrary to the laws of war?

Besides, what did Denmark and Sweden do? They armed and they negociated. They
did not begin by retaliations and reprisals. The United States also armed and
negociated, and like Denmark and Sweden, prudently forebore reprisals. The
conduct of the three countries agreed in principle, equally steering clear of a
precipitate resort to reprisals, and contradicting the doctrines and advice of
our war party.

The course pursued by our government was then in coincidence with the example
of Denmark and Sweden -- and it may be added was in every view the wisest.

Few nations can have stronger inducements than the United States to cultivate
peace. Their infant state in general -- their want of a marine in particular,
to protect their commerce, would render war in an extreme degree, a calamity.
It would not only arrest our present rapid progress to strength and prosperity,
but would probably throw us back into a state of debility and impoverishment,
from which it would require years to emerge. Our trade, navigation, and
mercantile capital would be essentially destroyed. Spain being an associate
with Great Britain, a general Indian war might be expected to desolate the
whole extent of our frontier -- our exports obstructed agriculture would of
course languish; all other branches of industry would proportionably suffer;
our public debt instead of a gradual diminution would sustain a great
augmentation, and draw with it a large increase of taxes and burdens on the
people.

But these evils however great, were perhaps, not the worst to be apprehended.
It was to be feared that the war would be conducted in a spirit which would
render it more than ordinarily calamitous. There are too many proofs that a
considerable party among us is deeply infected with those horrid principles of
Jacobinism which proceeding from one excess to another have made France a
theater of blood, and which notwithstanding the most vigorous efforts of the
national representation to suppress it, keeps the destinies of that country
suspended by a thread. It was too probable that the direction of the war, if
commenced would have fallen into the hands of men of this description. The
consequences of this, even in imagination, are such as to make any virtuous man
shudder.

It was therefore in a peculiar manner the duty of the government to take all
possible chances for avoiding war. The plan adopted was the only one which
could claim this advantage.

To precipitate nothing, to gain time by negotiation, was to leave the country
in a situation to profit by any events which might turn up tending to restrain
a spirit of hostility in Great Britain, and to dispose her to reasonable
accommodation.

The successes of France which opportunely occurred, allowing them to have had
an influence upon the issue, so far from disparaging the merit of the plan
which was pursued serve to illustrate its wisdom. This was one of the chances
which procrastination gave, and one which it was natural to take into the
calculation.

Had the reverse been the case, the posture of negotiation was still preferable
to that of retaliation and reprisal; for in this case, the triumphs of
Great Britain, the guantlet having been thrown by us, would have stimulated her
to take it up without hesitation.

By taking the ground of negotiation in the attitude of preparation for war, we
at the same time carried the appeal to the prudence of the British cabinet,
without wounding its pride, and to the justice and interest of the British
nation, without exciting feelings of resentment.

This conduct was calculated to range the public opinion of that country on our
side, to oppose it to the indulgence of hostile views in the Cabinet, and in
case of war, to lay the foundation of scism and dissatisfaction.

But one of the most important advantages to be expected from the course
pursued, was the securing of unanimity among ourselves, if, after all the pains
taken to avoid war, it had been forced upon us.

As on the one hand, it was certain that dissension and discontent would have
embarrassed and enfeebled our exertions in a war produced by any circumstance
of intemperance in our public councils, or not endeavored to be prevented by
all the milder expedients usual in similar cases. So, on the other, it was
equally certain, that our having ineffectually exhausted those expedients,
would cement us into a firm mass, keep us steady and persevering amidst
whatever vissicitudes might happen, and nerve our efforts to the utmost extent
of our resources.

This union among ourselves, and disunion among our enemies, were inestimable
effects of the moderate plan, if it had promised no other advantage.

But to gain time was of vast moment to us in other senses. Not a seaport of
the United States was fortified, so as to be protected against the insults of a
single frigate. Our magazines were in every respect too scantily supplied. It
was highly desirable to obviate these difficiencies before matters came to
extremity.

Moreover, the longer we kept out of the war, if obliged to go into it at last,
the shorter would be the duration of the calamities incident to it.

The circumstances of the injury of which we more immediately complained
afforded an additional reason for preceding reprisals by negotiation. The order
of the sixth of November directed neutral vessels to be brought in for
adjudication. This was an equivocal phrase, and though there was too much cause
to suspect that it was intended to operate as ^t did, yet there was a
possibility of misconstruction, and that possibility was a reason in the nature
of the thing for giving to the British ^vernment an opportunity of explaining
before retaliations to (...) p^ace.

To all this it may be added, that one of the substitutes for the plan pursued,
the sequestration of debts, was a measure no less dishonest than impolitie; as
will be shown in the remarks which will be applied to the tenth article of the
treaty.

But is it unimportant to the real friends of republican government, that the
plan pursued, was congenial with that pacific character which is ascribed to
it? Would it have been more desirable that the government of our nation,
out-stripping the (...) maxims of Europe, should, without a previous demand of
reparation, have rushed into reprisals, and consquently into war?

However this may be, it is a well ascertained fact, that our country never
appeared so august and respectable as in the position which it assumed upon
this occasion. Europe was struck with the dignified moderation of our conduct,
and the character of our government and nation acquired a new elevation.

It cannot escape an attentive observer, that the language, which in the first
instance condemned the mission of an Envoy extraordinary to Great Britain, and
which new condemns the treaty negociated by him, seems to consid^r the United
States as among the first rate powers of the world in point of strength and
resource, and proposes to them a conduct predicated upon that condition.

To under-rate our just importance would be a degrading error. To over-rate it
may lead to dangerous mistakes.

A very powerful state may frequently hazard a high and haughty tone with good
policy, but a weak ^te can scarcely ever do it without imprudence. The last is
yet our character, though we are the embryo of a great empi^e. It is therefore
better suited to our situation to measure each (...) with the utmost caution,
to hazard as little as possible, in the ^s in which we a^ injured, to blend
moderation with fir^ and brandish the weapons of hostility only when it is
apparent (...) she use of them is unavoidable.

It is not to be (...) this that we are to crouch to any power on earth, or
ta^ly to suffer our rights to be violated. -- A nation which is capable of this
meanness, will quickly have no rights to protect, or honor to defend.

But the true inference is, that we ought not lightly to seek or provoke a
resort to arms; that in the differences between us and other nations we ought
carefully to avoid measures which tend to widen the breach; and that we should
scrupulously abstain from whatever may be construed into reprisals till after
the fruitless employment of all amicable means has reduced it to a certainty
that there is no alternative.

If we can avoid war for ten or twelve years more, we shall then have acquired
a maturity, which will make it no more than a common calamity, and will
authorize us in our national discussions to take a higher and more imposing
tone.

This is a consideration of the greatest weight to determine us to exert all
our prudence and address to keep out of war as long as it (...) be possible; to
defer to a state of manhood a struggle to which in^ancy is ill adapted. This is
the most effectual way to disappoint the enemies of o^ welfare; to pursue a
contrary conduct may be to play into their (...), and to gratify their wishes.
If there be a foreign power which sees with envy or ill will our growing
prosperity, that power must discern that our infancy is the time for clipping
our wings. We ought to be wise enough to see, that this is not the time for
trying our strength.

Should we be able to escape the storm which at this juncture agitates Europe,
our dispu^ with Great Britain terminated we may hope to postpone wa^ t^ distant
period. This, at least, will greatly diminish the chances of it. For then there
will remain only one power with whom we have any embarrassing discussion. I
allude to Spain, and the question of the Missisippi; and there is reason to
hope that this question by the natural progress of things, and perseverance in
an amicable cour^ ^ill finally be arranged to our satisfacon without the
necessity of (...) dernier resort.

The allusion to this case ^ests one or two important reflections. How unwise
would it have (...) to invite or falicitate a quarrel with Great Britain, at a
moment when she and Spain were engaged in a common cause, both of ^m having,
besides, controverted points with the United States? ^w wise will it be to
adjust our differences with the most formidable (...) these two powers, and to
have only to contest with one of them?

This policy is so obvious, that it requires an extraordinary degree of
infatuation not to be sensible of (...) and not to view with favor any measure
which tends to so import^ a result.

This cursory review of the motive^* which may be supposed to have governed our
public councils in the mission to Great Britain, serves not only to vindicate
the measure^ then pursued, but to warn us against a prejudiced judgment of the
^esult, which may, in the end, defeat the salutary purposes of (...) measures.

I proceed now to observe sum^y, that the objects of the mission, contrary to
what has been ^ted, have been substantially obtained. What were those? The^
were principally, 1. To adjust the matter of controversy concerning the
inexecution of the treaty of peace, and especially to obtain destitution of our
western posts. 2. To obtain reparation for the captures and spoliations of our
property in the course of (...) existing war.

Both these objects have been provided for; and it will be shown, when we come
to comment upon the articles which make the provision in each case, that it is
a reasonable one, as good a one as ought to have been expected; as good a one
as there is any prospect of obtaining hereafter; one which it is consistent
with our honor to accept, and which our interest bids us to close with.

The provisions with regard to commerce, were incidental and auxilliary. The
reasons which may be conceived to have led to the including of the subject in
the mission, will be discussed in some proper place.

No. III.
THE opposers of the Treaty seem to have put invention on the rack, to
accumulate charges against it in a great number of cases, without regard even
to plausibility. If we suppose them sincere, we must often pity their
ignorance; if insincere, we must abhor the spirit of deception which it
betrays. -- Of the preposterous nature of some of their charges, specimens will
be given in the course of these remarks; though while nothing, which is
colorable, will remain unattended to, it were endless to attempt a distinct
refutation of all the wild and absurd things which are and will be said. It is
vain to combat the vagaries of diseased imaginations. The monsters they
engender are no sooner destroyed, then new legions supply their places. Upon
this, as upon all former occasions, the good sense of the people must be relied
upon, and it must be taken for granted, that it will be sufficient for their
conviction to give solid answers to all such objections as have the semblance
of reason; that now, as heretofore, they will maintain their character abroad
and at home, for deliberation and reflection, and disappoint those who are in
the habit of making experiments upon their credulity: who treating them as
children, fancy that sugar plumbs and toys will suffice to gain their
confidence and attachment and to lead them blindfold, whithersoever it is
desired.

In considering the treaty, it presents itself under two principal heads; the
permanent articles, which are the first ten, and which, with some supplementary
provisions, adjust the controverted points between the two countries; the
temporary articles, which are all the remaining ones, and which establish the
principles of mutual intercourse, as to general navigation and commerce. The
manner of the discussion will correspond with this natural division of the
subject.

An objection meets the treaty at the threshhold. It is said that our envoy
abandoned the ground which our government had uniformly held, and with it our
rights and interests as a nation, by acceding, in the preamble of the treaty,
to the idea of terminating the differences between the two countries, in s^ a
manner as without reference to the merits of their respective complaints and
pretensions, may be best calculated to produce mutual satisfaction and good
understanding.

It is observed in support of this, that our government has constantly charged
the first breaches of the treaty upon Great Britain, in the two particulars of
carrying away the negroes, and detaining the posts, that while the evacuation
at New York was going on, a demand of the surrender of the negroes was made by
Congress, through our Commander in Chief, which not being complied with,
Commissioners were sent to ascertain the number carried away, with a view to
claim a compensation; that early and repeated application were also made for
the surrender of the Western Posts, which not only was not done, but it is
proved by the circumstances, that orders were not given for it according to the
true intent of the treaty, and that there was, from the beginning, a design to
intract, and a virtual infraction of the article with respect to this object;
all this, it is alleged, has been the uniform language of our government, and
has been demostrated by Mr Jefferson to be true, in his letter to Mr. Hammond,
of the 29th of May, 1792; and it is asserted that the ground ought not to have
been given up by Mr. Jay, because it was the standard of the mutual rights and
duties of the parties, as to the points unexecuted of the treaty of peace.

A proper examination of these matters is therefore called for, not only by the
specific objection which is made to the principle which is contained in the
preamble, but by the influence which a right solution is calculated to have, in
giving a favorable or unfavorable complexion to the whole plan of the
adjustment.

It is true, as suggested, that our government has constantly charged as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain, the two particulars which have been
stated; but it is believed not to be true, that it has uniformly charged them
as first breaches of the treaty. Individuals may have entertained this idea.
The state of Virginia seems to have proceeded upon it in some public acts: but
as far as is recollected; that ground was never formally or explicitly taken by
the government of the United States, till in the above mentioned letter from
Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, when, for the first time, an attempt was made to
vindicate or excuse the whole conduct of this country, in regard to the treaty
of peace, contrary, I will venture to say, to the general sense of well
informed men.

The most solemn act of our government on this head is an address of Congress
to the different States on the 13th of April, 1787.

This address admits contraventions of ^he treaty on our part, and instead of
deriving either justification of extenuation of them from prior infractions by
Great Britain, urges the different states to a repeal of all contravening laws.

But if the fact, in this respect, were admitted to be as stated by the
adversaries of the treaty, it would not authorize their conclusion.

It would not follow, that, because the ground had been taken by the
government, it ought to have been pert^nac^ously kept -- if upon fair
examination it had appeared to be not solid, or if an adherence to it would
have obstructed a reasonable adjustment of oifferences.

Nations no more than individuals ought to persist in error especially at the
sacrifice of their peace and prosperity; besides, nothing is more common in
disputes between nations, than for each side to charge the other with being the
aggressor or delinquent. This mutual crimination, either from the nature of
circumstances or from the illusions of the passions, is sometimes sincere; at
other times it is dictated by pride or policy -- But in all such cases where
one party is not powerful enough to dictate to the other, and where there is a
mutual disp^sition to avoid war; the natural retreat for both is in a
compromise, which waves the question of first aggression or delinquency. Thi^
is the sa^vo for national pride; the escape for mutual error; the bridge by
which nations arrayed against each other, are enabled to retire with honor and
without bloodshed, from the field of contest. In cases of mutual delinquency,
the question of the first default i^ frequently attended with real difficulty
and doubt. -- One side has an equal right with the other, to maintain its
opinion. What is to be done when the pride of neither will yield to the
arguments of the other? War, or a waver of the point, is the alternative. What
sensible man, what humane man will deny that a compromise, which secures
substantially the objects of interest, is almost always preferable to war, on
so punctilions and unmanageable a point?

Reject the principle of compromise, and the feuds of nations must become much
more deadly than they have heretofore been. There would scarcely ever be ro^m
for the adjustment of differences without an appeal to the sword; and when
drawn, it could seldom be sheathed but with the destruction of one or the other
party. The earth now too often stained, would then continually stream with
human gore.

From the situation of the thing, and of the parties, there never could be a
rational doubt that the compromising plan was the only one on which the United
States and Great Britain could ever terminate their differences without war;
that the question, who was the first delinquent, would have been an eternal bar
to accommodation, and consequently that a dismission of that question was a
pre-requisite to agreement. Had our envoy permitted the negotiation to be
arrested by obstinacy on this head, he would have shown himself to be the
diplomatic pedant, rather than the able negociator, and would have been justly
chargeable with sacrificing to punctilio, the peace of his country. It was
enough for him, as he did, to ascertain by a preliminary discussion, the
impossibility of bringing the other party to concede the point.

An impartial survey of the real state of the question, will satisfy candid and
discerning men, that it was wise and politic to dismiss it. This shall be
attempted.

It has been observed, that two breaches of the treaty of peace are charged
upon Great Britain; the carrying away of the negroes, and the detertion of the
posts. It remains to investigate the reality of these breaches, and to fix the
periods when they can be said to have happened.

As to the negroes, the true sense of the article in the treaty of peace, which
respects them is disputed.

The words of the stipulation are (Art. 7.) that "his Britannic Majesty shall,
with all convenient speed, and without causing any destruction or carrying away
any negroes or other property of the American inhabitants, withdraw all his
armies, garrisons and fleets, from the United States."

These terms admit of two constructions; one, that no negroes, or other
articles, which had been American property should be carried away, the other,
that the evacuations were to be made, without depredation, consequently that no
new destruction was to be committed, and that negroes or other articles, which
at the time of the cessation of hostilities, continued to be the property of
American inhabitants, unchanged by the operations of war, should be foreborne
to be carried away.

The first is the construction which was adopted by this country, the last is
that insisted upon by great Britain.

The arguments which support her construction are these;

I. The established laws of war give to an enemy the use and enjoyment, during
the war, of real property, of which he obtains possession, and the absolute
ownership of all personal property which falls into his hands. The latter is
called booty, and, except ships, becomes vested in the captors the moment they
acquire a firm possession. With regard to ships, it seems to be a general rule
of the marine law, that condemnation is necessary to the complete investment of
the property in the captor.

II. Negroes, by the laws of the States, in which slavery is allowed, are
personal property. They therefore, on the principle of those laws, like horses,
cattle, and other movables, were liable to become booty -- and belonged to the
enemy as soon as they came into his hands. Belonging to him, he was free either
to apply them to his own use, or to set them at liberty. If he did the latter,
the grant was irrevocable, restitution was impossible. Nothing in the laws of
nations, or in those of Great Britain, will authorize the resumption of
liberty, once granted to a human being.

III. The negroes in question were either taken in the course of military
operations, or they joined the British army upon invitation by proclamation.
However dishonorable to Great Britain the latter may have been as an illiberal
species of warfare, there is no ground to say that the strict rules of war did
not warrant it, or that the effect was not in the one case as well as in the
other, a change of property in the thing.

IV. The stipulation relates to "negroes or other property of the American
inhabitants;" putting negroes on the same sooting with any other article. The
characteristic of the subject of the stipulation being property of American
inhabitants, whatever had lost that character could not be the object of the
stipulation. But the negroes in question, by the laws of war, had lost that
character; they were therefore not within the stipulation.

Why did not the United States demand the surrender of captured vessels, and of
all other movables which had fallen into the hands of the enemy? The answer
is, because common sense would have revolted against such a construction. No
one could believe that an indefinite surrender of all the spoils or booty of a
seven year's war was ever intended to be stipulated; and yet the demand for a
horse, or an ox, or a piece of furniture, would have been as comple^ly within
the terms "negroes and other property," as a negroe -- consequently the
reasoning which proves that one is not included, excludes the other.

The silence of the United States, as to every other article, is therefore a
virtual abandonment of that sense of the stipulation which requires the
surrender of negroes.

V. In the interpretation of treaties, things odious or immoral are not to be
presumed. The abandonment of negroes, who had been induced to quit their
masters on the faith of official proclamations, promising them liberty, to sail
again under the yoke of their masters, and into slavery, is as odious and
immoral a thing as can be conceived. It is odious, not only as it imposes an
act of perfidy on one of the contracting parties; but as it tends to bring back
to servitude, men once made free. The general interests of humanity conspire
with the obligation which Great Britain had contracted toward the negroes, to
repel this construction of the treaty, if another can be found

VI. But another and less exceptionable construction is found in considering
the clause as inserted, for greater caution, to secure evacuations without
depr^dation. It may be answered, that this was superfluous, because hostilies
having ceased, the stipulation to surrender implied of itself, that it was to
be done without depredation. But, to this the reply is, that a part of the
clause man^festly contemplates the case of new depredations, and provides a
guard against it, in the promise that the evacuations shall be made without
causing any destruction. To cause destruction is to do some new act of
v^olence. This reflection destroys the argument drawn from the superfluousness
of the stipulation in the sense here given to it, and by showing that it must
have such a sense in one part, authorizes the conclusion, that the remainder of
the clause has a similar sense. The connection of the two things, as parts of
one sentence, confirms this inference.

These arguments certainly have great weight and do not admit of easy
refutation. It is a fact too, that the opinions of some of the abl^st lawyers
of our country have, from the beginning corresponded with the construction they
enforce.

It is not enough for us to be persuaded, that some of the negociators, who
made the p^ace, intended the article in our sense. It is necessary that it
should be found in the instrument itself, and from the nature of it, ought to
have been expressed with clearness and without ambiguity. If there be real
ambiguity in such a case, the odiousness of the effect will incline the scale
against us.

It does not remove the difficulty to say, that compensation for the negroes
might have been a substitute for the thing. -- When one party promises a
specific thing to another, nothing but the thing itself will satisfy the
promise. The party to whom it is made cannot be required to accept in lieu of
it an equivalent. It follows, that compensation for the negroes would not have
been a performance of the stipulation to forbear to carry them away, and
therefore, if there be any thing odious in the specific thing itself, the
objection to the interpretation which requires it, is not done away by the idea
of substituting compensation. For the article does not admit such substitution,
and its sense cannot be defined by what it does not admit.

Some color to our sense of the article results from these expressions in the
same clause, "leaving in all the fortifications, the American artillery that
may be therein." But this expression is not of equivalent force to that of
property of American inhabitants. For example, suppose an American ship to have
been captured and condemned, it might still be said of her, in a certain sense,
this is an "American ship," alluding to the country of which she had been the
ship, but it could not be said in any sense of her this ship is American
property, or the property of American inhabitants. The country of which a thing
was, may often be used with aptness as a term of description of that thing,
though it may have changed owners; but the term property, which is synonimous
with ownership, can never be used in the present tense as descriptive of an
ownership which has ceased. Moreover, if the expressions in the two cases had
been (as they are not) of equivalent force, it would not follow that they were
to have the same meaning in both cases, being applied to different matters. For
an odious consequence in one instance would be a reason for rejecting a
particular sense of a word or phrase, which would be proper in another, to
which no such consequence was attached.

Let me now ask this question of any candid man. Is our construction of the
article respe^^^^g the negroes, so much better supported than that of
Great Britain, as to justify our pronouncing with positiveness that the
carrying them (...) was a breach of the treaty?

To me it appear^ (...), that this must be considered, speaking favorably for
us, as a very doubtful point, and that we cannot with confidence predicate a
breach of the treaty by Great Britain upon this event. If it was one it
happened in May, 1783.

The affair of the Western Posts is now to be examined; that the detention of
them, after the proper point of time for delivering them up, was a breach of
the treaty, will not bear a dispute. But what that proper time was, is a
serious question between the parties.

Our government has contended, that the posts ought to (...) surrendered with
all convenient speed after the provisional treaty took effect -- And Mr.
Jefferson, who is much cited on the present occasion, has shown, by an
ingenious and elaborate deduction of circumstances, that this was not only not
done, but never intended,

But Mr. Jefferson has not even discussed the question, whether the provisional
or the definitive treaty was the act from which the obligation to perform was
to date. This is an important omission, for Great Britain affirms the
definitive treaty to be the criterion.

As an original question much might be said on both sides. The natural relati^n
of the terms provisional or preliminary and definitive seems to exhibit the
former as inchoate and imperfect, and to refer to the latter the conclusive
obligatory force and legal perfection. There is room therefore, to say, that
all but the mere cessation of hostilities, or for the execution of which there
is no precise point of time fixed in preliminary articles, is referred to the
definitive treaty.

On the other hand it may be argued, that a preliminary treaty is as much a
national treaty as a definitive one both being made by an equal and the
competent authority, and that there is no good reason why those things which
are sufficiently regulated by the preliminar^, should not go into immediate and
complete effect, equally as if regulated by the definitive treaty, or why the
latter should be considered as any thing more than an instrument for adjusting
points which may have been left open by the preliminary articles, and for
giving more perfect form. Accordingly, there are examples of preliminary
treaties going into mutual and full execution, though never followed by
definitive treaties.

But, however this question may have stood on principle, the conduct of our
government in the particular case has settled it against us, and has completely
sanctioned the doctrine of Great Britain.

If performance was to date from the provisional articles, this applies as well
to us as to Great Britain. It was incumbent upon Congress to have notified the
treaty with the proper solemnities to the different States and their citizens;
to have made the recommendations stipulated in the fifth article, and to have
enjoined the observance of all those things which were promised on our part.
The nature of some of these stipulations rendered it particularly urgent that
no time should be lost. But all was deferred till afte^ the ratification in
this country of the definitive treaty. The 15 th day of January, 1784, is the
date of the act which attempts to carry the treaty into effect on our part.
This then is a practical settlement by ourselves of the principle that
performance was to date from the definitive treaty.

It is no objection to the position, that our seaports were previously
evacuated; that was matter of mutual co^venien^, and the done does not change
the state of strict obligation between the parties ^^ven in the view of liberal
and conciliating procedure, the prompt sur^r of our s^a ports and that of the
western posts are for obvious reasons ^ry different things.

But our dilemma is this, if the delay of orders for evacuating the western
posts, previous to the ratification of the definitive treaty, was on the part
of Great Britain a breach of treat^, our delay to act upon the points
stipulated by us till after that ratification, must have been equally a breach
of treaty; and it must have been at least co-temporary with any breach that
could have been committed by Great Britain.

We are compelled then by our own example to agree with Great Britain that
(...) ^as not obliged to surrender the western posts till after the mutual
^cation of the definitive treaty, and to abandon the super-structure, however
soothing to our wishes which has been reared upon a different foundation. If
so, we must look to the period of the exchange of the ratifications in Europe
for the date of the orders for evacuating. I have not in my possession
materials for fixing with accuracy that period, but considering the time of the
ratification here, and the time of its probable arrival in England, we are
carried to the latter end of April or beginning of May, 1784; so that it is not
till about May 1784, that we can charge upon Great Britain a delinquency as to
the surrender of the posts.

Having now examined the nature of the infractions of the treaty of peace
charged upon Great Britain, with respect to dates, I shall in the next number
of this defense, trace some instances of infraction on our part. The
conclusions to be drawn from this comparison, if I mistake not, will greatly
disconcert some articles of the prevailing creed on this head, and go far
toward confirming what was preliminarily offered to evince the prudence of our
Envoy in relinquishing the favorite ground.

No. IV.
AN accurate enumeration of the breaches of the treaty of peace, on our part,
would require a tedious research. It will suffice to select and quote a few of
the most prominent and early instances.

One of the earliest is to be found in an act of this state, for granting a
more effectual relief in cases of certain trespasses, passed the 17th of March,
1783. This act takes away from any person (subjects of Great Britain of every
description included) who had, during the war, occupied, injured, destroyed, or
received property, real or personal, of any inhabitant without the British
lines, the benefit of the plea of a military order: consequently the
justification which the laws and usages of war give, and the immunity resulting
from the reciprocal amnesty, which expressly or virtually is an essential part
of every treaty of peace. To this it may be added, that it was considered by
Great Britain as a direct infraction of the 6th article of her treaty with us,
which exempts all persons from prosecution "by reason of the part they might
have taken in the war."

Mr. Jefferson, not controverting the point that the provisions of this act
were contrary to the treaty, endeavors to get rid of the inference from it, by
alleging three things. -- 1st. That it passed antecedently to the treaty, and
so could not be a violation of an act of subsequent date. -- 2d. That the
treaty was paramount to the laws of the particular states, and operated a
repeal of them. -- 3d. That the exceptionable principle of this act was never
sanctioned by the courts of justice, and in one instance (the case of Rutgers,
and Waddington in the Mayor's court) was overruled.

As to the first point, it is sufficient to answer, that the law continued to
operate, in fact from the time of the treaty till the 4th of April, 1787, when
there was a repeal of the exceptionable clause, by an act of our legislature.
During the period of four years, many suits were brought and many recoveries
had; extending even to persons who had been in the military service of Great
Britain.

To the second point, these observations may be opposed.

The articles of confederation did not, like our present constitution, declare
that treaties were supreme laws of the land. The United States, under that
system, had no courts of their own to expound and enforce their treaties as
laws. All was to depend on the comparative authority of laws and treaties, in
the judgment of the state courts.

The question, whether treaties were paramount to, and a virtual repeal of
antecedent laws, was a question of theory, about which there was room for, and
in this country did exist much diversity of opinion. It is notorious, that it
has been strenuously maintained, that however a national treaty ought, in good
faith, to be conclusive on a state, to induce a repeal of laws contrary to it,
yet its actual laws could not be controverted by treaty, without an actual
repeal by its own authority. This doctrine has been emphatically that of the
party distinguished by its opposition to national principles.

And it is observable that Congress, not relying entirely upon the force of the
treaty, to abrogate contravening laws, in their address already cited, urge the
states to a repeal of those laws. It is likewise observable in respect to the
very act under consideration, that the legislature of the state, in April,
1787, thought a positive repeal of the exceptionable clause necessary.

The complaints of a power, whose treaty with us was, in fact, violated by the
operation of a state law, could never be satisfactorily answered by referring
to a theoretic abstract disputed proposition. Such a power might reply with
irresistible force. It is not for us to concern ourselves about the structure
or meaning of your political constitutions, or the force of the legal maxims
deducible from the forms and distributions of power which you have adopted for
your government. It is the fact in which alone we are interested -- you have
stipulated this and that to us -- your stipulation in practice is contravened.
It is your duty to see that there are no impediments from conflicting
authorities within yourselves, to an exact fulfillment of your promises. If you
suffer any such impediment to exist, you are answerable for the consequences.

As to the third point, it is to be observed that though there may have been no
express formal decision of our courts, enforcing the exceptionable principle of
the trespass act; yet there never was a decision of a superior court against
it: and it may not be amiss to remark incidentally, that the decision of the
Mayor's court, from which Mr. Jefferson is glad to derive an exculpation of our
conduct, was the object of a severe animadversion at a popular meeting in this
city, as a judiciary encroachment on the legislative authority of the state.
The truth on this point is, that according to the prevailing opinion of our
bar, a defense under a military order was desperate, and it was believed that a
majority of our supreme court bench would overru^e the plea. Hence in numerous
cases where it might have been used, it was waved; and the endeavor on behalf
of the defendants was either to effect on collateral grounds, a mitigation of
damages, or to accomplish the best compromises that could be obtained; even the
suit of Rutgers and Waddington, after a partial success in the Mayor's court,
was terminated by a compromise, according to the advice of the defendant's
council, owing to the apprehension of an unfavourable issue in the supreme
court; and this, notwithstanding the defendant was a British subject.

Under these circumstances which are faithfully represented, is it possible to
doubt that the act in question operated a breach of our treaty with Great
Britain? and this from the very commencement of its existence? can we
reasonably expect that the nations with whom we have treaties will allow us to
substitute theoretic problems to performances of our engagements, and will be
willing to accept them as apologies for actual violations?

It is pertinent to remark, that the British commander in chief, very early
remonstrated against this act, but the remonstrance produced no effect.

Another act of the state of New York may be cited as a violation of the treaty
on our part, which must have been nearly cotemporary with that of the detention
of the posts. Its date is the 12th of May, 1784: this act confirms, in express
terms, all confiscations before made, notwithstanding errors in the
proceedings, and takes away the writ of error upon any judgment previously
rendered.

This was in substance, a new confiscation; judgments which from error were
invalid, were nullities. To take away the writ of error, by which their nullity
might be established, was to give them an efficacy which they did not before
possess; and as to the operation, cannot be distinguished from the rendering of
new judgments. To make voidable acts of confiscation, valid and conclusive, is
equivalent to new acts of confiscation. A fair execution of the treaty
required, that every thing in this respect should be left where it was, and
forbade the remedying of defects, in former proceedings as much as the
institution of new judgments.

Another, and an unequivocal breach of the treaty is found in an act of
South Carolina, of March 26, 1784. This act suspends the recovery of British
debts for nine months, and then allows them to be recovered only in four yearly
^nstallments, contrary to the express stipulation of the 4th article, ' that
creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful impediment to the recovery
of the full value in sterling money, of all bona fide debts theretofore
contracted."

It is idle to attempt to excuse infractions of this kind, by the pleas of
distress and inability. This is to make the convenience of one party the
measure of its obligation to perform its promises to another. If there was
really an impossibility of payment, as has been pretended, there was no need of
legislative obstruction; the thing would have regulated itself, and the very
interest of the creditor was a pledge, that no general evil could have resulted
from a^lowing a free course to the laws. If such impediments could be justified
what impediments might not be justified? What would become of the article, the
only one in the treaty to be performed by us, of real consequence to Great
Britain?

This infraction by South Carolina was prior to that of the detention of the
posts by Great Britain.

But the case of Virginia is still stronger than that of South Carolina. There
is evidence which cannot be disputed, that her courts, in defiance of the
treaty, have constantly remained shut to the recovery of British debts, in
virtue of laws passed during the war.

An act of her general assembly of the 22d of June, 1784, after suggesting as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain, the carrying off of the negroes, and
the detention of the posts, after instructing her delegates in Congress to
request a remonstrance to the British court, complaining of those infractions,
and desiring reparation, and after declaring that the national honor and
interest of the citizens of that Commonwealth obliged the assembly to withhold
their cooperation in the complete fulfillment of the said treaty until the
success of the aforementioned remonstrance is known, of Cong^^^s shall signify
their sentiments touching the premises, concludes with the following resolution:

That so soon as reparation is made for the foregoing infraction, or Congress
shall judge it indispensably necessary, such acts and parts of acts passed
during the late war, as inhibit the recovery of British debts ought to be
repealed and payment thereof made in such time and manner as shall consist with
the exhausted situation of the Commonwealth."

The plain language of these resolutions is, that there were acts passed during
the war, which then actually inhibited the recovery of British debts, and that
for the removal of this inhibition, a repealing act by the authority of
Virginia was necessary.

However unsound this position may have been in theory, here is conclusive
evidence that the fact in Virginia was conformable to it; that her courts had
been, ever since the peace, then were, and until a repealing law was passed,
were likely to continue to be shut against the recovery of British debts. --
When testimony of this kind was urged by the British minister, was it possible
for our envoy to make any solid reply? Who could be supposed to know better
than the legislature of Virginia the real state of the fact? When that
legislature declared it to be as has been stated, who, or what could contradict
it? With what truth has it been asserted, that "it was at all times perfectly
understood, that Treaties controuled the laws of the states?"

Additional proof of the contrary is found in the subsequent conduct of
Virginia. On the 12th of December, 1787, that state passed an act repealing all
such acts or parts of acts of the state, as had prevented, or might prevent the
recovery of debts due to British subjects, according to the true intent of the
treaty; but with this proviso, that there should be a suspension of the repeal,
'till the governor, by advice of council had by proclamation, notified that
Great Britain had delivered up the posts, and was taking measures for the
further fulfillment of the treaty by delivering up the negroes, or by making
compensation for them. This denotes clearly, that in the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia, there were acts of that state which had prevented, and
might prevent the recovery of debts according to the treaty.

It is observable too, that the resolutions of June, 1784, do not even give the
expectation of a complete repeal of the impeding laws, in the event of, or
reparation of the breaches of treaty by Great Britain. They only promise such a
modification of them as would permit the payment in such time and manner as
should consist with the exhausted situation of the Commonwealth; that is, not
according to the true intent of the treaty, but according to the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia of the abilities of the Commonwealth.

As the infraction which these proceedings of Virginia admit, resulted from
acts passed during the war, it of course was coeval with the first existence of
the treaty of peace, and seems to preclude the possibility of any prior breach
by Great Britain. It has been at least demonstrated, that the detention of the
Posts was not such prior breach, as there was no obligation to surrender, till
after the exchange of the ratifications of the definitive treaty in England.

I pass by the serious contraventions of the treaty, in this important article,
of the debts which are of later date, because they do not affect the question
of the first breach, though they are of great weight to demonstrate the
obligation of the United States to make compensation.

The argument then, upon the whole, as to the question of first breach, stands
thus -- It is a great doubt, whether the carrying away of the negroes was at
all a breach. If it was one, the trespass act of this state preceded it in
date, and went into operation the very moment it was possible to issue process.
The detention of the posts is subsequent to breaches of the article concerning
the recovery of debts on our part. This, in the case of South Carolina, is
determined by the date of her act (March 26, 1784) which is before the exchange
of the ratifications of the definitive treaty could have taken place. In that
of Virginia, it results from her own testimony, that impediments to the
recovery of British debts, created by acts passed during the war, continued
from the first moment of the peace until after the year 1787. Or if, contrary
to our own interpretation, we are disposed to adhere to the provisional treaty,
as the act from which performance was to date, we were guilty of a breach, in
not acting ourselves upon that treaty; a breach which, being cotemporary with
the existence of the treaty, seems not to admit of any prior contravention.
From all which it follows that, take what ground we will, we must be perplexed
to fix the charge of the first breach of the treaty upon Great Britain.

Let the appeal be to the understandings and hearts of candid men, men who have
force of mind sufficient to rescue themselves from the trammels of prejudice,
and who dare to look even unpalatable truths in the face. Let such men
pronounce whether they are still satisfied, that Great Britain is clearly
chargeable with the first breaches of the treaty. -- Whether they are not, on
the contrary, convinced, that the question is one so mixed and doubtful, as to
render a waver of it, even on the score of intrinsic merits, expedient on our
part, and especially whether they can entertain a particle of doubt, that it
was wiser to wave it, than to suffer it to prove a final obstacle to the
adjustment of a controversy, on which the peace of their country was suspended.
This was undoubtedly the alternative to our envoy. In the choice he made, the
ultimate opinion of an enlightened country cannot fail to applaud his prudence.

No. V.
THE discussion in the two last numbers has shown, if I mistake not, that this
country by no means stands upon such good ground, with regard to the
inexecution of the treaty of peace, as some of our official proceedings have
advanced, and as many among us have too lightly credited. The task of
displaying this truth has been an unwelcome one. As long as a contrary doctrine
was either a mere essay of polemical skill, or a convenient ingredien^ of
negotiation, it was natural for those who thought indifferently of it to prefer
silence to contradiction; but when it is made the engine of great errors of
national conduct, of excessive pretensions which forbid a reasonable
accommodation of national differences, and endanger rupture and war, on grounds
which reason disapproves, and prudence condemns, it becomes an indispensible
duty to expose its hollowness and fallacy. Reserve then would be a crime. --
The true patriot who never fears to sacrifice popularity to what he believes to
be the cause of public good, cannot hesitate to endeavor to unmask the error,
though with the certainty of incurring the displeasure and censure of the
prejudiced and unthinking.

The disposition to infract the treaty, which in several particulars discovered
itself among us, almost as soon as it was known to have been made, was from its
first appearance a source of humiliation, regret, and apprehension to those who
could dispassionately estimate the consequences, and who felt a proper concern
for the honor and character of the country. They perceived that besides the
loss of reputation, it must sooner or later lead to very furious
embarrassments. They have been hitherto mistaken in no part of their
anticipations, and if their faithful warning voice, now rais^d to check the
progress of error, is as little listened to as when it was raised to prevent
the commencement of it, there is too much cause to fear, that the experience of
extensive evils may extort regrets which the foresight of an enlightened people
ought to avert.

Citizens of United America! as you value your present enviable lot, rally
round your own good sense! expel from your confidence, men who have never
ceased to misadvise you! Discard intemperate and illiberal passions! Aspire to
the glory of the greatest triumph which a people can gain, a triumph over
prejudice! Be just, be prudent! Listen impartially to the unadulterated
language of truth! And above all guard your peace with anxious vigilance
against all the artful snares which are laid for it! Accompany me with minds
open to conviction, in a discussion of unspeakable importance to your welfare!

Weigh well, as a preliminary to further investigation, this momentous
proposition: "Peace, in the particular situation of this country, is an object
of such great and primary magnitude, that it ought not to be relinquished,
unless the relinquishment be clearly necessary to preserve our honor in some
unequivocal point, or to avoid the sacrifice of, some right or interest of
material and permanent importance." This is the touchstone of every question
which can come before us, respecting our foreign concerns.

As a general proposition, scarcely any will dispute it, but in the application
of the rule, there is much confusion of ideas, much false feeling and falser
reasoning. The ravings of anger and pride are mistaken for the suggestions of
honor. Thus are we told in a delirium of rage, by a gentleman of South
Carolina, that our envoy should have demanded an unconditional relinquishment
of the Western Posts, as a right; till which was granted, and until Lord
Grenville had given orders to Lord Dorchester to that effect, open to be sent
to our President, to be by him forwarded, he should not have opened his lips
about the treaty. It was prostituting the dearest rights of freemen, and laying
them prostrate at the feet of royalty.

In a case of incontestible, mutual infractions of a treaty, one of the parties
is to demand, peremptorily of the other, an unconditional performance on his
part, by way of preliminary, and without negotiation. An envoy sent to avert
war, carrying with him the clearest indications of a general solicitude of his
country -- that peace might be preserved, was at the very first step of his
progress to render hostility inevitable, by exacting, not only what could not
have been complied with, but what must have been rejected with indignation. The
government of Great Britain must have been the most abject on earth, in a case
so situated, to have listened for a moment to such a demand. And because our
envoy did not pursue this frantic course; did not hold the language of an
imperious Bashaw to his trembling slave, he is absurdly stigmatized as having
prostrated the rights of freemen at the feet of royalty. What are we to think
of the state of the mind which could produce so extravagant a sally? Would a
prudent people have been willing to have entrusted a negotiation which involved
their peace to the author of it? Will they be willing to take him as their
guide in a critical emergency of their affairs? No man in the habit of thinking
well either of Mr. Rutledge's head or heart, but must have felt at reading the
passages of his speech, which have been published, pain, surprise, and
mortification. I regret the occasion, and the necessity of animadversion.


True honor is a rational thing. It is as distinguishable from Quixotism as
true courage from the spirit of a bravo. It is possible for one nation to
commit so undisguised and unqualified an outrage upon another, as to render a
negotiation of the question dishonorable. But this seldom, if ever happens. In
most cases it is consistent with honor to precede rupture by negotiation, and
whenever it is, reason and humanity demand it. Honor cannot be wounded by
consulting moderation. As a general rule, it is not till after it has become
manifest that reasonable reparation for a clear premeditated wrong, cannot be
obtained by an amicable adjustment, that honor demands a resort to arms. In
all the questions between us and Great Britain, honor permitted the moderate
course: in those which regard the inexecution of the treaty of peace, there had
undoubtedly been mutual faults. It was therefore a case for negotiation and
mutual reparation. True honor, which can never be separated from justice, even
requires reparation from us to Great Britain, as well as from her to us. The
injuries we complain of in the present war were also of a negociable kind. The
first was bottomed on a controverted point in the laws of nations. The second
left open the question, whether the principal injury was a designed act of the
government or a misconstruction of its courts. To have taken therefore, the
imperious ground which is recommended, in place of that which was taken, would
have been not to follow the admonitions of honor, but to have submitted to the
impulse of passion and phrenzy.

So likewise when it is asserted that war is preferable to the sacrifice of our
rights and interests, this, to be true, to be rational, must be understood of
such rights and interests as are certain, as are important, such as regard the
honor, security, or prosperity of our country. It is not a right disputable,
or of small consequence; it is not an interest temporary, partial, and
inconsiderable, which will justify, in our situation, an appeal to arms.

Nations ought to calculate as well as individuals, to compare evils, and to
prefer the lesser to the greater; to act otherwise is to act unreasonably;
those who counsel it are impostors or madmen.

These reflections are of a nature to lead to a right judgment of the conduct
of our envoy in the plan of adjustment to which he has given his assent.

Three objects, as has appeared, were to be aimed at, on behalf of the United
States: 1. Compensation for the negroes carried away. 2. Surrender of the
western posts. 3. Compensation for spoliations during the existing war.

Two of these objects, and these in every view the most important, have been
provided for -- how fitly will be examined hereafter. One of them has been
given up (to wit) compensation for the negroes.

It has been shown, as I trust, to the conviction of d^passionate men, that the
claim of compensation for the negroes, is in point of right a very doubtful
one, in point of interest it certainly falls under the description of partial
and inconsiderable -- affecting in no respect the honor or security of the
nation, and incapable of having a sensible influence upon its prosperity. The
pecuniary value of the object is, in a national scale, trifling.

Not having before me the proper document, I can only speak from memory. But I
do not fear to be materially mistaken in stating that the whole number carried
away, so ascertained as to have afforded evidence for a claim of compensation,
was short of 3000 persons, men, women, and children, of whom about 1300 were of
about 16 years and upwards. Computing these at an average of 150 dollars per
head, which is a competent price, the amount would be 450,000 dollars, and not
two or three millions as has been pretended.

It is a fact, which I assert on the best authority, that our envoy made every
effort in his power to establish our construction of the article relating to
this subject, and to obtain compensation, and that he did not relinquish it,
till he became convinced, that to insist upon it would defeat the purpose of
his mission, and leave the controversy between the two countries unsettled.

Finding at the same time, that the two other points in dispute could be
reasonably adjusted. -- Is there any one who will be ^h enough to affirm, that
he ought to have broken off the negotiation on account of the difficulty about
the negroes? Yes, there are men, who are thus inconsiderate and intemperate!
But will a sober, reflecting people ratify their sentence.

What would such a people have said to our envoy, had he returned with this
absurd tale in h^s mouth? "Countrymen! I could have obtained the surrender of
your posts, and an adequate provision for the reparation of your losses by
unjust captures -- I could have terminated your controversy with Great Britain,
and secured the continuance of your peace, but for one obstacle, a refusal to
compensate for the negroes carried away; on this point the British government
maintained a construction of the treaty different from ours, and adhered to it
with inflexibility. I confess, that there appeared to me much doubt concerning
the true construction: I confess also, that the object was of inconsiderable
value. Yet it made a part of our claims, and I thought the hazards of war
preferable to a renunciation of it."

What would his adversaries have replied to him on such an occasion? No
ridicule would have been too strong, no reproach too bitter. -- Their triumph
would have been complete: for he would have been deservedly left without
advocate, without apologist.

It cannot admit of a seriou^ doubt, that the affair of the negroes was too
questionable in point of right, too insignificant in point of interest, to have
been suffered to be an impediment to the immense objects which were to be
promoted by an accommodation of differences acceptable in other respects. --
There was no general principle of national right or policy to be renounced. No
consideration of honor forbid the renunciation, every calculation of interest
invited to it. The evils of war for one month would outweigh the advantage, if
at the end of it there was a certainty of attainment.

But was war the alternative? Yes, war or disgrace.

The United States and Great Britain had been brought to issue. The recent
spoliations of our commerce, superadded to the evils of a protracted Indian
War, connected with the detention of the western posts, and accompanied with
indications of a design to contr^ct our western boundaries, obstructing the
course of our settlements and the enjoyment of private rights, and producing
serious and growing discontent in our western country, rendered it
indispensable, that there should be a settlement of old differences, and a
reparation of new wrongs; or, that the sword should vindicate our rights.

This was certainly and with reason, the general sense of our country when our
envoy left it. There are many indications that it was the opinion of our
government, and it is to be inferred that our envoy understood the alternative
to be as has been stated.

Indeed what else could be contemplated? after the depredations which had been
committed upon our commerce, after the strong sensibility which had been
discovered upon the occasion in and out of our public councils, after an envoy
extraordinary had been sent to terminate differences and obtain reparation; if
nothing had resulted, was there any cho^e but reprisals? should we not have
rendered ourselves ridiculous and contemptible in the eyes of the whole world,
by forbearing them.

It is curious to observe the inconsistency of certain men. They reprobate the
treaty as incompatible with our honor, and yet they affect to believe that an
abortion of the negotiation would not have led to war. If they are sincere,
they must think that national honor consists in perpetually railing,
complaining, blustering and submitting. For my part, much as I deprecate war, I
entertain no doubt that it would have been our duty to meet it with decision
had the negotiation failed; that a due regard to our honor, our rights and our
interests would have enjoined it upon us. Nor would a pa^sillanimous
passiveness have saved us from it. So unsettled a state of things would have
led to fresh injuries and aggravations, and circumstances too powerful to be
resisted, would have dragged us into war. We should have lost our honor without
preserving our peace. Nations in similar situations have no option but to
accommodate differences or to fight. Those which have strong motives to avoid
war, should by their moderation, facilitate the accommodation of differences.
This is a rule of good sense, a maxim of sound policy.

But the misfortune is, that men will oppose imagination to fact. Though we see
Great Britain predominant on the ocean: though we observe her pertinaciously
resisting the idea of pacification with France amidst the greatest
discouragements: though we have employed a man whose sagacity and integrity
have been hitherto undisputed, and of a character far from flexible, to
ascertain what was practicable: though circumstances favored his exertions:
though much time and pains were bestowed upon the subject: though there is not
only his testimony, but the testimony of other men who were immediately on the
scene, and in whom there is every reason to confide, that all was attained
which was attainable* yet we still permit ourselves to imagine, that more and
better could have been done, and that by taking even now a high and menacing
tone, Great Britain may be brought to our feet.

Even a style of politeness in our envoy has been construed to his
disadvantage. Because he did not mistake strut for dignity, and rudeness for
spirit; because he did not, by petulance and asperity, insist the pride of the
British court against the success of his mission, he is represented as having
humiliated himself and his nation. It is forgotten that mildness in the manner,
and firmness in the thing, are most compatible with true dignity, and almost
always go further than harshness and stateliness.

Suppositions that more could be done by displaying what is called, greater
spirit, are not warranted by facts. It would be extremely imprudent on that
basis, to trust ourselves to a further experiment -- to the immense
vicissitudes in the affairs of Europe, which from moment to moment may
essentially vary the relative situations of contending parties. If there ever
was a state of things which demanded extraordinary circumspection, and forbade
a spirit of adventure, it is that of the United States at the existing
juncture, viewed in connection with the present very singular and incalculable
posture of Europe.

But it is asked, to avoid Sylla, may we not run upon Charibdis? -- If the
treaty should preserve our peace with Britain, may it not interrupt it with
France? I answer, that to me there appears no room for apprehension. It will be
shown in the course of the discussion, that the treaty interferes in no one
particular with our engagements to France, and will make no alteration whatever
in the state of things between us and her, except as to the selling prizes in
our ports, which not being required by treaty, was originally permitted merely
because there was no law to forbid it, and which being confined to France, was
of very questionable propriety on the principles of neutrality, and has been a
source of dissatisfaction to other belligerent powers. This being the case, no
cause of umbrage is given to France by the treaty, -- and it is as contrary to
her interest as to her inclination, want only to seek a quarrel with us.
Prostrate indeed were our situation, if we could not, without offending France,
make a treaty with another power, which merely tended to extinguish
controversy, and to regulate the rules of commerical intercourse, and this not
only without violating any duty to France but without giving any preference to
another. It is astonishing that those who affect so much nicety about national
honor, do not feel the extreme humilation of such an idea. As to the
denomination of Alliance with Great Britain, which has been given to the
treaty, it is an insult to the understandings of the people, to call it by such
a name. There is not a tittle of it that warrants the appellation.

No. VI.
THERE is one more objection to the treaty for what it does not do, which
requires to be noticed. This is an omission to provide against the impressment
of our seamen.

It is certain that our trade has suffered embarrassments in this respect, and
that there have been abuses which have operated very oppressively upon our
seamen, and all will join in the wish that they could have been guarded against
in future by the treaty.

But it is easier to desire this, than to see how it could have been done. A
general stipulation against the impressment of our seamen would have been
nugatory, if not derogatory. Our right to an exemption is perfect by the laws
of nations, and a contrary right is not even pretended by Great Britain. The
difficulty has been and is to fix a rule of evidence, by which to discriminate
our seamen from theirs, and by the discrimination to give ours protection,
without covering theirs in our service It happens that the two nations speak
the same language, and in every exterior circumstance closely resemble each
other; that many of the natives of Great Britain and Ireland are among our
citizens, and that others without being properly our citizens, are employed in
our vessels.

Every body knows, that the safety of Great Britain depends upon her marine.
This was never more emphatically the case, than in the war in which she is now
engaged. Her very existence, as an independent power, seems to rest on a
maritime superiority.

In this situation, can we be surprised that there are difficulties in bringing
her to consent to any arrangement which would enable us by receiving her seamen
into our employment, to detain them from her service? Unfortunately there can
be devised no method of protecting our seamen which does not involve that
danger to her. Language and appearance, instead of being a guide as between
other nations, are between us and Great Britain, sources of mistake and
deception. The most familiar experience in the ordinary affairs of society,
proves, that the oaths of parties interested, cannot be fully relied upon.
Certificates of citizenship, by officers of one party, Would be too open to the
possibility of collusion and imposition, to expect that the other would admit
them to be conclusive. If inconclusive, there must be a discretion to the other
party which would destroy their efficacy.

In whatever light the matter may be viewed, there will be found an intrinsic
difficulty in devising a rule of evidence safe for both parties, and
consequently, in establishing one by treaty. No nation would readily admit a
rule which would make it depend on the good faith of another, and the integrity
of its agents, whether her seamen in time of war, might be withdrawn from her
service, and transferred to that of a neutral power. Such a rule, as between,
Great Britain and us, would be peculiarly dangerous, on account of the
circumstances, which facilitate a transfer of seamen from one party to another.
Great Britain has accordingly perseveringly declined any definitive arrangement
on the subject; notwithstanding earnest and reiterated efforts of our
government.

When we consider heartily the peculiar difficulties which various
circumstances of similitude, between the people of the two countries, oppose to
a satisfactory arrangement, and that to the belligerent party, it is a question
of national safety, to the neutral party a question of commercial convenience,
and individual security, we shall be the less diposed to think the want of such
a provision as our wishes would dictate, a blemish in the treaty.

The truth seems to be, that from the nature of the thing, it is matter of
necessity to leave it to occasional and temporary expedients -- to the effect
of special interpositions from time to time, to procure the correction of
abuses; and if the abuse becomes intolerable to the ultima ratio; the good
faith of the parties, and the motives which they have to respect the rights of
each other, and to avo^d causes of offense, and vigilance in noting and
remonstrating against the irregularities which are committed, are probably the
only peaceable securities of which the case is susceptible.

Our minister plenipotentiary Mr. Pinckney, it is well known, has long had this
matter in charge, and has strenuously exerted himself to have it placed upon
some acceptable footing; but his endeavors have been unsuccessful, further
than to mitigate the evil by some additional checks, and by drawing the
attention of the British government to the observance of more caution. A more
sensible effect of our reprensentations, has been lately experienced; and with
attention and vigilance, that effect may be continued, and perhaps increased.
But there is reason to fear that it will be constantly found impracticable to
establish an efficacious conventional guard.

I proceed now to the examination of the several articles in the treaty, in the
order in which they stand.

The first contains merely a general declaration that there shall be peace and
friendship between the contracting parties, the countries and people of each,
without exception of persons of places.

One would have imagined that this article, at least, would have escaped a
formal objection; however it might have been secretly viewed as the most sinful
of all, by those who pant after war and enmity between the two countries.
Nothing but the fact could have led to a surmise, that it was possible for it
to have been deemed exceptionable; and nothing can better display the rage for
objection, which actuates the adversaries of the treaty, than their having
invented one against so innocent a provision.

But the committee appointed by a meeting at Charleston (S. C.) have
sagaciously discovered, that this article permits "the unconditional return to
our country of all persons who were proscribed during the late war."

With all, but men determined to be dissatisfied, it would be a sufsufficient
answer to such an objection to say, that this article to a formula in almost
every treaty on record and that the consequence attributed to it was never
before dreamt of, though other nations besides ourselves have had their
proscriptions and their ban^shments.

But this is not all -- our treaty of peace with Great Britain in 1783, has an
equivalent stipulation in these words, (article 6) "there shall be a firm and
perpetual peace between his Britannic majesty and the said states, and between
the subjects of the one, and the citizens of the other." In calling this an
equivalent stipulation, I speak with reference to the objection which is made.

The argument to support that objection would be to this effect; "Exiles and
criminals are regarded as within the peace of a country; but the people of each
are, by this article, placed within the peace of the other; therefore
proscribed persons are restored to the peace of the United States, and so lose
the character of exiles and criminals. Hence the argument will turn upon the
word "peace" -- the word friendship will have no influence upon the question.
In other respects there is no difference, in substance, between the two
articles. For the terms "people," "subjects," "citizens," as used in the two
treaties, are synonimous. If therefore, the last treaty stipulates that there
shall be peace between the governments, countries, and people of the two
nations, the first stipulates what is equivalent, that there shall be peace
between the two governments and the subjects and citizens of each. The
additional words, without exception of persons and places, can make no
difference, being merely surplusage. If A says to B, "I give you all the money
in this purse," the gift is as complete as if he had said, "I give you all the
money in this purse, without exception of a single dollar."

But the object of the stipulation, and the subject of the objection, have no
relation to each other. National stipulations are to be considered in the sense
of the laws of nations. Peace, in the sense of those laws defines a state which
is opposite to war. Peace, in the sense of the municipal laws, defines a state
which is opposite to criminality. They are consequently different things, and a
subject of Great Britain, by committing a crime, may put himself out of the
peace of our government, in the sense of our municipal laws, while there might
be perfect peace with him, in the sense of the laws of nations, and vice versa,
there might be war wish him in the sense of the laws of nations, and peace in
that of the municipal laws.

The punishment of a subject of Great Britain as a felo^, would certainly not
constitute a state of war between the parties, nor interfere with the peace
which is stipulated by this article; though it is declared that it shall be
inviolable, and might as well be affirmed to prevent the punishment of future,
as of former criminals.

But who in the contemplation of the laws of the respective states, are the
proscribed persons? They must have been understood to have been subjects or
citizens of the states which proscribed them -- consequently cannot be presumed
to be comprehended in an article which stipulates peace between the nations and
their respective citizens.

This is not a stipulation of peace between a nation and its own citizens; nor
can the idea of expatriation be admitted to go so far as to destroy the
relation of citizen as it regards amenability for a crime. To this purpose, at
least, the offender must remain a citizen.

There can hardly have been a time when a treaty was formed between two
nations, when one or the other had not exiled criminals or fugitives from
justice, which it would have been unwilling to reinstate. Yet this was never
deemed an obstacle to the article, nor has an immunity from punishment ever
been claimed under it, nor is there the least ground to assert that it might be
claimed under it.

It follows that the objection which has been taken to this article is wholly
without foundation. It is humiliating to the human understanding, or
disreputable to the human heart, that similar objections should come from
sensible men -- it is disgustful to have to refuse them. The regard I feel for
some of those who have brought it forward, makes it a painful task. How great
is the triumph of passion over judgment, on this occasion! From a note of the
Editor of the Argus it is to be inferred, that a piece has been sent to him,
charging the writer of Camillus with having liberated some person from gaol to
insult, or fight those who are called respectable WHIGS [It will be observed,
that this note is written by Camillus. For aught Camillus knows a disbelief of
the " suggestion" induced the Editor of the Argus to reject the piece, as (...)
generally does all observations of a personal nature.]
-- The suggestion is a total falsehood. The writer of Camillus has not recently
liberated any person from gaol -- though if he had, it would not be the first
instance that laudable actions have been misconstructed and imputed to him as
crimes. This is a specimen of the detestable arts which are employed to excite
resentment against the supposed author of Camillus: what does all this mean?


No. VII.
THE second article of the treaty stipulates that his Britannic majesty will
withdraw, all his troops and garrisons from all pasts and places within the
boundary lines assigned by the treaty of peace to the United States; and that
this evacuation shall take place on or before the first day June 1796; The
United States in the mean time at their discretion, extending their settlements
to any part within the said boundary line, except within the precincts or
jurisdictions of any of the said posts -- that all settlers or traders within
the precincts or jurisdiction of the said posts, shall continue to enjoy,
unmolested, all their property of every kind, and shall be protected therein;
that they shall be at liberty to remain there, or to remove with all or any
part of their effects; also to sell their lands, houses or effects, or to
retain the property thereof at their discretion, that such of them as shall
continue to reside within the said boundary lines, shall not be compelled to
become citizens of the United States, but shall be at liberty to do so if they
think proper, making and declaring their election within a year after the
evacuation, and that those who should continue after the expiration of a year
without having declared their intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic
Majesty, shall be considered as having elected to become citizens of the United
States.

This article which accomplishes a primary object of our envoy's mission, and
one of primary importance to the United States, has been as much clamoured
against as if it had made a formal cession of the posts to Great Britain. On
this point an uncommon degree of art has been exerted, and with no small
success. The value of the principal thing obtained has been put out of sight by
misrepresentations of incidental circumstances.

But the fact is nevertheless, that an object has been accomplished, of vast
consequence to our country. The most important desidera^^ in our concerns with
foreign powers are, the possession of the Western posts, and a participation in
the navigation of the river Mississippi. More or fewer of commercial privileges
are of vastly inferior moment. The force of circumstances will do all we can
reasonably wish in this respect, and in a short time, without any steps that
may convulse our trade or endanger tranquillity, will carry us to our goal.

The recovery of our Western Posts will have many important sides. It will
extinguish a source of controversy with Great Britain, which at a period, not
distant, must have inevitably involved the two countries in war, and the thing
was becoming every day, more and more urgent. It will enable us effectually to
control the hostilities of the northern and western Indians, and in so doing
will have a material influence on the southern tribes. It will therefore tend
to rescue the country from what is at present its greatest scourge, INDIAN
WARS. When we consider that these wars have, for four years past, taken an
extra million annually from our revenue; we cannot be insensible of the
importance of terminating that source of expense. This million turned to the
redemption of our debt, would contribute to complete its extinguishment in
about twenty years. This is a rough calculation, but it cannot materially err.
The benefits of tranquillity to our frontier; exempting its inhabitants from
the complicated horrors of savage warfare, speak too loudly to our humanity, as
well as to our policy, to need a commentary.

The advantages of the recovery of the Posts do not stop here; an extension of
trade is to be added to the catalogue. This however need only be mentioned at
this time as it will come again into view in considering the third article.

But two consequences, not commonly adverted to, require particular notice in
this place.

There is just ground of suspicion, corroborated by various concurring
circumstances, that Great Britain has entertained the project of contracting
our boundaries to the Ohio. This has appeared in Canada -- at the British
garrisons -- at the Indian towns -- at Philadelphia, and at London. The
surrender of the posts for ever cuts up by the roots, this pernicious project.
The whole of our western interests are immediately and deeply concerned in the
question.

The harmonious, and permanent connection of our western with our Atlantic
country, materially depends on our possession of the Western posts. Already had
great discontent been engendered in that country by their detention. That
discontent was increasing and rankling daily. It was actually one of the
aliments of the insurrection in the western parts of Pennsylvania. While the
posts remained in the hands of Great Britain, dangerous tamperings with the
inhabitants of that country were to be apprehended -- a community of views
between Great Britain and Spain might have taken place, and by force and
seduction,events formidable to our general union might have been hazarded. The
dissolution or prevention of this community of views, is a point of the
greatest moment in our system of national policy. It presses us to terminate
differences, to extinguish misunderstandings with Great Britain; it urges us to
improve the favorable moment, and stamps with the charge of madness, the
efforts to let go the hold which the treaty, if mutually ratified, would give
us.

Whoever will cast his eye upon the map o^ the United States, will survey the
position of the western posts, their relations to our western waters, and their
general bearings upon our western country; and is at the same time capable of
making the reflections, which an accurate view of the subject suggests, will
discover multiplied confirmations of the position, that the possession of those
posts by us, has an intimate connection with the preservation of union between
our western and Atlantic territories; and whoever can appreciate the immense
mischiefs of a disunion, will feel the prodigious value of the acquisition. To
such a man, the question may be confidently put* Is there any thing in the
treaty conceded by us to Great Britain, to be placed in competition with this
single acquisition? The answer could not fail to be in the negative.

But it is said by way of objection, that admitting the posts will be
surrendered at the time stipulated, it is no acquisition by this treaty; it is
only the enjoyment of a right which was secured by the treaty of peace.

With as much good sense might it be said, that the stipulation of reparation
for the spoilations of our property, or even immediate actual reparation, if it
had been obtained, was nothing gained; because the laws of nations gave us a
right to such reparation; and it might in this way be proved to have been
impossible for our envoy to have effected any thing useful or meritorious.

Let us see what is the real state of the case. Great Britain had engaged by
the treaty of peace, to surrender the Western Posts with all covenient speed;
but without fixing a precise time. For the cause, or on the pretext of our not
having complied with the treaty on our part, especially, in not removing the
impediments which the antecedent laws of particular states, opposed to the
recovery of British debts, she delayed, and afterward refused to make the
surrender; and when our envoy left this country, there was too much appearance
of an intention on her part to detain them indefinitely, and this, after having
actually kept them ten years. The treaty of peace was consequently in this
particular suspended, if not superceded. It was either to be reinstated by a
new agreement, or enforced by arms. The first our envoy has effected; he has
brought Great Britain to abandon the dispute, and to fix a precise determinate
time when at farthest the posts are to be delivered up. It is therefore to this
new agreement, that we shall owe the enjoyment of them, and it is of course,
entitled to the merit of having obtained them; it is a positive ingredient in
its value, which cannot be taken from it; and it may be added, that this is the
first time that the merit of procuring, by negotiation, restitution of a right
witheld, was ever denied to the instrument which procured it.

But it is objected, that as much has not been done as might have been done;
that restitution of the posts has not been procured, but only a promise to
restore them at a remote period, in exchange for a former promise, which had
been violated. That there is no good ground of reliance upon the fulfillment of
this new promise, for the performance of which there ought to have been some
surety or guarantee -- that the restitution of the posts ought to have been
accompanied with indemnification for the detention, and for the expenses of the
Indian wars which have been occasioned by that detention, and by the
instigations of British intrigue -- that it was better to go to war than to
relinquish our claim to such indemnification; or if our present circumstances
did not recommend this, it was better to wait till it was more convenient to us
to enforce our claim, than to give it up. These are the declamations by which
this part of the treaty is arraigned. Let us see, if they are the random
effusions of enthusiasm, or the rational dictates of sound policy.

As to the suggestion, that more might have been done than was done, it must of
necessity be mere conjecture and imagination. If the picture given of the
situation of Great Britain, was better justified by facts, than it is, it would
not follow that the suggestion is true; for the thing would depend not on the
real situation of that country, but on the opinion entertained of it by its own
administration, on the personal character of the prince and of his council; on
the degree by which they were influenced by pride and passion, or by reason.
The hypothesis, that the dispositions of a government are conformable with its
situation, is as fallacious a one as can be entertained. It is to suppose,
contrary to every day's experience, that cabinets are always wise. It is on the
part of those who draw the inference, to suppose, that a cabinet, the most
violent, rash, and foolish, of Europe, is at the same time moderate and prudent
enough to act according to the true situation of the country. -- Who of our
enthusiasts, reasoning from his view of the abased condition of Great-Brita^n,
has not long since imagined, that she ought to be on her knees to France suing
for mercy and forgiveness? yet how different hitherto is the fact. If we
carefully p^se the speeches of the leading members of the Convention, we shall
observe the menaces against Great Britain frequently intersp^rsed with
^nvitations to peace. While the British government maintains a proud and
distant reserve, repels every idea of peace, and inflexibly pursues the path of
war. If the situation of Europe in general, and of Great Britain in particular,
as is pretended, authorized us to expect, to exact whatever we chose, how
happens it, that France, with all her victories, has not yet been able even to
exact peace.

But the picture given of the situation of Great Britain to warrant the
inferences which are drawn, is exaggerated and false. -- It cannot be denied
that the is triumphant on the ocean; that the acquisitions she has made upon
France, are hitherto greater than those which France has made upon her. If, on
the one hand, she owes an immense debt, on the other, she possesses an immense
credit, which there is no symptom of being impaired. British credit, has become
in a British mind, an article of faith, and is no longer an object of reason.
How long it may last, how far it may go, is incalculable. -- But it is evident,
that it still affords prodigious resource^, and that it is likely for some time
to come to afford them. In addition to this, it is a well ascertained fact,
that her government possess^s, internally, as much vigor, and has as much
national support as it perhaps ever had a^ any former period of her history.
Alarmed by the unfortunate excesses in France, most men of property cling to
the government, and carry with them the great bulk of the nation, almost the
whole of the farming interest, and much the greatest proportion of other
industrious classes. Her manufactures, though probably wounded by war, are
still in a comparatively flourishing condition. They suffice not only for her
own supply, but for the full extent of foreign demand, and the markets for them
have not been materially contracted by the war. Her foreign commerce continues
^o be ^mmense; as a specimen of it, it may be mentioned, that the ships from
India this year, announced to have been seen upon or near the British coast,
amounted to 35 in number, computed to be worth be^ween four and five millions
sterling. It is no light circumstance in the estimate of her resources, that a
vast preponderacy in that quarter of the globe continues to nourish her wealth
and power.

If from a view of Great Britain sing^y, we pass to a view of her foreign
connections, we shall find no cause to consider her as a prostrate nation.
Among her allies, are the two greatest powers of Europe (France excepted)
namely, Russia and Austria, or the Emperor -- Spain and Sardinia continue to
make common cause with her. There is no power of Europe which has displayed a
more uniform Character of perseverance than Austria; for which she has very
strong motives on the present occasion. Russia too, is remarkable for her
steadiness to her purpose, whatever it may be. It is true, that heretofore she
has not discovered much zeal in the coalition, but there are symptoms of her
becoming more closely and cordially engaged. If she does, she is a great weight
in the scale.

Against this will be set the astonishing victories, he^ic* exploits, and vast
armies of France, her rapid conquests to the R^me, the total reduction of
Holland, the progress of her arms in Spain and Italy, the detaching of the king
of Prussia from the coalition, and the prospect of detaching some others of the
German Princes; and it will be added, that the continental enemies of France
appear exhausted, despairing, and unable to continue the war.

This, if offered only to show that there is no probability that the enemies of
France can succeed in the original objects of the war against her, or can
divest her of her acquisitions on the continent, has all the force that may be
desired to be given to it, but when it is used to prove that the situation of
Great Britain is so desperate and humbled as to oblige her to receive from
France, or the United States, any conditions which either of them may think fit
to impose; the argument is carried infinitely too far. It is one thing for a
country to be in a posture not to receive the law from others, and a very
different thing for her to be in a situation which obliges others to receive
the law from her, and what is still stronger, from all her friends. France
evidently cannot annoy Russia -- she can, with great difficulty, from their
geographical position, make any further acquisitions upon the territories of
Austria. -- Britain and her possessions are essentially safe, while she
maintains a decided maritime superiority. -- As long as this is the case, even
supposing her abandoned by all her allies, she never can be in the situation
which is pretended by the opposers of the treaty.

But in describing the situation of France, only one side of the medal is
presented. -- There is another side far less flattering, and which in order to
a just conclusion, must be impartially viewed.

If the allies of Great Britain are fatigued and exhausted, France cannot be in
a better condition. The efforts of the latter, in proportion to intrinsic
resources, have no doubt been much greater than those of the former. It is a
consequence from this, physically certain, that France must be still more
fatigued and exhausted even than her adversaries. Her acquisitions cannot
materially vary this conclusion; the low countries, long the theater of the
war, must have been pretty well emptied before they fell into her hands.
Holland is an artificial power -- her life and strength were in her credit --
this perished with her reduction. Accordingly the succors extracted from her
compared with the scale of the war, have been insignificant.

As to the true position of France, we are not left to mere inference.

All the official reports, all the private accounts from thence acknowledge a
state of extreme embarrassment and distress: an alarming derangement of the
finances, and a scarcity not distant from famine. To this are to be added, a
continuance of violent and destructive conflicts of parties, and the
unextinguished embers of insurrection.

This fair comparison of the relative situation of the contending parties will,
I know, be stigmatized as blazoning the strength and resources of
Great Britain, and depreciating the advantages of France. But the cant phrases
of party cannot alter the truth -- nor will they prevent the people of the
United States from listening impartially to it, or from discerning that it is a
mark of fidelity to their interests to counteract misrepresentation, by placing
facts fairly before them, and a duty which they cannot omit to perform without
betraying their own interests, to receive them heartily, and weigh them
maturely.

The conclusion is, that all those highly charged declamations which describe
Great Britain to us as vanquished and humbled; as ready to pass under the yoke
at our command, and to submit to any conditions which we may think fit to
prescribe, are either the chimeras of over heated imaginations, or the
fabrications of imposture; and if listened to, can have no other effect than to
inspire a delusive presumption, and a dangerous temerity.

But to judge the better of the extravagance of these declamations, it will be
useful to go back to the periods when the negotiation began and ended. Our
envoy arrived in England and entered upon the business of his mission, at the
moment when there was a general elation on account of the naval victory gained
by Lord How, and previous to those important successes which have terminated
in the conquest of Holland; and the treaty was concluded by the 19th of Nov.
last, prior to the last mentioned event, and to the defection of the king of
Prussia. The posture of things at the time it was in negotiation, and not at
this time, is the standard by which to try its merits; and it may be observed,
that it is probable the negotiation received its first impression, and even its
general out line anterior to the principal part of the disasters sustained by
the coalesced powers in the course of the last campaign.

It may not be improper to add, that if we credit the representations of our
envoy Great Britain manifested similar dispositions with regard to the treaty
at the commencement as at the close of the negotiation: whence it will follow,
that too much has been attributed, in this country to the victories of France.

The subject of the second article will be resumed and concluded in the next
number.

No. VIII.
ONE of the particulars, in which our en^oy is alleged to have fallen short of
what might or ought to h^ve been done, respect the time for the surrender of
the western posts. It is alleged that there ought either to have been an
immediate surrender, or some guarantee or surety for the performance of the new
promise. Both parts of the alternative, presuppose that Great Britain was to
have no will upon the subject; that no circumstan^s of security or convenience
to her were to be consulted; that our envoy was not to negociate but to
command. How unsubstantial the foundation on which this course of proceeding is
recommended, has been already developed.

The fact was, that our envoy pressed an early evacuation of the Posts; but
there was an inflexible adherence on the other side to the term limited in the
treaty. The reasons understood to have been assigned for it, were to this
effect, viz. That according to the course of the Indian trade, it was customary
to spread through the nations, goods to a large amount, the returns for which,
could not be drawn into Canada, in a shorter period than was proposed to be
fixed for the evacuation; that the impression which the surre^r of all the
posts to American garrisons might make on the minds (...) the Indians, could
not be foreseen; that there was the greater reason for caution, as on a former
occasion it had been intima^ed to them by public agents of the United States,
that they had been forsaken and given up by the British government; that the
protection promised on our part, however sincere and however competent in other
respects, might not be sufficient in the first instance to prevent the
embarrassment which might ensue; that for these reasons the traders ought to
have time to conclu^e their adventures, which were pre^ca^ upon the existing
state of things; that they would in future calculate upon the new state of
things, but that in the mean time the care of government ought not to be
withdrawn from them.

There is ground to believe that there were representations on behalf of the
Canada traders, alleging a longer term than that which was adopted in the
treaty, to be necessary to wind up and adapt their arrangements to the new
state of things; and that the term suggested by them was abridged several
months. And it may not be useless to observe, as explanatory of the reasons
given, that in fact it is the course of the trade to give long credits to the
Indians, and that the returns for goods furnished in one year, only come in the
next year.

What was to be done in this case? Was the negotiation to break off o^ was the
de^ay to be admitted? The last was preferred by our envoy, and the preference
was rightly judged.

The consequence of breaking off the negotiation has been stated. No reasonab^e
man will doubt that delay was preferable to war if there be good ground of
reliance, that the stipulation will be fulfilled at the appointed time. -- Let
us calmly examine this point.

The argument against it is drawn from the breach of the former promise. To be
authorized to press this argument, we ought to be sure that all was right on
our part. -- After what has been offered on this subject, are we still
convinced that this was the case? Are we able to say that there was nothing in
our conduct which furnished a ground for that of Great Britain? Has ^t not been
shown to be a fact that, from the arrival of the provisional articles in this
country, till after the ratification here of the definitive treaty, acts of
states interdicting the recovery of British debts and other acts militating
against the treaty, continued in operation? Can we doubt that subjects of Great
Britain, affected by these acts, carried complaints to the ears of their
government? Can we wonder if they made serious impressions there, if they
produced dissatisfaction and distrust? Is it very extraordinary if they excited
the idea of detaining the posts as a pledge, till there were better indications
on our part? Is it surprising if the continuance of these acts and the addition
of others which were new and positive breaches of the treaty, prolonged the
detention of the Posts? --

In fine, was the delay in surrendering so entirely destitute of cause, so
unequivocal a proof of a perfidious character, as to justify the conclusion,
that no future dependence can be made on the promises of the British
government? Discerning men will not hastily subscribe to this conclusion.

Mutual charges of breach of faith are not uncommon between nations: yet this
does not prevent their making new stipulations with each other, and relying
upon their performance. The argument from the breach of one promise, if real,
to the breach of every other, is not supported by experience, and if adopted as
a general rule would multiply, infinitely the impediments to accord and
agreement among nations.

The truth is, that though nations will too often evade their promises on
colorable pretexts, yet few are so profligate as to do it without such
pretexts. In clear cases, self interest dictates a regard to the obligations of
good faith: nor is there any thing in the history of Great Britain which
warrants the opinion that she is more unmindful than other nations of her
character for good faith.

Yet she must be so, and in an extreme degree, if she be capable of breaking,
without real cause, a second promise on the same point, after the termination
by a new treaty of an old dispute concerning it, and this too on the basis of
mutual reparation. It would indicate a destitution of principle, a contempt of
character, much beyond the usual measure, and to an extent which it may be
affirmed is entirely improbable.

It is a circumstance of some moment in the question, that the second promise
is free from the vagueness of the first, as to the time of execution -- It is
not to be perfomed with all convenient speed, but by a day certain, which
cannot be exceeded. This would give point to violation and render it
unequivocal.

Another argument against the probability of performance has been deduced from
the supposed deficiency of good reasons for the delay, which is represented as
evidence of want of sincerity in the promise.

Besides the reasons which were assigned for that delay, there are others that
may be conjectured to have operated, which it would not have been equally
convenient to avow, but which serve to explain the delay different from the
supposition of its having been calculated for ultimate evasion. If, as we have
with too much cause suspected, Great Britain, or her Representative in Canada,
whether with or without orders, has really countenanced the hostilities of the
Western Indians, it was to be expected that she would think it incumbent upon
her to give them sufficient time to make peace before an evacuation of the
Posts should put them entirely in our power. She might otherwise have provoked
them to hostilities against her own settlements, and have kindled in their
minds, inextinguishable resentments. It was not certain how soon a peace would
be brought about, and it might be supposed, that the disposition to it on our
part might be weakened or strengthened by the proximity or remoteness of the
period of the surrender. Moreover, some considerable time might be requisite to
prepare these establishmments for the security of Canada, which the
relinquishment of the Posts would be deemed to render necessary.

The latter (...) not justly objectionable: the former implies an embarrassment
resulting from a culpable policy, which was entitled to no indulgence from us,
but which, nevertheless, must have had a pretty imperious influence on the
conduct of the other party, and must have created an obstacle to a speedy
surrender not easy to be surmounted. Taken together, we find in the reasons
assigned, and in those which may be presumed to have operated, a solution of
the pertinacity of Great Britain on the subject of time, without impeaching on
that account, the sincerity of the promise to surrender.

But we have very strong holds for the performance of this promise upon the
interest of Great Britain: 1st. The interest which every nation has in not
entirely forfeiting its reputation for honor and fidelity. 2d. The interest
which results from the correlative stipulation with regard to the
indemnification for the British debts, a point upon which there will be no
inconsiderable mercantile sensibility. 3d. The interest of pre^rving peace with
this country, the interruption of which, after all that has passed, could not
fail to attend the non-surrender of the Posts at the stipulated time.

It is morally certain that circumstances will every day add strength to this
last motive. -- Time has already done much for us and will do more. Every
hour's continuance of the war in Europe must necesarily add to the
inconveniences of a rupture with this country, and to the motives which Great
Britain must feel to avoid an increase of the number of her enemies, to desire
peace, and if obtained, to preserve it.

The enemies of the treaty, upon their own calculations, can hardly dispute,
that if the war continues another year after the present the probable situation
of Great Britain will be a complete security for her compliance with her
promise to surrender the posts. But let us suppose that a general peace takes
place in Europe this winter, what may then be the disposition of Great Britain
in June next, as to war or peace with this country?

I answer, that the situation will be of all others that which is most likely
to indispose her to a war with us. There is no juncture, at which war is more
unwelcome to a nation, than immediately after the experience of another war,
which has required great exertions, and has been expensive, bloody and
calamitous. The minds of all men then dread the renewal of so great an evil,
and are disposed rather to make sacrifices to peace than to plunge afresh into
hostilities. The situation of Great Britain at the end of the war in which she
is now engaged, is likely to be the most discouraging that can be imagined to
the provocation of new wars. Here we may discover a powerful security for the
performance of her stipulations.

As to the idea of a guarantee or surety for the fulfillment of the promise, it
cannot be seriously believed that it was obtainable. It would have been an
admission of the party that there was a well founded distrust of its faith. To
consent to it, therefore, would have been to subscribe to its own humiliation
and disgrace, the expecation of which has been shown to be ridiculous.

But why was there not equally good reason that we should have given a
guarantee or surety for the performance of our new promise with regard to the
debts? And if there was to have been reciprocity, where should we have
conveniently found that guarantee or surety? Should we have thought it very
reputable to ourselves to have been obliged to furnish it?

The arguments of the opposers of the treaty are extremely at variance with
each other. On the one hand they represent it as fraught with advantages to
Great Britain, without equivalents to the United States -- as a premeditated
scheme to sacrifice our trade and navigation to here is -- as a plan dictated by
her for drawing the two countries into close connection and alliance, and for
making our interests subservient to here is; on the other hand, they tell us,
that there is no security for the surrender of the posts, according to
stipulation. How is the one thing to be reconciled with the other? If the
treaty be such an immense boon to Great Britain, if it be such a master piece
of political craft on her side, can there be any danger that she will destroy
her favorite work, by not performing the conditions on which its efficacy and
duration must depend? There is no position better settled, than that the breach
of any article of a treaty by one party, gives the other an option to consider
the whole treaty as annulled. Would Great Britain give us this option, in a
case in which she had so much to lose by doing it?

This glaring collision of arguments proves how superficially the adversaries
of the treaty have considered the subject, and how little reliance can be
placed on the views they give of it.

In estimating the plan which the treaty adopts for the settlement of the old
controversy, it is an important reflection, that, from the course of things,
there will be nothing to be performed by us before the period for the
restitution of the pos^s will have elapsed, and that, if this restitution
should be evaded, we shall be free to put an end to the whole treaty, about
which there could not be a moment's hesitation. We should then be where we were
before the treaty, with the advantage of having strengthened the justice of our
cause, by removing every occasion of reproach, which the infractions of the
treaty of peace may have furnished against us.

Two other particulars, in which this part of the treaty is supposed to be
defective, regard the want of indemnification for the detention of the posts,
and for the expenses of Indian wars.

Those who make the objection, may be safely challenged to produce precedents
of similar indemnifications, unless imposed by conquering powers on the
vanquished, or by powers of overbearing strength upon-those which were too weak
to dispute the logic of superior force. If this were the relative situation of
the United States and Great Britain, then is the treaty inexcusably faulty; but
if the parties were to treat and agree as equal powers, then is the pretension
extravagant and impracticable. The restitution of the specific thing detained,
is all that was to be expected, and, it may be added, it is all that was ever
really expected on the part of this country, so far as we may reason either
from official acts or informal expressions of the public opinion.

In cases where clear injuries are done, affecting objects of known or easily
ascertainable values, pecuniary compensation may be expected to be obtained by
negotiation: but it is believed that it will be impossible to cite an example
of such compensation so obtained, in a case in which territory has been
withheld on a dispute of title, or as a hostage for some other claim (as in the
present instance, for securing the performance of the 4th article of the treaty
of peace.) The recovery of the territory withheld is the usual satisfaction.

The want of a rule to adjust consequential damages, is, in such cases, a very
great difficulty. In the ins^^^ce under discussion, this difficulty would be
peculiarly great. -- The posts are, for the most part, in a wilderness. There
are but two of them which have any adjacent settlements; Point-au-fer, or
Dutchman's point, to one of which a part of a tract of land, called Caldwell's
Manor, with a few inhabitants, has been claimed as appurtenant. Detroit, which
has a settlement in the town and neighborhood of between two and three
thousand souls. In the vicinity of the other posts, on our side, there is
scarcely an inhabitant. It follows, that very little damage could be predicated
either upon the loss of revenue from, (...) of the profits of trade with the
settlements in the vicinity of the posts. The trade of the Indians within our
limits would consequently be the basis of the claim of compensation. -- But
here the ignorance or spirit of exaggeration of the opponents of the treaty has
been particularly exemplified. The annual loss from this source has been
stated, by a very zealous writer against the treaty, who signs himself Cato, at
800,000 dollars.

Now it is a fact well ascertained, that the mean value of the whole exports
from Canada in peltries (which constitute the returns of Indian trade) in the
years 1785 and 1787, was something short of 800,000 dollars. It is also a fact,
in which all men informed on the subject agree, that the trade with the
Indians, within our limits, An account of peltries exported from Canada in 1786
and 1787.
1786 1787 Beaver skins 116,309 139,509 Martin do. 58,132 68,132 Otters do.
26,330 26,330 Minks do. 9951 17,951 Fishers do. 5813 5813 Foxes do. 6213 8913
Bears do. 22,108 17,108 Deers do. 126,000 102,656 Racoons do. 108,346 140,346
Cats cased do. 3026 4526 Do. open do. 2925 1825 Elks do. ^^15 9815 Wolves do.
11,987 9687 Carcajoux do. 503 653 Tyger's do. 77 27 Seal's do. 157 125
Muskrat's do. 202,^56 240,456 Dressed deer skins 5488 lbs. 1788 lbs. Castors,
1454 lbs. 1454 lbs.


is not more than about one eighth of that which furnishes the peltry exported
from Canada. Hence the total product of our Indian trade could not be computed
at more than 100,000 dollars. What proportion of this may be profit, is not
easy to be determined; but it is certain, that the profits of that trade, from
the decrease of wild animals, and the inferiority of their kinds, are not
considerable. -- Many assert, that it scarcely a^^ longer worth following.
Twenty per cent. therefore, would ^^obably be a large allowance, which would
bring the loss on our Indian trade, by the detention of the posts, to about
20,000, instead of 800,000 dollars per ann. as has been asserted.

But might not a c^ of this sum, by way of indemnification, be encountered,
with (...) force, by the observation. that there is the highest probability
that the capital and labor which would have been employed to produce 20,000
dollars profit on the trade with the Indians, have been quite as productively
employed in other channels, and, consequently, that there may have been no loss
at all?

Thus we see how erroneous the data which serve to magnify claims in themselves
insignificant, and which, from the great uncertainty of their quantum, are
exposed to serious objections. Are claims like these proper subjects on which
to stake the peace of the United States?

The reasonableness of indemnification for the expenses of Indian wars,
independent of the unusual nature of the claim, might have been matter of
endless debate. We might have been told, that the Indians ascribe those wars to
pretensions upon their lands, by virtue of treaties with the former government
of the United States, imposed by violence, or contracted with partial and
inadequate representations of their nation -- that our own public records
witness, that the proceedings of our agents, at some of those treaties, were
far from unexceptionable -- that the wars complained of are to be attributed to
errors in our former policy, or mismanagement of our public agents, not to the
detention of the posts -- that this detention was merely an incidental
circumstance of disadvantage, in carrying on the wars not a cause of them --
that it must be problematical how much of the duration or expenses of those
wars are chargeable upon that detention, that the posts having been detained by
way of security for the performance of the article respecting debts, there was
no responsibility for collateral and casual damages: and finally, that it is
without example to claim indemnification of one nation for the expenses of wars
with another. Had we resorted to the charge of their having instigated or
prompted those wars, they would have demed the charge, as they have repeatedly
done before; and, though we might have been able to adduce circum^tances of
suspicion against them, they would have contested their validity and force, and
whether guilty or not, would have thought their honor concerned in avoiding
the most distant concession of having participated in so improper a business.

In every view, therefore, the c^aim for indemnification was a hopeless one;
and to insist upon it could have answered no other purpose than to render an
amicable adjustment impossible. No British minister would have dared to go to a
British parliament to ask provision for such an expenditure. What, then, was to
be done? Were we now or hereafter to go to war to enforce the claim? suppose
this done, and fifty or a hundred millions of dollars expended in the contest,
what certainty is there that we should at last accomplish the object?

Moreover, the principle of such a war would require, that we should seek
indemnification for the expenses of the war itself, in addition to our former
claim. What prospect is there, that this also would be effected? yet if not
effected, it is evident that we should have made a most wretched bargain.

Why did we not insist on indemnification for the expenses of our revolution
war? Surely not because it was less reasonable, but because it was evident that
it could not have been obtained, and because peace was necessary to us as well
as to our enemy. This likewise would be the end of a war undertaken to enforce
the claim of indemnification for the detention of the posts. We should at
length be glad to make peace either without the indemnification sought, or at
best at an expense to carry on the the war, without a chance of reimbursement,
with which the thing gained would bear no comparison.

The idea which has been thrown out of leaving the posts in the hands of the
British, till we might be better able than at present to go to war for
indemnification, is a notable political expedient. This would be to postpone of
choice the possession of an object which has been shown to be demanded by very
urgent and important general considerations, to submit to certain and great
inconveniences from that privation, including probably the continuance or
renewal of Indian hostilities, and to run the risk, from the growth of the
British settlements in the neighborhood of the posts, and various unforeseen
casualties, of their ultimate acquisition becoming difficult and precarious:
For what? why, to take at last the chances of war, the issue of which is ever
doubtful, to obtain an object which, if obtained, will certainly cost more than
it is worth. The expenses of war apart, pecuniary indemnification upon any
possible scale, would ill compensate for the evils of the future detention,
till the more convenient time for going to war should arrive. What should we
think of this policy, if it should turn out that the posts and the
indemnification too were to be finally abandoned?

No. IX.
IT was my intention to have comprised in two numbers, the examination of the
second article; but on exp^riment, it was found expedient to add a third. I
resume, for a moment, the subject of indenification for the detention of the
Posts.

As an inducement to persist in this claim, we are assured that the magnanimity
of France, would have procured for us its establishment. In the first place,
this supposes that we were to have become a party in the war; for otherwise it
would be silly to imagine, that France would on our account, embarrass herself
with a difficulty of this sort. In this case, and supposing the object
accomplished, still the injuries, losses, and expenses of war, would have
greatly overbalanced the advantage gained. But what certainty have we that
France will be able to dictate terms, even for herself? Could we expect or rely
after the terrible and wasting war, in which she has been engaged, that she
would be willing to encumber the making of peace, with additional obstacles, to
secure so trifling a point for us? Would it be even humane, or friendly in us
to ask her to risk the prolonging of her calamities, for so trivial an object?
A conduct like this, with re^eence either to France, or to ourselves, would
resemble that of the ^ester, who should p^ay millions against ^^rthings. It is
so prepoterous in every sense, that the recommendation of it, if he ^re, admits
of but one construction, namely, that those who recommend it, with our envoy to
have acted, not as if he had been sent to make peace, but as if he had been
sent to make war, to blow and spread the desolating flames of discord and
contention.

There is a marked disingenuousness running through the observations, which are
made to the prejudice of the treaty: they endeavor constantly to have it
understood that our envoy abandoned, without effort, the claims which have not
been established? Whence is this inferred? Is it from the silence of the
treaty? Surely we can only expect to find there what was agreed upon, not what
was discussed and rejected. The truth is, that as well on this point of
indemnification, for the detention of the posts, as on that of compensation for
the negroes carried away, our envoy urged our pretensions, as far, and as long
as he could do it, without making them final obstacles to the progress of the
negotiation.

I shall now enumerate and answer the remaining objections, which have appeared
against this article. They are these: -- 1. That the posts to be surrendered
instead of being described in general terms, should for greater certainty, have
been specifically enumerated; that now the uncertainty of a part of the
boundary line, may furnish a pretext for detaining some of them. 2. That the
expressions, "precincts and jurisdictions," which are excepted from our right
of settlement previous to the surrender are so vague and indeterminate, as to
be capable of being made to countenance encroachments. 3. That it was improper
to have stipulated, for the inhabitants, the option of residing and continuing
British subjects, or of becoming American citizens; that the first was to
establish by treaty, a British colony, within our limits; the last to admit
without the power of exception bitter enemies of the country, to the privileges
of citizens. 4. That the securing to those inhabitants, the enjoyment of their
property is exceptionable as being "ascession without equivalent of an
indefinite extent of territory." This is the character given to it by the
meeting at Philadelphia.

The answer to the first objection is, that the enumeration proposed might have
included the very danger which is objected to the provision as it stands, and
which is completely avoided by it. The principal posts occupied by the British
are known and might easily have been enumerated; but there is a possibility of
there being others not known, which might have escaped. Last year there started
up a post which had not been before heard of, on the presence of an old trading
establishment. Who knows with absolute certainty, how many similar cases may
exist in the vast extent of wilderness, as far as the lake of the Woods, which
for several years past has been inaccessible to us? If our envoy's information
could have been perfect, at the time of his last advices from America; between
that period and the signing of the treaty, changes might have taken place, that
is, trading houses might have grown into military posts, as they did in the
case referred to; a case, which in fact, happened after the departured of our
envoy from the United States. Was it not far better than to hazard an imperfect
specification to use terms so general and comprehensive, as could not fall in
any circumstances, to embrace every case; Certainly it was; and the terms " all
posts and places," which are those used in the article, are thus comprehensive.
Nothing can escape them.

Neither is there the least danger that the uncertainty This uncertainty is to
be observed, results not from the late treaty, but from the treaty of peace. It
is occasioned by its being unknown whether any part of the Missisippi extends
far enough north to be intersected by a due west line from the lake of the
Woods.
of a part of the boundary line, can be made a pretext for detaining any post
which it was possible to enumerate. This will appear from an inspection of the
map. The only uncertain part of the ^ndary line (except that depending on the
river St. C^ix, which is on a side unconnected with the position of the Posts)
is that which is to run from the lake of the Woods to the Missisippi. The most
western of our known posts is at Michillimacnac, at or near the junction of the
lakes Huron and Michegan, eastward near eleven degrees of longitude of the lake
of the Woods, and about ten degrees of longitude of that point, on the
Missisippi, below the fails of St. Anthony, where a survey, in order to a
settlement of the line is to begin. Moreover our line by the treaty of peace,
is to pass through the middle of lake Huron, and the water communication
between that lake and lake Superior, and through the middle of lake Superior,
and thence westward through other waters to the lake of the Woods; that is
about half a degree of latitude more northward, and about eight degrees of
latitude more westward, than any part of lake Michegan. -- Whence it is
manifest, that any closing line, to be drawn from the lake of the Woods to the
Missisippi, must pass at a distance of several hundred miles from
Michillimacnac. If the British therefore, should be disposed to evade the
surrender, they will seek for it some pretext, more plausible than one which
involves a palpable geographical absurdity. Nor can we desire a better proof of
the disingenuousness of the objectors to the treaty, than their having
contrived one of this nature.

The general terms used were to be preferred, for the very reason, that there
was a doubt about the course of a part of the boundary line; for if there
should chance to exist any post, now unknown, so near that line as to render it
questionable, in the first instance, on which side it may fall; the moment the
line is settled, the obligation to surrender will be settled with it.

The second obligation loses all force, when it is considered that the
exception can only operate till the 1st of June next, the period for the
surrender of the posts; and that in the mean time, there is ample space for
settlement, without coming to disputable ground. There was besides real
difficulty in an accurate definition. What the precincts and jurisdiction of
the posts are, is a question of fact. In some instances, where from there being
no settlements, over which an actual jurisdiction had been exercised, a good
rule might have been the distance of gun shot from the fortifications, which
might have been settled at a certain extent in miles, say three or four. -- But
in some cases, an actual jurisdiction has been exercised under circumstances
which created obstacles to a precise definition. -- The case of Caldwell's
manor in the vicinity of Dutchman's point is an example. There a mixed
jurisdiction has been sometimes exercised by the British and by the state of
Vermont, connected with a disputed title to that manor; one party claiming
under an ancient French grant, the other under the state of Vermont. Detroit
and its vicinity would also have occasioned embarrassment. From the situation
of the settlements, and of a number of dispersed trading establishments, a
latitude was likely to have been required, to which it might have been
inexpedient to give a sanction. In such situations, where a thing is to last
but a short time, it is commonly the most eligible course to avoid definition.
It is obvious, that no ill can result from the want of one, if the posts are
surrendered at the time agreed; if not, it is equally plain that it can be of
no consequence, because the whole article will be void.

The third objection becomes insignificant, the moment the real state of things
is adversed to. This has been described in a former number for another purpose,
but will now be recapitulated with one or two additional facts. The first posts
beginning eastward are point Aufer, and Dutchman's point on lake Champlain. The
whole number of persons in this vicinity, over whom jurisdiction has been
claimed by the British, may amount to an hundred families. But the claim of
jurisdiction here, has been only occasionally and feebly urged; and it is
asserted, in addition, by well informed persons, that the above mentioned
families have been, for some time, regularly represented in the legislature of
Vermont, the ordinary civil jurisdiction of which state, has, with little
interruption, extended over them. At neither of the other posts, to wit:
Oswego, Niagara, the Miami Detroit, Michillimacnac; is there any settlement
except at Detroit, where, and in the vicinity of which, there may be between
two and three thousand persons, chiefly French Canadians, and their
descendants. It will be understood, that I do not consider as a settlement, two
or three log-houses for traders.

It follows, that the number of persons who can be embraced by the privileges
stipulated is too inconsiderable to admit of attaching any political
consequence whatever to the stipulation. Of what importance can it possibly be
to the United States, whether two or three thousand persons, men, women, and
children, are permitted to reside within their limits, either as British or
American subjects, at their option? If the thing was an object of desire to
Great Britain for the accommodation of the individuals concerned, could it have
merited a moments hesitation on our part? As to residence, it is of the
ordinary curtesy of nations at peace to permit the mutual residence of the
citizens of each other within their respective territories. British subjects
are now free by our laws, to reside in all parts of the United States. As to
the permission to become citizens, it has been the general policy and practice
of our country to facilitate the naturalization of foreigners. And we may
safely count on the interest of the individuals, and on that desire to enjoy
equal rights which is so deeply implanted in the human breast, that all who
resolve to make their permanent residence with us will become citizens.

It is true, that there may be a few obnoxious characters (though I do not
recollect to have heard of more than two or three) among the number of those
who have acquired by the stipulation a right to become citizens of the United
States. But would it ever have been worthy of the dignity of the national
wrath, to have launched its thunders against the heads of two or three, or half
a dozen desp^^ble individuals? can we suppose, that without a stipulation, it
wou^d have been thought worth the while to make a special exception of their
cases out of the operation of our general laws of naturalization? And if this
had not been done, would they not have found means, if they desired it, after
the lapse of a short period, to acquire the rights of citizens? It is to be
observed, that citizens of our own, who may have committed crimes against our
laws, not remitted by the treaty of peace, would find no protection, under this
article.

Suppose the stipulation had not been made, what would have been the probable
policy of the United States? Would it not have been to leave the handful of
settlers undisturbed, in quiet enjoyment of their property, and at liberty, if
British subjects, to continue such, or become American citizens, on the usual
conditions? A system of depopulation, or of coercion to one allegiance or
another, would have been little congenial with our modes of thinking, and would
not, am persuaded, have been attempted.

If then, the treaty only stipulates in this respect, what would have been the
course of things without it; what cause for serious objecc^^^n can there be on
this account?

The matter of the fourth objection can only derive a moment's importance from
misapprehension. It seems to have been imagined, that there are large tracts of
land held under British grants, made since the peace, which are confirmed by
the part of the article that gives the inhabitants the right of removing with,
selling, or retaining their property.

In the first place, it is to be observed, that if such grants had been made,
the stipulation could not be deemed to confirm them, because our lands must
determine the question, what is the property of the inhabitants, and they would
rightfuly decide, that the British government, since the treaty of peace could
make no valid grants of land, within our limits. Upon the ground even of its
own pretensions it could not have made such grants. Nothing more was claimed,
than a right to detain the posts as a hostage. The right to grant lands
pre-supposes much more, a full right of sovereignty and territory.

But in the second place, it has always been understood, and upon recent and
careful enquiry is confirmed, that the British government has never, since the
peace made a single grant of lands within our limits. It appears, indeed, to
have been its policy to prevent settlements in the vicinity of the posts.

Hence the stipulation as it affects lands, does nothing more than confirm the
property of those which were holden at the treaty of peace; neither is the
quantity considerable; and it chiefly, if not altogether, depends on titles
acquired under the French government while Canada was a province of France.

In giving this confirmation, the treaty only pursues what is a constant rule
among civilized nations. When territory is ceded or yielded up by one nation to
another it is a common practice, if not a special condition, to leave the
inhabitants in the enjoyment of their property. A contrary conduct would be
disgraceful to a nation; nor is it very reputable to the objectors to the
treaty, that they have levelled their battery against this part of it. It is a
reflection upon them too, that they employ for the purpose, terms which import
more than is true, even on their own supposition, and are, therefore,
calculated to deceive; for the confirmation of property to individuals, could
be at most a cession only of the right of soil, and not of territory, which
term has a technical sense including jurisdiction.

Let it be added, that the treaty of peace in the article which provides, "that
there should be no future confiscations nor prosecutions against any person or
persons, by reason of the part which he or they might have taken in the war;
and that no person should, on that account, suffer any future loss or damage,
either in his person, liberty or property, did substantially what is made an
objection to the treaty under consideration. It will not, I believe, be
disputed, that it gave protection to all property antecedently owned, and not
confiscated. Indeed, it is a question, whether the stipulations cited would not
have effected, with regard to other rights than those of property, a great part
of what is regulated by the last treaty. Its provisions, in this particular,
were perhaps in the main, unnecessary, further than to obviate a doubt which
might have arisen from the suspension of the treaty by the withholding of the
posts.

Thus have I gone through every objection to the second article, which can be
deemed is colorable, and I flatter myself have shown not only that the
acquisition made by it is of great and real value, but that it stands as well
as circumstances permitted, and is defensible in its details. I have been the
more particular in the examination, because the assailants of the treaty have
exerted all their ingenuity to discredit this article, from a consciousness, to
doubt, that it is a very valuable item of the treaty; and that it was important
to their cause to envelope it in as thick a cloud of objections as they were
able to contrive. As an expedient of party, there is some merit in the
artifice; but a sensible people will see that it is merely artifice. It is a
false calculation, that the people of this country can ever be ultimately
deceived.

No. X.
THE object of the 3d article is connected with that of the 2d. The surrender
of the posts naturally drew with it an arrangement with regard to inland trade
and navigation. Such an arrangement, convenient in several respects, appears to
be in some respects necessary. To restrain the Indians on either side of the
line, from trading with the one party or the other, at discretion, besides the
questionableness of the right, could not be attempted without rendering them
disgusted and hostile. The truth of this seems to have influenced the conduct
of Great Britain and France, while the latter was in possession of Canada. The
15th art. of the treaty of peace of Utrecht, in the year 1713, allows free
liberty to the Indians on each side, to resort for trade to the British and
French colonies. It is to be observed too, that the Indians not only insist on
a right of going to ^e with whom they please, but of permitting whom they
please to come to trade with them, and also to reside among them for that
purpose. Thus the southern and south western Indians within our limits,
maintain a constant intercourse with Spain, established on the basis of treaty;
nor has their right to do it, been hitherto contested by the United States --
indeed, on what clear principle of justice could this natural right to trade of
a people not subject to our ordinary jurisdiction be disputed? This claim on
their part, gives a corresponding claim to neighboring nations to trade with
them. -- Spain would think the pretension to exclude her inadmisible -- And
Great Britain would have thought the same, if she had found it her interest to
assert the right of intercourse; views which would always be seconded by the
Indian^ from regard to their own interest and independence. It was a point,
therefore, which it much concerned the preservation of good understanding
between the parties and with the Indians, to regulate on some equitable plan;
and the more liberal the plan, the more agreeable to a natural course of
things, and to the free participation of mutual advantages, the more likely was
it to promote and prolong that important benefit.

In the second place, the expediency of some arrangement was indicated by the
circumstance of the boundary line, between the parties, running for an extent
of sixteen hundred miles through the middle of the same rivers, lakes and
waters. It may be deemed impossible from the varying course of winds and
currents, for the vessels of one party to keep themselves constantly within
their own limits, without passing or transgressing those of the other. How,
indeed, was the precise middle line of those great lakes to be always known.

It appears evident, that to render the navigation of these waters useful to,
and safe for both parties, it was requisite that they should be common. Without
this, frequent forfeitures to enforce interdictions of intercourse might be
incurred -- and there would be constant danger of interference and controversy.
It is probable too, that when those waters are better explored in their whole
extent, it will be found that the best navigation of the lakes is sometimes on
the one side, sometimes on the other, and that common convenience will, in this
respect also, be promoted by community of right.

Again, it is almost always mutually beneficial for bordering territories to
have free and friendly intercourse with each other. This relates not only to
the advantages of an interchange of commodities, for the supply of mutual wants
and to those of the reciprocal reaction of industry, connected with that
interchange, but also to those of avoiding jealousy, collision, and contest, of
preserving friendship and harmony. Proximity of territory invites to trade --
the bordering inhabitants, in spite of every prohibition, will endeavor to
carry it on -- If not allowed, illicit adventurers take place of the regular
operations of legalised commerce -- individual interest, leads to collusions to
evade restraining regulations -- habits of infracting the laws are produced --
morals are perverted -- severities necessarily great in proportion, as they
counteract the natural course of things, lay the foundation of discontents and
quarrels. Perhaps it may be safely affirmed that, freedom of intercourse or
violent hatred and enmity, are the alternative in every case of contiguity of
territory.

The maxims of the United States have hitherto favored a free intercourse with
all the world. They have conceived that they had nothing to fear from the
unrestrained competition of commercial enterprise, and have only desired to be
admited to it on equal terms. Hence not only the communication by sea has been
open, with the adjacent territories, on our continent, as well as with more
distant quarters of the globe, but two ports have been erected on lake
Champlain for the convenience of interior commerce with Canada. These
arrangements have excited neither blame nor criticism.

Our envoy, therefore, in agreeing to a liberal plan of intercourse with the
British territories in our neighborhood has conformed to the general spirit of
our country, and to the general policy of our laws. Great Britain, in acceding
to such a plan, departed from her system of colonial monopoly, a departure
which ought to be one recommendation of the plan to us; for every relaxation of
that system pays the way for other and further relaxations. It might have been
expected also, that a spirit of jealousy might have proved an obstacle on the
part of great Britain, since, especially if we consider the composition of
those who inhabit, and are likely to inhabit Canada, it is morally certain that
there must be, as the result of a free intercourse a far greater momentum of
influence of the United States upon Canada, than of Canada upon the United
States. -- It would not have been surprising, if this jealousy had sought to
keep us at a disance, and had counteracted the wiser policy of limiting our
desires by giving us possession of what is alone to us truly desirable, the
advantages of commerce, rather than of suffering our wishes to be stimulated
and extended by privation and restraint.

New ideas seem of late to have made their way among us. The extremes of
commercial jealousy are inculcated. -- Regulation, restriction, exclusion, are
now with many the favorite topics -- Instead of feeling pleasure, that new
avenues of trade are opened, a thousand dangers and mischiefs are pourtrayed
when the occasion occurs. Free trade with all the world seems to have dwindled
into trade with France and her dominions. -- The love sick partisans of that
country appear to regard her as the epitome of the universe, and to have
adopted for their motto, "All for love, and the world well lost."

These new propensities toward commercial jealousy have been remarkably
exemplified with respect to the article immediately under consideration. Truly
estimated, it is a valuable in gredient in the treaty; and yet there is
perhaps, no part of it which has been more severely reprobated -- It will be
easy to show that it has been extremely misrepresented, and that what have been
deemed very exceptionable features, do not exist at all.

We will first examine what the article really does contain, and afterward
what are the comparative advantages likely to result to the two ^ountries.

The main stipulation is, that "it shall at all times be free to his ma^esty's
subjects, and to the citizens of the United States, and also to the In^ians
dwelling on either side of the boundary line, freely to pass and to ^pass, by
land and inland navigation, into the respective territories and ^ntries of the
two parties on the continent of America (the country with the limits of the
Hudson Bay company only excepted) and to navigate (...) the lakes, rivers, and
waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade ^d commerce with each other."

The subject matter of this stipulation is plainly inland trade and commerce to
be carried on by land passage, and inland navigation. This appears, 1 st. from
the terms of the article. The subjects and citizens of the two parties, and
also the Indians dwelling on each side of the boundary line, are freely to pass
and repass. In what manner? by land and inland navigation: to what places? into
the respective territories and countries of the two parties on the continent of
America (the country of the Hudson's Bay company only excepted). They are also
to navigate all the lakes, rivers and waters thereof, and freely to carry on
trade and commerce with each other. This right to navigate lakes, rivers and
waters, must be understood with reference to inland navigation; because this
gives it a sense conformable with the antecedent clause, with which it is
immediately connected, as part of a sentence; because the right to pass and
repass, being expressly restricted to land and inland navigation, it would not
be natural to extend it by implication, on the strength of an ambigous term, to
passage by sea, or by any thing more than inland navigation; because the words
lakes and rivers have direct reference to inland navigation, showing that to be
the object in view, and the word "waters, from the order in which it stands,
will most consistently with propriety b^ understood as something less than
lakes and rivers, as ponds, canals, and those amphibious waters, to which it is
scarcely possible to give a name* and because the waters mentioned are "waters
thereof," that is, water of the territories and countries of the two parties on
the continent of America; a description which cannot very aptly be applied to
the sea, or (...) supposed to include navigation by sea to the United States,
or from the^ to the British territories. It is true that nations, for various
purpos^ claim and exercise jurisdiction over the seas, immediately adjacent
(...) their coasts; yet this is subject to the common right of nations, to the
^cent use of those seas for navigation: and it is not prima facie pres^able,
that two nations, speaking of the waters of each other, w^ mean to give this
appropriate denomination to waters, in which (...) claimed some common right.
The usual description of such waters in ^ties is, "the seas near the countries,
etc." But were it otherwise, (...) the navigating from the open sea into those
waters, could not be wi^ the permission to navigate those waters, and might be
prohibited.

The above construction is confirmed by the general complexion of treaty. It is
the manifest province of the eighteen articles, which such the first ten, to
regulate external commerce and navigation. The reg^tions they contain are
introduced thus, by the 11 th article: "(...) agreed between his majesty and
the United States of America, that (...) shall be a reciprocal and entirely
perfect liberty of navigation and ^merce, between their respective people, in
the manner under the ^tions, and on the conditions specified in the following
articles." (...) follow articles, which provide fully and distinctly for trade
and nation between the United States and the British West Indies, between
Asiatic dominions of Great Britain and the United States; and (...) between the
European dominions of Great Britain and the United (...) These eighteen
articles properly constitute the treaty of commerce and ^vigation between the
two countries. Their general scope, and so^ ^cial provisions which they
contain, prove that the object of the third ^cle is localand partial, that it
contemplates exclusively, an interior ^merce, by land and inland navigation
(except as to the Missisippi) particularly that it does not reach at all our
atlantic ports. An instance of one of the special provisions alluded to, will
be cited in the further examination of this article.

In opposition to this construction, much stress is laid upon the provisions
which immediately succeed the clauses that have been quoted. They are in these
words: "But it is understood that this article does not extend to the admission
of vessels of the United States into the seaports, harbors, bays or creeks of
his majest's said territories, nor into such parts of the rivers in his said
territories, as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of entry
from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal and
Quebec: nor to the admission of British vessels from the sea, into the rivers
of the United States, beyond the highest ports of entry for foreign vessels
from the sea." The last, it is said, contains an implication that under this
article, British vessels have a right to come to our highest ports of entry for
foreign vessels from the sea while we are excluded from the sea ports of the
British territories on this continent.

But this is altogether an erroneous inference. The clauses last cited are
inserted for greater caution, to guard expressly against any construction of
the article, by implications more or less remote; contrary to the actual
regulations of the parties, with regard to external commerce and navigation.
Great Britain does not now permit a trade by sea to Nova Scotia and Canada. She
therefore declares that the article shall not be deemed to contravene this
regulation. The United States now permit foreign vessels to some to certain
port of entry from the sea, but exclude them from other more interior parts of
entry, to which our own vessels may come. An example of this is found in the
state of New York. Foreign vessels can only enter and unlade at the city of
New York; vessels of the United States may enter at the city of Hudson, and
unlade there and at Albany.
It is therefore declared on their part, that the article shall not be
construed to contravene this regulation. This was the more proper, as the right
of inland navigation might have given some color to the claim of going from an
outer to an inner port of entry. But this negative of an implication, which
might have found some color in the principal provision, can never be construed
into an affirmative grant of a very important privilege, foreign to that
principal provision. The main object of the article it has been seen, is trade
b^ land, and inland navigation. Trade and navigation by sea, with our sea
ports, is an entirely different thing. To infer a positive grant of this
privilege, from a clause which says, that the right of inland navigation shall
not be construed to permit vessels coming from the sea, to go from the ports of
entry, to which our laws now restrict them, to more interior ports, would be
contrary to reason, and to every rule of sound construction. Such a privilege
could never be permitted to be founded upon any thing less than a positive and
explicit grant. It could never be supported by an implication drawn from an
article relative to a local and partial object; much less by an implication
drawn from the negative of another implication. The pretension, that all our
ports were laid open to Great Britain by a covert and side wind provision, and
this without reciprocity, without a right of access to a single sea-^ort of the
other party in any part of the world, would be too monstrous to be tolerated
for an instant. The principles of equity between nations, and the established
rules of interpretation would unite to condemn so great an inequality, if any
other sense could possibly be found for the terms from which it might be
pretended to be deduced. It would be in the present case the more inadmissible,
because the object is embraced and regulated by other parts of the treaty on
terms of reciprocity.

The different mode of expression, in the clause last cited, when speaking of
the British territories, and when speaking of the United States, has furnished
an argument for the inference which has been stated. But this difference is
accounted for by the difference in the actual regulations of the parties as
described above. The object was on each side to OUST an implication interfering
with those regulations. The expressions to effect it were commensurate with the
state of the fact on each side; and consequently do not warrant any collateral
or special inference.

The only positive effect of these clauses is to establish, that navigation
from Montrealto Quebec, shall be carried on in what are called "small vessels
trading bona fide between Montreal and Quebec." In determining their sense, it
merits some observation, that they do not profess to except from the operation
of the general provisions of the article, the sea ports, etc. of the British
territories; but declare, that it is understood that those provisions do not
extend to them. This is more a declaration that the antecedent provisions were
not so broad as to comprehend the cases, than an exception of the cases from
the operation of those provisions.

Those who are not familiar with laws and treaties may feel some difficulty
about the position, that particular clauses are introduced, only for greater
caution, without producing any new effect; but those who are familiar with such
subjects, know, that there is scarcely a law or a treaty which does not offer
examples of the use of similar clauses, and it not unfrequently happens, that a
clear meaning of the principal provision is rendered obscure by the excess of
explanatory precaution.

The next clause of this article is an exception to the general design of it,
confirming the construction I have given. "The river Missisippi, shall,
however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
which soever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty in Great
Britain."

If the general provision gives access to all our ports, which must be the
doctrine, if it gives access to our Atlantic ports, then it would equally have
this effect with regard to the Missisippi. But this clause clearly implies the
contrary, not only by introducing a special provision for the ports of the
Missisippi, but by introducing it expressly, as a further or additional
agreement; the words are "it is further agreed, etc." and these ports are to be
enjoyed by each party "in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or
places of the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty in
Great Britain." This reference to our Atlantic ports, coupling them with the
ports of Great Britain, shows that the Missisippi ports are to be regulated by
a rule or standard different from the ports for that inland navigation, which
is the general object of the article; else, why that special reference? why not
have stopped at the words "used by both parties?" If it be said, that the
reference to our Atlantic ports implies, that they are within the purview of
the article, let it be observed that the same argument would prove that the
ports of Great Britain are also within its purview, which is plainly erroneous,
for the main provisions are expressly confined to the territories of the
parties on this continent. The conclusion is, that the reference is to a
standard out of the article, and depending on other parts of the treaty.

It may be useful to observe here, that the Missisippi ports being to be used
only in as ample, and not in a more ample manner, than our Atlantic ports and
the ports of Great Britain will be liable at all times to all the regulations,
privileges and restrictions of the ports with which they are assorted.

The next clause is a still further refutation of the construction which I
oppose. "All goods and merchandise, whose importation into his Majesty's said
territories in America shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States; and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties than would be payable by his Majesty's subjects on
the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories: And in like
manner, all goods and merchandise, whose importation into the United States
shall not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be
carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, subject to no higher or other
duties than would be payable by the citizens of the United States, on the
importation of the same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said
States: and all goods not prohibited to be exported from the said territories
respectively, may, in like manner, be carried out of the same by the two
parties respectively paying duty as aforesaid."

The words, "in the manner a foresaid," occur twice in these clauses, and their
equivalent, "in like manner" once. What is the meaning of this so often
repeated phrase? it cannot be presumed that it would have been inserted so
frequently without having to perform some office of consequence. I answer, that
it is evidently the substitute for these other words of the main provision, "by
land and inland navigation." This is "the manner aforesaid." -- This is the
channel, through which goods and merchandises passing, would be subject to no
other or higher duties than would be payable in the British territories by
British subjects, if imported from Europe, in the territories of the United
States, by citizens of the United States, if brought by American vessels into
our Atlantic ports. No other reasonable use can be found for the terms. If they
are denied this sense, they had much better been omitted, as being not only
useless, but as giving cause to suppose a restriction of what, it is pretended,
was designed to be general -- a right of importing in every way, and into all
parts of the United States, goods and merchandise, if not entirely prohibited,
on the same duties as are payable by our own citizens when brought in our own
vessels.

The words," whose importation into the United States shall not be entirely
prohibited," is a further key to the true sense of the article. They are
equivalent to these other words, "whose importation into all parts of the
United States shall not be prohibited." -- The design of this clause is to
prevent importation, through the particular channels contemplated by the article,
being obstructed by a partial or by any other than a general prohibition. As
long as certain goods may be introduced into the United States through the
Atlantic ports, they may also be brought into them through the channels
designated by this article, that is, by land and inland navigation. The making
a prohibition in the given case to depend on a general prohibition, is
conclusive to prove, that the article contemplates only particular channels. On
any other supposition the clause is nonsense. The true reading, then, of this
part of the article must be as follows: -- "Goods and merchandise, whose
importation into all parts of the United States shall not be prohibited, may
freely, for the purpose of commerce, be carried into the same by land and
inland navigation, from the territories of his Majesty on the continent of
America."

There are still other expressions in the article, which are likewise an index
to its meaning. They are these, " would be payable by the citizens of the
United States on the importation of the same in American vessels into the
Atlantic ports of the said States." This reference to a rate of duties, which
would be payable on importation into the Atlantic ports, as a rule or guide for
the rate of duties, which is to prevail in the case meant to be comprehended in
the article, is full evidence that importation into the Atlantic ports is not
included in that case. The mention of importation in American vessels confirms
this conclusion, as it shows that the article itself contemplates that the
discrimination made by our existing laws may continue.

But the matter is put out of all doubt by those parts of the fifteenth article
which reserve to the British government the right of imposing such duty as may
be adequate to countervail the difference of the duty now payable on the
importation of European and Asiatic goods, when imported in the United States
in British and in American vessels. And which stipulate that "the United States
will not INCREASE the now subsisting difference between the duties payable on
the importation of any articles in British or in American vessels."

This is demonstration, that the treaty contemplates, as consistent with it, a
continuance of the present difference of duties on importations in American and
British vessels, and consequently that the third article, which stipulates
equal duties, as to the cases within it, does not extend to importations into
our Atlantic ports, but is confined to importations by land and inland
navigation. Though this article be of temporary duration yet as an evidence of
the sense of parties, it will always serve as a rule of construction for every
part of the instrument.

These different views of the article establish beyond the possibility of
doubt, that, except with regard to the Missisippi, inland trade and navigation
are its sole objects -- that it grants no right or privilege whatever in our
Atlantic ports -- and that with regard to the ports of the Missisippi, it only
establishes this principle, that Great Britain shall always enjoy there the
same privileges which by treaty or law she is allowed to have in our Atlantic
ports.

I remark incidentally, for a purpose which will appear hereafter, that as far
as this article is concerned, we are free to prohibit the importation into the
United States at large of any British article whatever though we cannot
prohibit its importation partially, that is merely from her territories in our
neighborhood by land or inland navigation, but we may prohibit the importation
by sea from those territories; nor is there any other part of the treaty by
which this is prevented.

The remaining clauses of this article establish the following points." That no
duty of entry shall be levied by either party on pehries brought by land or
inland navigation, into the respective territories;" that Indians passing and
repassing with their own goods, shall pay no impost or duty upon them, but
goods in bales, or other large packages, unusual among Indians, shall not be
considered as their goods, that tolls and rates of ferriage shall be the same
on both sides as are paid by natives -- that no duties shall be paid by either
party on the mere transit of goods across portages and carrying places from one
part to another of the territory of the same party, that the respective
governments will promote friendship, good neighborhood and amicable
intercourse, by causing speedy and impartial justice to be done, and necessary
protection to be extended to all who may be concerned therein.

I shall conclude this paper with an observation or two on the meaning of the
terms, inland navigation. These terms have no technical meaning defined in the
laws of either country, nor have they any precise meaning assigned by the law
of nations. They however exvi termini, exclude navigation from the sea; and as
a general rule, I should say, that inland navigation begins there, where sea
navigation ends. Where is this? I answer, at the ports of entry from the sea.
By the laws of Great Britain and of the United States, all rivers are arms of
the sea, as far as the ordinary tides flow -- It would be a consequence of this
principle, that sea navigation would reach to the head of tide water. But some
more obvious and notorious rule ought to govern the interpretation of national
compacts. The ports of entry from the sea are conceived to be the proper rule.

In the case under consideration, the general spirit of the article may require
that all the waters which divide the territories of the parties should be in
their whole extent common to both -- As to other communicating waters
accessible under the article, the reciprocal limit of the right will be the
ports of entry from the sea. This is to be understood with the exception of the
Missisippi, to the ports of which access from the sea is granted under the
qualification which has been pointed out.

No. XI.
THE foregoing analysis of the third article, by fixing its true meaning,
enables us to detect some gross errors, which have been principal sources of
prejudices against it. -- One of these is, that the article gives to the other
party a right of access to all our ports, while it excludes us from the ports
of the British territories in our neighborhood. It has been clearly shown,
that it gives no right of access to any one of our atlantic ports, and that it
gives only a qualified and conditional access to the ports which we may have on
the Missisippi to be regulated by the privileges at any time allowed by law or
compact in our atlantic ports, and liable to cease with the cessation of those
privileges. The charge therefore of want of reciprocity in this particular
vanishes, and with it all the exceptionable consequences which have been the
fruit of the error. Such is the assertion of Decius, that a British trader may
set out for Canada, traverse our lakes, rivers and waters to New York, and
thence to Philadephia, while we are precluded from the navigation of the St.
Lawrence, and other British rivers lower than the highest ports of entry from
the sea. It would be an indulgent construction of the article not to stop the
British trader at Hudson, as the highest port of entry from the sea, and the
boundary of inland navigation, but he could certainly have no claim of right
under it, to go from New York to Philadelphia, because he must necessarily go
by sea to arrive at the first place, and no such permission is stipulated by
the article. Such also is the assertion of Cato, that Great Eritain is admitted
to all the advantages of which our atlantic rivers are susceptible. The rivers
upon which no part of their territory borders, and which their vessels can only
approach by sea, are certainly excepted.(...)

Another of the errors referred to is this, that goods and merchandise may,
under this article, be imported into any part of the United States, upon the
same duties as are now payable when imported by citizens of the United States,
and in vessels of the United States. It has been clearly proved that there is
no pretense for this position, and -- that equality of duties only applies to
importations from the British territories, in our neighborhood, by land and
inland navigation.

Cato, Decius, and other writers against the treaty, have fallen into this
strange error, and have founded upon it much angry declamation. The first
however, embarrassed in his construction, by the provision which reserves to
Great Britain the right of laying contervailing duties, endeavors to escape
from it by distinguishing between goods imported for Indian trade, and those
imported for other uses. Whatever may be the case with regard to the latter,
the former, he is convinced, are certainly entitled to admission into our
atlantic ports, on the privileged rates of duty; though he is very naturally
perplexed to see how the discrimination could be maintained in prac^^^e. But
where does he find room for this distinction? Not in the provision respecting
countervailing duties, for that is general -- not in the clause of third
article, to which he gives the interpretation, for that is directly against his
distinction. The goods and merchandise for the privileged importation of which
it provides, are restricted to no particular object -- have no special
reference to Indian more than to other trade: on the contrary, they are
expressly to be imported for "the purposes of commerce" at large; so that in
the cases in which they are privileged, they are equally so, whether it be for
a trade with our citizens, or with Indians. The distinction therefore, only
proves the embarrassment of its inventor, without solving the difficulty. A
curious assertion has been made on this article of duties. It has been said,
that while we are obliged to admit British goods on the same duties with those
paid by our own citizens, on importation in our own vessels, G. Britain, under
the right to lay countervailing duties may incumber us with an additional
^opr^ct. Can any thing be more absurd than the position, that the right to lay
countervailing duties exists in a case where there is no difference of duty to
countervail? The term is manifestly a relative one, and can only operate where
there is something on our side to be countervailed or counterbalanced, and in
an exact ratio to it. If it be true that a very high law character is the
writer of Cato, we cannot but be surprised at such extreme inaccuracy.

Other errors no less considerable will appear in the progress of the
examination, but it will facilitate the detection of these and tend to a more
thorough understanding of the article, to state in this place some general
facts, which are material in a comparison of the advantages and disadvantages
of the article, to the respective parties.

1st. The fur trade within our limits is to the fur trade within the British
limits, as one to seven nearly: that is, the trade with the Indians, on the
British side of the boundary line, is about seven times greater than the same
trade on our side of that line. This fact is stated at the result of repeated
enquiry from well informed persons for several years past. It will not appear
extraordinary to those who recollect how much the indians on our side are
circumscribed in their hunting grounds, and to what a degree they are reduced
in numbers by the frequent wars, in which they have been engaged with us: while
the tribes on the British side of the line are not only far more numerous, but
enjoy an immense undisturbed range of wilderness. The more rapid progress of
settlement on our side than on the other, will fast increase the existing
disparity.

2d. Our communication with the sea is more easy, safe, and expeditious, than
that of Canada, by the St. Laurance. Accordingly, while our vessels ordinarily
make two voyages in a year, to and from Europe, the British vessels in the
Canada trade are, from the course of the seasons, and the nature of the
navigation, confined to one voyage in a year. Though hitherto, from temporary
circumstances, this difference has not made any sensible difference in the
price of transportation, yet in its permanent operation, it is hardly possible
that it should not give us a material advantage in the competition for the
supply of European goods to a large part of Canada, especially that which is
denominated Upper Canada. The city of Hudson, distant 124 miles from the city
of New York, is as near to the junction of the river Cataraquay and Lake
Ontario as Montreal, which last is near four hundred miles distant from the
mouth of the St. Lawrance. When the canals, now in rapid execution, are
completed, there will be water communication the whole way from the city of
Hudson to Ontario.

3d. The supply of East India goods to Canada is likely to be always easier and
cheaper through us, than in any other way. According to the present British
system, Canada is suppplied through Britain. It is obvious how much the charges
of this double voyage must enhance the prices of the articles when delivered in
Canada. A direct trade between the East Indies and Canada, would suppose a
change in the British system, to which there are great obstacles; and even
then, there are circumstances which would secure to us an advantageous
competition. It is a fact which serves to illustrate our advantages that
East India articles, including teas, are upon an average, cheaper in the United
States than in England.

These facts demonstrate that a trade between us and the British territories in
our neighborhood, upon equal terms as to privilege, must afford a balance of
advantages on our side. As to the fur trade, for a participation in one eighth
of the whole which we can cede, we gain a participation in 7-8hs which is
conceded to us. As to the European and East India trade, we acquire the right
of competition upon equal terms of privilege with real and considerable
advantages of situation.

The stipulation with regard to equal duties was essential to the preservation
of our superi^rity of advantages in this trade, while it could not interfere
with the general policy of our regulation concerning the difference of duties
on goods imported in our own and in foreign bottoms; because the supplies which
can come to us through Canada, for the reasons already given must be
inconsiderable -- because, also, distance would soon countervail, in expenses
of transportation, the effect of the difference of duties in our market -- and
because, in the last place, this difference is not very sensible, owing to the
large proportion of goods which are imported in the names of our own citizens.
I say nothing here of the impracticability on general grounds of long
maintaining with effect this regulation.

Is it not wonderful, considering the real state of the trade as depending on
locality, that the treaty should be charged with sacrificing the fur trade to
the British? If there be any sacrifice, is it not on their side? when the fact
is, that the quantity of trade in which they admit us to equal privileges is
seven times greater than that in which we admit them to equal privileges.

The arguments against the treaty on this point, are not only full of fallacy,
but they are in contradiction with each other

On the one hand, it is argued that our communication from the sea, with the
Indian country, being much easier than by the St. Lawrence, we could furnish
English goods cheaper, and of course, could have continued the Indian trade in
its usual channel, even from the British side of the lakes, nor could they have
prevented it without giving such disgust to the Indians as would have made them
dangerous neighbors. On the other hand, it is argued, that from superiority of
capital, better knowledge of the trade, a better established connection of
customers, the British will be able to supplant us, even in our own
territories, and to acquire a monopoly of the whole fur trade.

Propositions so opposite cannot all be true. Either the supposed faculty of
supplying English goods cheaper, which it is said, would give us a command of
the Indian trade, even on the British side of the lakes, not in the power of
the British to prevent, overbalances the advantages which are specified on the
other side, or it does not -- If it does not, then is it not true that it could
draw to us the trade from the British side of the lakes -- If it does, then is
it not true that the British can supplant us in the trade on either side of the
lakes; much less that they can obtain a monopoly of it on both sides.

Besides, if it be true that the British could not prevent our trading with the
Indians on their side, without giving them such disgust as to make them
dangerous neighbors, why is it not equally true that we could not prevent
their trading with the Indians on our side, without producing a similar effect?
And if they have really a superiority of advantages, why would they not, on the
principle of this argument, attract and divert the trade from us, though a
mutual right to trade with the Indians in each others territories had not been
stipulated?

The difficulty of restraining the Indians from trading at pleasure, is an idea
well founded, as has been admitted in another place. But there results from it,
strong arguments in favor of a reciprocation of privileges in the Indian trade
by treaty. One of them, its tendency to preserve peace and good understanding,
has been already noticed: another arises from the consideration that it will
probably be the policy of the British to maintain larger military
establishments on their frontier, than we shall think eligible on ours, which
will render it proportionably more easy to them to restrain their Indians, than
it will be to us to restrain ours. This greater difficulty of executing
restraints on our side, is a powerful reason for us to agree, mutually to throw
open the door.

It will not be surprising, if upon some other occasion the adversaries of the
treaty should abandon their own ground, and instead of saying the treaty is
faulty, for what it stipulates on this point should affirm merely that it has
no merit on this account, since it only does what the dispositions of the
Indians would have brought about without it. -- But it is always a merit to
divest an advantageous thing of cause of dispute, and to fix by amicable
agreement, a benefit which otherwise would be liable to litigation, opposition
and interruption.

As to relative advantages for carrying on the trade, the comparison ought to
be made with caution. That which has been stated on our side, namely, greater
facility in conveying the materials of the trade from Europe, to the seen
where it is to be carried on is a real one, and in process of time may be
expected to make itself to be felt; yet hitherto, as before observed, it has
had no sensible effect.

Of the advantages which have been stated as belonging to the other side, there
is but one which has substance, and this is previous possession of the ground.
But even this from the very nature of it is temporary -- With our usual
ente^prize and industry it would be astonishing if we do not spe^y share the
ground to the full extent of our relative advantag^.

As to supe^iority of capital, it amounts to nothing. It has been seen that the
capital requ^site for the whole trade is small. -- From a hundred to a hundred
and fifty thousand pounds sterling would be a high statement. The whole of
this, if we were to monopolize the entire trade, could not create a moment's
embarrassment to find it, in the opinion of any man who attends to the great
pecuniary operations which are daily going on in our country. But that very
capital which is represented as our rival, could be brought into action for our
benefit in this very trade. The so^ution is simple: Our credit will command it
in obtaining the foreign articles necessary for the trade upon as good terms as
the merchants who now carry it on. The same objection of superiority of capital
may with as much reason be applied to any ^ther branch of trade between us and
Great Britain. Why does it not give her a monopoly of the direct trade between
her European dominions and the United States? The argument, if valid, would
prove that we ought to have no commerce, not only with Great Britain, but with
any nation which has more capital than ourselves.

As to superior knowledge of the particular branch of business, there is still
less force in that argument. It is not a case of abstruse science or
complicated combination. And we are in no want of persons among us who are
experimentally acquainted with the subject.

As to customers for the proceeds of the trade, we should stand upon as good a
footing as the British merchants. What we did not want for our own consumption
might be sent upon equal terms to the very market to which they send theirs;
and to others which might be found preferable, because less well supplied with
the kind of articles.

As to whatever may depend on enterprise, we need not fear to be outdone by any
people on earth. It may almost be said that enterprise is our element.

It has been alleged that our trade with the Indians would be inturrupted by
bad seasons and occasional war^, wh^le that of Great Britain would be steady
and uniform. As to the c^sualties of seasons, it is evident they must fall upon
Great Brita^n as much as upon us, unless we suppose the elements in conspiracy
against us; and as to wars, possession of the posts would essentially change
our situation, and render it peculiarly advantageous for preventing or
repressing hostilities, so that with equally good management, our territories,
would not be more exposed than the British.

But the intrigues of the British traders residing among our Indians would
excite them to hostility. It could not be the private interest of the traders
to do this, because besides being amenable to punishment if discovered,
besides, that both the trader and the Indians within our limits, by the
possession of the posts would be under our con^roul, wars interrupt of course
the hunting of the Indians, and so destroy their means of trading.

As to great Britain, she never could have had but one interest to prompt
Indian histilities, that was to induce the United States to relinquish a part
of their boundary. The restitution of the posts will put an end to this
project. In regard to trade, she and her traders will have a common interest
with us and our traders to keep all the Indians at peace for the reason
assigned above. This interest will be the stronger, because the best
communication even with her own Indians will be partly through our territory,
and it would be impossible that it should not be impeded and interrupted by the
operations of war between us and the Indians. In fact under the circumstance of
common privileges, there is every possible link of common interest between us
and Great Britain in the preservation of peace with the Indians.

In this question of dang^r to our peace by the B^itish participation in the
trade with our Indians; the d^fficulty of rest^aining the Indians from trading
with whom they please (which is admitted by the argument of both sides) is a
very material consideration Would there not be greater hazard to our peace from
the attempts of the British to participate in a trade from which we endeavored
to exclude them, seconded by the discontents of the Indians, than from any
dispositions to supplant us when allowed a free competiton, when no cause of
dissatisfacton was given to the Indians, and when it was certa^n that war must
interfere with their means as well as ours, of carrying on the trade? The
security for our peace appears to be much greater in the latter than in the
former state of things.

A suspicion is also suggested, that Great Britain, without exciting war, would
indirectly tra^ and obstruct our trade. To objections which suppose a want of
fair dealing in the other party, it is very difficult to answer. All that a
treaty can do is to establish principles which are likely to operate well if
will excuted. It is no objection to its meri^s, that the bene^its aimed at may
be frustrated by ill faith. The ^ity of any compact between nations must
presume a sincere execution. The reverse may disappoint the best conceived
plan, and the security against it must be the mutual interest to perform, and
the power of retaliation. If Great Britain acts with infidelity or chicamery
toward us, we must retract the privileges granted on our side,

Another objection which is made is, that while the British would have a right
to reside am^ng u^, to hire houses and warehouses, and to enjoy every
convenience for prosecuting the trade systematically, we should not be entitled
to similar p^iveleges w^h them having only a right to pass "like pedlars with
our shops upon our backs." These are the expressions of Cato.

The position is ^ounded on that ^e of the British act of navigation, which
forbids any but a neutralized subject to exercise the occupation of a merchant
or factor in any of the British dominions in Asia, Africa and America.

In the first place, it is to be observed, that as far as the article under
discussion is singly concerned, there is no pretense to say that one party has
greater rights as to r^sidence than the other. If therefore Great B^itain can
prevent our citizens residing in their territories, we are free by this article
to apply to them a similar exclusion. And any right of residence which may be
claimed under any other part of the treaty will be temporary.

In the second place the prohibition act in the navigation proceeds on the
ground of exc^uding foreigners from carry^ng on trade in the territories to
which it extends. But the third article expressly gives us a right freely to
carry on trade and commerce with the British territories on this continent, a
right which necessarily includes the privilege of residing as merchants and
factors. For wherever an END is granted, the usual and proper means to enjoy it
are implied in the grant. Residence is a usual and n^cessary mean of freely
carrying on trade. Without it the right to trade becomes essentially nugo^ary.

This reasoning has peculiar force in relation to inland trade. And it agrees
with decisions at common law, and with the opinion of Lord Coke, who tells us
that "of an house for habitation an alien m^rchant may take a leas^ for years,
as incident to commerce, for without habitation he cannot merchandise or
trade." This among other things he in forms us was resolved by all the judges
assembled for that purpose in the case of sir James Cro^t in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth; and we learn from it, that the right to hire houses and warehouses
is derived from the right to trade as its incident. The same principle in toto
has been recognized in other cases.

The whole of the article is an innovation upon the British act of navigation.
Being abrogated as to the principal thing, there is no difficulty in supposing
it so as to incidents; on the other hand, to pretend to exclude us from the
right to residence, could not be deemed a fair execution of the article. Hence
we find that the want of reciprocity in this piarticular also sails, and with
it the supposed disadvantage on our side in the competition for the trade.

No. XII.
THE remaining allegations in disparagement of the third article, are to this
effect: 1. That the exception of the country of the Hudson's Bay company, owing
to its undefined limits, renders the stipulations in our ^avour in a great
measure nugatory. 2. That the privileges granted to Great Britain in our
Missisippi ports are impolitic, because without reciprocity. 3. That the
agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry on p^^tries, is the surrender,
without equivalent, of a valuable item of revenue, and will give to the British
the facility of carrying on their fur trade through us with the use of our
advantages. 4. That the articles which will be brought from Europe into Canada,
coming duty free, can be afforded cheaper than the same articles going th^ther
from us charged with a heavy duty on their importation into the United States,
and with the expense of a long transportation by land and inland navigation. 5.
That the population of Canada, which, by a census in 1784, amounted only to
123082 souls, is too small to render the supply of European and Asiatic
commodities through us of so much importance as to bear any comparison with the
loss by the sacrifice of the fur trade. 6 That the intercouse to be permitted
with the British territories will facilitate smuggling, to the injury of our
revenue. 7. That the much greater extent of the United States than of the
British territories destroys real reciprocity in the privileges granted by the
article, giving in fact far greater advantages than are received. These
suggestions will be discussed in the order in which they are here stated.

1. It is true that the country of the Hudson's Bay Company is not well
defined. -- Their charter, granted in 1670, gives them "the sole trade and
commerce of and to all the seas, bays, streights, creeks, lakes, rivers, and
sounds, in whatsoever latitude they shall be, that lie within the entrance of
the straight, commonly called Hudson's Streights, together with all the lands
countries, and territories upon the coasts and confines of the said seas,
streights, bays, etc. which are now actually possessed by any of our subjects,
or by the subjects of any other Christian prince or state."

To ascertain their territorial limits, according to charter, it would be
necessary to know what portion of country, at the time of the grant, was
actually possessed by the subjects of Great Britain, or of some other Christian
prince or state: but though this be not known, the general history of the
country, as to settlement, will demonstrate that it could not have extended far
westward, certainly not to that region which is the scene of trade in furs,
commonly called the North West Trade, carried on by the Canada company from
Canada; the possession of which, as far as possession exists, is recent. -- We
learn from a traveller who has lately visited that region, that one of this
company's establishments is in lat. 56.9. N. long. 117.43. W. that is, about
twenty degrees of longitude westward of the Lake of the Woods; and it is
generally understood, that the entire scene of the trade of this company is
westward of the limits of the Hudson's Bay Company.

Canada, on the north, is bounded by the territories of the Hudson's Bay
Company. This is admitted by the treaty of Utrecht, and established by the act
of parliament in 1774, commonly called the Quebec act. The treaty of Utrecht
provides for the settlement of the boundary by commissaries. I have not been
able to trace whether the line was ever actually so settled, but several maps
lay down a line as the one settled by the treaty of Utrecht, which runs north
of the Lake of the Woods.

In a case thus situated, the United States will justly claim, under the
article, access to all that country, the trade of which is now carried on
through Canada. This will result both from the certainty that there were no
actual possessions, at the date of the charter, so far interior, and from the
fact of the trade being carried on through a different channel, by a different
company, under the superintendance and protection of a different government,
that of Canada. It may be asked, why was the article embarrassed by the
exception of the country of the Hudson's Bay Company? The answer is this, That
the charter of this company gives it a monopoly within its limits, and
therefore, a right to trade there could not have been granted with propriety,
to a foreign power by treaty. It is true that it has been questioned, whether
this monopoly was valid against British subjects, seeing that the charter had
not been confirmed by act of parliament. But besides that this doubt has been
confined to British subjects, it would appear that in fact, the company has
enjoyed the monopoly granted by its charter, even against them, and with at
least the implied approbation of parliament. In the year 1749, petitions were
preferred in the House of Commons, by different trading towns in England, for
rescinding the monopoly and opening the trade. An enquiry was instituted by the
house. The report of its committee was favorable to the conduct and
pretensions of the company, and against the expediency of opening the trade;
and the business terminated there.

This circumstance of there being a monopoly, confirms the argument drawn from
the f^ct, that the north west trade is carried on through Canada by the Canada
Company: which affords a decisive presumption, that the trade is not within the
country of the Hudson's Bay Company, and is, cons^quently, within the operation
of the privilege granted to us.

Though it will be partly a digression, I cannot forbear, in this place, to
notice, some observations of Cato in his 10th number. -- After stating, that in
1784 the peltry from Canada sold in London for 230,000l. sterling, he proceeds
to observe, that, excluding the territories of the Hudson's Bay Company, 9
tenths of this trade is within the limits of the United States; and though with
studied ambiguity of expression, he end^avours to have it understood, that
nine-tenths of the trade which yielded the p^ltry, that sold for 230,000l.
sterling in 1784, was within our territories. It is natural to ask how he has
ascertained the limits of the Hudson's Bay Company (which, at other times, is
asserted by way of objection to the article, to be altogether indefi^ite) with
so much ex^ctness as to be able to pronounce what proportion, if any, of the
trade carried on through Canada, may have come from that country, toward the
calculation which has led to the conclusion that nine-tenths of the whole lie
within our limits? The truth is, indub^tably and notoriously, that whether any
or whatever part of the peltry exported from Canada may come from the country
of the Hudson's Bay Company, seven eighths Some statements rate it at between
6-8ths and 7-8ths.
of the whole trade which furnishes that peltry, has its source on the British
side of the boundary line. It follows, that if it were even true, that only one
tenth of the whole lay in that part of the British territory, which is not of
the Hudson's Bay Company, inasmuch as only one seventh of it lies within our
limits, the result would be, that the trade in which we granted an equal
privilege was to that in which a like privilege was granted to us, as one
seventh to one tenth, and not, according to Cato, as nine to one. This
Legerdemain, in argument and calculation, is too frivolous for so serious a
subject: or, to speak more properly, it is too shocking, by the spirit of
deception which it betrays.

Cato has a further observation with regard to the trade with the Indians in
the vicinity of the Mississippi, and, from that river into the Spanish
territories -- The product of all this trade, he says, must go down the
Mssissippi, and, but for the stipulation of the 3d article, would have been
exclusively ours; because, "by the treaty of Paris, though the British might
navigate the Mississippi, yet they did not own a foot of land upon either of
its banks; whereas the United States, possessing all the Indian country in the
vicinitity of that river and the east bank for many hundred miles, could when
t^^y pleased establish factories and monopolize that commerce." This assertion,
with regard to the treaty of Paris, is in every sense of the word incorrect;
for the seventh article of that treaty establishes as a boundary between the
dominions of France and his Britannic majesty "a line drawn along the middle of
the river Mississippi, from its source to the river Iberville, and from thence
by a line drawn along the middle of this river and the lakes Maurepas and Pont
Chartraim to the sea," and cedes to his Britannic majesty all the country on
the east side of the Missisippi. By the treaty of Paris, then, his Britannic
majesty owned all the territory on the east side of the Missisippi, (except the
town and Island of New Orleans) instead of not having a foot of land there.

Whether a part of this territory does not still belong to him, is a point not
yet settled. The treaty of peace between the United States and Great Britain
supposes that part will remain to Great Britain; for one line of boundary
between us and her, designated by that treaty, is a line due west from the lake
of the woods to the Missisippi. If in fact this river runs far enough north to
be intersected by such a line, according to the supposition of the last
mentioned treaty, so much of that river, and the land upon it, as shall be
north of the line of intersection, will continue to be of the dominion of Great
Britain. The treaty lately made, not abandoning the possibility of this being
the case, provides for a survey to ascertain the fact: and in every event, the
intent of the treaty of peace will require that some closing line, more or less
direct, shall be drawn from the lake of the Woods to the Mississippi. The
Position, therefore, that Great Britain has no land or ports on the
Mississippi, takes for granted what is not ascertained, and of which the
contrary is presumed by the treaty of peace.

The trade with the Indian country on our side of the Mississippi, from the
Ohio to the lake of the Woods (if that river extends so far north) some
fragments excepted, has its present direction through Detroit and
Michillimacnac, and is incl^ded in my calculation, heretofore stated, of the
proportion which the Indian trade within our limits bears to that within the
British limits. Its estimated amount is even understood to embrace the proceeds
of a clandestine traffic with the Spanish territories; so that the new scene
suddenly explored by Cato is old and trodden ground, the special reference to
which cannot vary the results that have been presented. It is still
unquestionably true, that the fur trade within our limits bears no proportion
to that within the British limits. As to a contigent traffic with the
territories of Spain, each patry will pursue it according to right and
opportunity; each would have independent of the treat^ the facility of
bordering territories.

The geography of the best regions of the fur trade, in the Spanish
territories, is too little known to be much reasoned upon; and if the
Spaniards, according to their usual policy, incline to exclude their
neighbors, their precautions along the Mississippi will render the access to
it circuitous; a circumstance which makes it problematical, whether the
possession of the opposite bank is, as to that object, an advantage or not; and
whether we may not find it convenient to be able, under the treaty, to take a
circuit through the British territories.

2. It is upon the suggestion of Great Britain having no ports on the
Missisippi, that the charge of want of reciprocity in the privileges granted,
with regard to the use of that river is founded. The suggestion has been shown
to be more peremptory than is justified by facts. Yet it is still true, that
the ports on our side bear no proportion to any that can exist on the part of
the British according to the present state of territory. It will be examined in
a subsequent place, how far this disproportion is a proper rule in the estimate
of reciprocity. But let it be observed in the mean time, that in judging of the
reciprocity of an article it is to be taken collectively. If upon the whole,
the privileges obtained are as valuable as those granted, there is a
substantial reciprocity; and to this test, upon full and fair examination of
the article, I freely refer the decision.

Besides, if the situation of Great Britain did not permit in this particular,
a precise equivalent, it will not follow that the grant on our part was
improper, unless it can be shown, that it was attended with some inconvenience,
injury or loss to us; a thing which has not been, and I believe cannot be
shown. Perhaps there is a very importantly beneficial side to this question.
The treaty of peace established between us and Great Britain a common interest
in the Missisippi, the present treaty strengthens that common interest. Every
body knows that the use of the river is denied to us by Spain, and that it is
an indispensible outlet to our western country. Is it an inconvenient thing to
us, that the interest of Great Britain has in this particular been more
completely separated from that of Spain, and more closely connected with ours?

The agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry on peltries, is completely
defensible on the following grounds, viz. It has been the general policy of
commercial nations, to exempt raw materials from duty. This has likewise been
the uniform policy of the United States, and it has particularly embraced the
article of peltries, which by our existing laws may be imported into any part
of the United States free from duty. The object of this regulation is the
encouragement of manufactures, by facilitating a cheap supply of raw materials.
A duty of entry therefore, as to such part of the article as might be worked up
at home, would be prejudicial to our manufacturing interest, as to such part as
might be exported, if the duty was not drawn back, would injure our commercial
interest. But it is the general policy of our laws, in conformity with the
practice of other commercial countries, to draw back and return the duties
which are charged upon the importation of foreign commodities. This has
reference to the advancement of the export trade of the country; so that with
regard to such peltries as should be reexported, there would be no advantage to
our revenue from having laid a duty of entry.

Such a duty then being contrary to our established system and to true
principles, there can be no objection to a stipulation against it. As to its
having the effect of making our country the channel of the British trade in
peltries, this if true, and it is indeed probable, could not but promote our
interest. A large proportion of the profits would then necessarily remain with
us to compensate for transportation and agencies. It is likely too that to
secure the fidelity of agents, as is usual, co-partnerships would be formed, of
which British capital would be the principal instrument, and which would throw
a still greater proportion of the profits into our hands. The more we can make
our country the Entrepot, the Emporium of the trade of foreigners, the more we
shall profit. There is no commercial principle more obvious than this, more
universally agreed, or more generally practiced upon, in countries where
commerce is well understood.

4. The fourth of the above enumerated suggestions is answered in its principal
point by the practice just stated, of drawing back the duties on importation
when articles are re-exported. This would place the articles, which we should
send into the British territories, exactly upon the same footing as to duties
with the same articles imported there from Europe. With regard to the
additional expense of transportation, this is another instance of the
contradiction of an argument, which has been relied upon by both sides, that
taking the voyage from Europe in conjunction with the interior transportation
the advantage, upon the whole, is likely to be in our favor. And it is upon
this aggregate transportation that the calculation ought to be made. With
respect to India or Asiatic articles, there is the circumstance of a double
voyage.

5. As to the small population of Canada, which is urged to depreciate the
advantages of the trade with the white inhabitants of those countries, it is to
be observed, that this population is not stationary. If the date of the census
be rightly quoted, it was taken eleven years ago, when there were already
123,082 souls. It is presumeable that this number will soon be doubled; for it
is notorious, that settlement has proceeded for some years with considerable
rapidity in Upper Canada, and there is reason to believe that the future
progress will not be slow. In time to come the trade may grow into real
magn^tude, but be it more or less beneficial, it is so much gained by the
articles, and so much clear gain, since it has been shown not to be true that
it is counterbalanced by a sacrifice in the fur trade.

6. With regard to the supposed danger of smuggling in the intercourse
permitted by this article, it is very probable it will be found less than if it
were prohibited. Entirely to prevent trade between bordering territories, is a
very arduous, perhaps an impracticable task. If not authorized, so much as is
carried on must be illicit, and it may be presumed, that the extent of illicit
trade will be much greater in that case, than where an intercourse is permitted
under the usual regulations and guards. In the last case, the inducement to it
is less, and such as will only influence persons of little character or
prin-ciple while every fair trader is from private interest a sentinel to the
laws; in the other case, all are interested to break through the barriers of a
rigorous and apparently unkind prohibition. This consideration has probably had
its weight with our government in opening a communication through Lake
Champlain with Canada; of the principle of which regulation the treaty is only
an extension.

7. The pretended inequality of the article, as arising from the greater extent
of the United States than of the British territories, is one of those fanciful
positions which are so apt to haunt the brains of visionary politicians. Traced
through all its consequences, it would terminate in this, that a great empire
could never form a treaty of commerce with a small one, for to equalize
advantages according to the scale of territory, the small state must compensate
for its deficiency in extent by a greater quantum of positive privilege in
proportion to the difference of extent which would give the larger state the
monopoly of its trade. According to this principle what wretched treaties have
we made with France, Sweden, Prussia, and Holland? for our territories exceed
in extent those of either of these powers. How immense the sacrifice in the
case of Holland; for the United States are one hundred times larger than the
United Provinces.

But how are we sure, that the extent of the United States is greater than the
territories of Great Britain on our continent? We know that she has pretensions
to extend to the pacific ocean and to embrace a vast wilderness, incomparably
larger than the United States, and we are told as already mentioned, that her
trading establishments now actually extend beyond the 56th degree of north
latitude, and 117th degree of west longitude.

Shall we be told (shifting the original ground) that not extent of territory,
but extent of population i^ the measure? Then how great is the advantage which
we gain in this particular, by the treaty at large? The population of Great
Britain is to that of the United States, about two and a half to one; and the
comparative concession by her in the trade between her European dominions and
the United States, must be in the same ratio. When we add to this the great
population of her East India possessions, in which privi-leges are granted to
us, without any return how prodigiously will the value of the treaty grow upon
us according to this new and extraordinary rule?

But the rule is in fact, an absurd one, and only merits the notice which has
been taken of it, to exhibit the weak grounds of opposition to the treaty. The
great standard of reciprocity is equal privilege. The adventitous circumstances
which may render it more beneficial to one party than the other, can seldom be
taken into the account, because they can seldom be estimated with certainty --
the relative extent of country or population, is of all others, a fallacious
guide.

The comparative resources and facilities for mutual supply, regulate the
relative utility of a commercial privilege; and as far as population is
concerned, it may be laid down as a general rule, that the smallest population
graduates the scale of the trade on both sides, since it is at once the
principal measure of what the smaller state can furnish to the greater, and of
what the former can take from the latter, or in other words, of what the
greater state can find a demand for from the smaller state. But this rule too,
like most general ones, admits of numerous exceptions.

In the case of a trade by land and inland navigation, the sphere of the
operation of any privilege can only extend a certain distance. When the
distance to a given point, through a particular channel, is such that the
expense of transportation would render an article dearer than it could be
brought through another channel to the same point, the privilege to carry the
article through that particular channel to such point, becomes of no avail.
Thus the privilege of trading by land or inland navigation, from the British
territories on this continent, can procure to that country no advantage of
trade with Princeton, in New Jersey, because supplies can come to it on better
terms from other quarters. Whence we perceive, that the absolute extent of
territory or population of the United States, is no measure of the relative
value of the privileges reciprocally granted by the article under
consideration, and consequently no criterion of the real reciprocity of the
article.

The objectors to the treaty have marshalled against this article a quaint
figure, of which from the use of it, in different quarters, it is presumable
they are not a little enamoured; it is this, that the article enables
Great Britain to draw a line of circumvallation round the United States. They
hope to excite prejudice, by presenting to the mind, the image of a siege or
investment of the country. If trade be war, they have chosen a most apt figure;
and we cannot but wonder, how the unfortunate island of Great Britain, has been
able so long to maintain her independence amidst the beleaguering efforts of
the number of nations with whom she has been imprudent enough to form treaties
of commerce; and who, from her insulated situation, have it in their power to
beset and hem her in on all sides. How lucky it is for the United States, that
at least one side is covered by Spain, and that this formidable line of
circumvallation cannot be completely perfected! or rather how! and driven must
those be, who are obliged to call to their aid, auxiliaries so preposterous!

Can any good reason be given, why one side of a country should not be
accessible to foreigners for purposes of trade equally with another? Might not
the cultivators on the side from which they were excluded, have cause to
complain, that the carriage of their productions was subject to an increased
charge, by a monopoly of the national navigation; while the cultivators in
other quarters enjoyed the benefit of a competition between that and foreign
navigation? and might not all the inhabitants have a right to demand a reason,
why their commerce should be less open and free, than that of other parts of
the country? Will privileges of trade extend the line of territorial
circum^allation? Will not the extent of contiguous British territory remain the
same, whether the communications of trade are open or shut? By opening them,
may we not rather be said to make so many breaches in the wall, or intrenchment
of this newly invented circumvallation? If indeed it be not enchanted!

The argument upon this article, has hitherto turned, as to the trade with the
white inhabitants of the British territories, on European and East India goods.
But there can be no doubt that a mutually beneficial commerce in native
commodities ought to be included in the catalogue of advantages. Already there
is a useful interchange of certain commodities, which time and the progress of
settlement and resources cannot fail to extend. It is most probable too, that a
considerable part of the productions of the British territories will find the
most convenient channel to foreign markets through us; which as far as it regards
the interests of external commerce will yield little less advantage than if
they proceeded from our own soil or industry. It is evident in particular, that
as far as this shall be the case, it will prevent a great part of the
competition with our commodities which would exist, if those productions took
other routs to foreign markets.

In considering the subject on the side of a trade in home commodities, it is
an important reflection, that the United States are much more advanced in
industrious improvement, than the British territories. This will give us a
material and a growing advantage. While their articles of exchange with us will
essentially consist in the products of agriculture and of mines, we shall add
to these manufactures of various and multiplying kinds, serving to increase the
balance in our favor.

In proportion as the article is viewed on an enlarged and permanent seal, its
importance to us magnifies. Who can say how far British colonization may spread
southward and down the west side of the Mississippi, northward and westward
into the vast interior regions toward the pacific ocean? Can we view it as a
matter of indiffference, that this new world is eventually laid open to our
enterprise, to an enterprise seconded by the immense advantage already
mentioned, of a more improved state of industry? Can we be insensible, that the
precedent furnishes us with a cogent and persuasive argument, to bring Spain to
a similar arrangement? And can we be bind to the great interests we have in
obtaining a free communication with all the territories that environ our
country from the St. Mary's to the St. Croix.

In this large view of the subject, the fur trade which has made a very
prominent figure in the discussion, becomes a point scarcely visible. Objects
of great variety andmagnitude, start up in perspecctive, eclipsing the little
atoms of the day, and promising to grow and mature with time.

The result of the whole is, that the United States make by the 3d art. of the
treaty a good bargain -- that with regard to the fur trade, with equality of
privileges and superior advantages of siuation, we stake one against seven, or
at most one against six -- that as to the trade in European and East India
Goods and in home productions, we make an equal stake, with some advantages of
situation -- that we open an immense field of future enterprise -- that we
avoid embarrassments and dangers ever attendant on an artificial and
prohibitory policy, which in reference to the Indian nations was particularly
difficult and hazardous -- and, that we secure those of a natural and liberal
policy, and give the fairest chances for good neighborhood between the United
States and the bordering British territories, and consequently of good
understanding with Great Britain, conducing to the security of our peace.
Experience, no doubt, will demonstrate that the horrid specter which have been
conjured up are fictions and if it should even be slow to realize the predicted
benefits (for time will be requisite to give permanent causes their due effect
in controuling temporary circumstances) it will at least prove, that the
predicted evils are chimeras and cheats.

No. XIII.
THE fourth and fifth articles of the treaty, from similarity of object, will
naturally be considered together. The fourth, reciting a doubt "whether the
river Mississippi extends so far north, as to be intersected by a line drawn
due west from the lake of the woods, in the manner mentioned in the treaty of
peace," agrees that measures shall be taken in concert between the two
governments to make a joint survey of that river, from a degree of latitude
below the fa^ls of St. Anthony, to the principal source or sources thereof, and
of the parts adjacent thereto, and that if in the result it should appear that
the said river would not be intersected by such a line as above mentioned, the
two parties will proceed by amicable negotiation, to regulate the boundary line
in that quarter as well as all other points to be adjusted between them,
according to justice and mutual convenience, and the intent of the treaty of
peace. The fifth, reciting that doubts have arisen, what river was truly
intended under the name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the treaty of
peace, and forming a part of the boundary therein described, provides that the
ascertainment of the point shall be referred to three commissioners, to be
appointed thus: one to be named by his Britannic Majesty, another by the
President of the United States, with the advice and consent of the Senate, the
third by these two if they can agree in the choice; but if they cannot agree,
then each of them to name a person, and out of the persons named, one drawn by
lot in their presence to be the third commissioner. -- These commissioners are
to meet at Hallifax, with power to adjourn to any place or places they may
think proper -- are to be sworn to examine and decide the question according to
the evidence which shall be la^d before them by both parties -- and are to
pronounce their decision which is to be conclusive, by a written declaration
under their hands and seals, containing a description of the river and
particularly the latitude and longitude of its mouth and of its source.

These articles, though they have been adjusted with critical propriety, have
not escaped censure. They have even in one instance been severely reprobated,
as bringing into question, things about which there was no room for any -- and
which a bare inspection of the map was sufficient to settle.

With regard to the Mississippi, there is no satisfactory evidence that it has
ever been explored to its source. It is even asserted, that it has never been
ascended beyond the 45th degree of north latitude, about a degree above the
falls of St. Anthony. Faden's map in 1793, will serve as a specimen of the
uncertainty which attends this matter. It notes that the river had not been
ascended beyond the degree of latitude just mentioned and exhibits three
streams, one connected with the Marshy Lake in that latitude, another with the
White Bear Lake near the 46th degree, and the third with the Red Lake in the
47th degree; denominating each of the two first, "the Missisippi by
conjecture," and the last, "Red Lake River, or Lahontan's Missisippi," -- all
of them falling considerably short in their northern extent of the Lake of the
Woods, which is placed as high as the fifteenth degree of north latitude. Thus
stands this very clear and certain point which we are told it was disgraceful
on the part of our envoy to have sufferred to be brought into question.

There is however, a specific topic of blame of the article which has greater
plausibility. It is this, that it does not finally settle the question, but
refers the adjustment of the closing line to future negotiation, in case it
should turn out that the river does not stretch far enough north to be
intersected by an east and west line from the Lake of the Woods. I answer, that
the arrangement is precisely such as it ought to have been. It would have been
premature to provide a substitute till it was ascertained that it was necessary
-- This could only be done by an actual survey -- A survey is there-fore
provided for and will be made at the joint expense of the two countries.

That survey will not only determine whether a substitute be requisite or not,
but it will furnish data for judging what substitute is proper, and most
conformable to the true intent of the treaty. -- Without the data which it will
afford, any thing that could have been done, would have been too much a leap in
the dark. National acts, especially on the important subject of boundary, ought
to be bottomed on a competent knowledge of circumstances. It ought to be
clearly understood how much is retained, how much is relinquished. Had our
envoy proceeded on a different principle, if what he had agreed to had turned
out well, it would have been regarded as the lucky result of an act of
supererogation. -- If it had proved disadvantageous, it would have been
stigmatized as an act of improvidence and imprudence.

The strong argument for having settled an alternative is the avoiding of
future dispute. But what alternative could have been agreed upon, which might
not have bred controversy? The closing line must go directly or indirectly to
the Missisippi -- which of the streams reputed or conjectured to be such, above
the falls of St. Anthony, is best entitled to be so considered? to what known
point was the line to be directed? How was that point to be identified with
adequate certainty? The difficulty of answering these questions will evince,
that the danger of controversy might have been increased by an impatience to
avoid it, and by anticipating, without the necessary lights, an adjustment,
which they ought to direct.

The facts with regard to the river St. Croix, are these -- the question is,
which of two rivers is the true St. Croix. The dispute concerning it is as old
as the French possession of Nova Scotia. France set up one river; Great Britain
another. The point was undecided when the surrender of Nova Scotia by the
former to the latter, put an end to the question as between those parties -- It
was afterward renewed between the colonies of Nova Scotia and Massachusetts
Bay, which last, in the year 1762, appointed commissioners to ascertain, in
conjunction with commissioners which might be appointed by the Province of Nova
Scotia, the true river, but no final settlement of the matter ensued.

The treaty of peace gives us for one boundary, the river St. Croix, but
without defining it. Hence it has happened, that not long after the peace was
concluded, the question which had before been agitated between France and Great
Britain, and between the provinces of Massachusetts and Nova Scotia, was
revived between the state of Massachusetts and that province, and it has ever
since continued a subject of debate. A mode of settling the dispute was under
the consideration of Congress in the year 1785, and powers were given to our
then minister at the court of London, to adjust the affair, but nothing was
concluded. And we lear^n from a letter of Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated
the 15th December, 1791, that it then also engaged the attention of our
government: that the ascertaining of the point in dispute was deemed a matter
of "present urgency," and that it had before been the subject of applications
from the United States to the government of Great Britain.

It is natural to suppose, that a dispute of such antiquity, between such
different parties, is not without colorable foundation on either side; at any
rate, it was essential to the preservation of peace that it should be adjusted.

If one party could not convince the other by argument of the superior solidity
of its pretensions, I know of no alternative but Arbitration or War. Will any
one pretend that honor required us in such a case to go to war, or that the
object was of a nature to make it our interest to refer the decision to that
solemn, calamitous, and precatious issue? No rational man will answer this
question in the affirmative. It follows that an arbitration was the proper
course, and that our envoy acted rightly in acceeding to the expedient. It is
one too, not without precedents among nations, though it were to be wished, for
the credit of human moderation, that they were more frequent.

Is there any good objection to the mode of the arbitration? It seems
impossible that any one more fair or convenient could have been devised, and it
is recommended by its analogy to what is common among individuals.

What the mode is, has been already detailed, and need not be repeated here. It
is objected that too much has been left to chance, but no substitute has been
offered which would have been attended with less casualty. The fact is, that
none such can be offered. Conscious of this, those who make the objection have
not thought fit to give an opportunity of comparison by proposing a substitute.
What is left to chance? Not that there shall be a final decision; for this is
most effectually provided for. It is not only positively stipulated that
commissioners, with full and definitive power, shall be appointed, but an
ultimate choice is s^cured, by referring in the last resort to a decision by
lot, what it might not be practicable to decide by agreement. This is the ne
plus ultra of precaution. Is it that this reference to lot leaves it too
uncertain of what character or disposition the third commissioner may be? If
this be not rather a recommendation of the fairness of the plan, how was it to
be remedied? Could it have been expected of either of the parties, to leave the
nomination to the other? Certainly not. Would it have been advisable to have
referred the ultimate choice to some other state or government? -- where would
one have been found in the opinion of both parties, sufficiently impartial? On
which side would there have been the greatest danger of a successful employment
of undue influence? Is it not evident that this expedient would have added to
equal uncertainty, as to character and disposition, other casualties and more
delay? Should it have been left to the two commissioners appointed by the
parties to agree at all events? It might have been impossible for them to come
to an agreement, and then the whole plan of settlement might have been
frustrated. Would the sword have been a more certain arbiter? Of all uncertain
things, the issues of war are the most uncertain. What do objections of this
kind prove, but that there are persons resolved to object at all events?

The submission of this question to arbitration has been represented as an
eventual dismemberment of empire, which it has been said, cannot rightly be
agreed to, but in a case of extreme necessity. This rule of extr^me nec^ssity
is manifestly only applicable to a cession or relinquishment of a part of a
country, held by a clear and acknowle^ged ti^^e: not to a case of disputed
boundary.

It would be a horrid and destructive principle, that nations could not
termi^ate a dispute about the title ^o a particular parcel of territory, by
amicable agreement, or by subm^ssion to arbitration as its substitute; but
wou^d be under an indispensible obligation to prosecute the dispute by arms,
till real danger to the existence of one of the parties should justify, by the
plea of extreme necessity, a surrender of its pretensions.

Besides, the terms in which writers lay down the rule, and the reason of it
will instruct us that where it does apply, it relates not to territory as such,
but to those who inhabit it; on the principle that the social compact entitles
all the members of the society to be protected and maintained by the common
strength in their rights and relations as members. It is understood, that the
territory between the two rivers in dispute, is either uninh^bited, or
inhabited only by settlers under the B^itish. If this be so, it obviates all
shadow of difficul^y on our side. But be it as it may, it would be an abuse of
the rule to oppose it to the amicable adjustment of an ancient controversy,
about the title to a particular tract of country, depending on a question of
fact, whether this or that river be the one truly intended by former treaties
between the parties. The question is not in this case -- Shall we cede a part
of our country to another power? I^ is this: To whom does this tract of country
truly belong? Should the weight of evidence be on the British side, our faith
pledged by t^eaty, would demand from us an acquiescence in their claim. Not
being able to agree in opinion on this point, it was most equitable and most
agreeable to good faith to submit it to an impartial arbitration.

It h^s been asked among other things, whether the United States were competent
to the adjustment of the matter without the special consent of the state of
Massachusetts. Reserving a more particular solution of this question to a
separate discussion of the constitutionality of the treaty I shall content
myself with remarking here, that our treaty of peace with Great Britain, by
settling the boundaries of the United States without the special consent or
authority of any state, assumes the principle, that the government of the
United States was of itself competent to the regulation of boundary with
foreign powers; that the actual government of the Union has ever more plenary
authority, with regard to treaties, than was possessed under the confederation,
and that acts, both of the former and of the present government presuppose the
competency of the national authority to decide the question in the very
instance under consideration. I am informed also, that the state of
Massachusetts has, by repeate^ acts, manifested a corresponding sense on the
subject.

A reflection not unimportant occurs here. It was perhaps, (...) another sense
than has been hitherto noticed, a point of pruden^ in both governments to refer
the manner in dispute to arbitratio^ If one had yielded to the pretensions of
the other, it could hard^ have failed to draw upon itself complaints, and
censures, more or less extensive, from quarters immediately interest or
affected.

No. XIV.
THE 6th article stipulates compensation to British creditors for losses and
damages which may have been sustained by them, in cons^quence of c^rtain legal
impediments, which, since the treaty of peace with Great Britain, are alleged
to have obstructed the recovery of debts bona fide contracted with them before
the peace.

To a man who has a due sense of the sacred obligation of a just debt, a proper
conception of the pernicious influ^nce of laws which infringe the righ^s of
creditors, upon morals, upon the general security of property, upon public as
well as private credit, upon the spirit and principles of good government: who
has an adequate idea of the sanctity of the national faith explicitly ple^ged
-- of the ignominy attendant upon a violation of it in so delicate a particular
as that of private pecuniary contracts, of the evil tendency of a precedent of
this kind to the political and commercial interests of the nation generally:
every law which has existed in this country, interfering with the recovery of
the debts in question, must have afforded matter of serious regret and real
affliction.

To such a man it must be among the most welcome features of the present
treaty, that it stipulates reparation for the injur^es which laws of that
description may have occasioned to individuals, and that as far as is now
practicable, it wipes away from the national reputation the stain which they
have cast upon it. He will regard it as a precious tribute to justice, and as a
valuable pledge for the more strict future observance of our public
engagements; and he would deplore as an ill-omened symptom of the depravation
of public opinion the success of the attempts which are making to render the
article unacceptable to the people of the United States. But of this there can
be no dang^r. -- The spontaneous sentiments of equity of a moral and
intelligent people will not fail to sanction, with their approbation, a measure
which could not have been resisted without inflicting a new wound upon the
honor and character of the country.

Let those men who have manifested by their actions, a willing disregard of
their own obligations as debtors -- those who secretly hoard, or open and
unblushingly riot on the spoils of plundered creditors, let such men enjoy the
exclusive and undivided satisfaction of arraigning and condemning an act of
national ju^tice, in which they may read the severest reproach of their
iniquitous principles and guilty acquisitions. But let not the people of
America tarnish their honor by participating in that condemnation, or by
sh^elding with their favorable opinion, the meretricious apologies which are
offered for the measures that pro^uced the necessity of reparation.

The recapitulation of some la^ts will contribute to a right judgment of this
part of the treaty.

It is an established principle of the laws of nations, that on the return of
peace between nations which have been at war, a free and undisturbed course
shall be given to the recovery of private debts on b^th sides. Grotius, b. iii.
c. xx. s. xvi.
In conformity with this principle, the 4th art. of the treaty of peace b^tween
the United States and Great Britain, expressly stipulates, "That creditors on
either side shall meet with no lawfu^ impediment to the recovery of the full
value in sterling money of all bona fide debts heretofore contracted."

Two instances of the violation of this article have been already noticed with
a view to another point; one relating to certain laws of the state of Virginia,
p^ssed prior to the peace, which for several years after it appear to have
operated to prevent the legal pursuit of their claims by British creditors.
Another relating to a law of the state of South Carolina, which suspended the
recovery of their debts for nine months, and after that period permitted the
recovery only in four yearly instalments.

But these were not all the instances; there were other laws of South Carolina
prolonging the instalments, and obliging the creditors to receive in payment
the property of debtors at appraised va^ues; and there were laws of
Rh^de-Island, New Jersey, North Carolina and Georgia, making paper money a
legal tender for the debts of those creditors; which it is known sustained a
very great d^prec^ation in every one of those states. These very serious and
compulsory interferences with the rights of the creditors, have received from
Decius, the soft appellation of a modification of the recovery of British
debts. -- Does he expect to make us believe by this smooth phrase, that the
right to recover the full value of a debt in sterling money is satisfied by the
obligation to take as a substitute, one half, one third, or one fourth of the
real value in paper?

It must necessarily have happened that British creditors have sustained, from
the operation of the different acts alluded to losses more or less extensive,
which the more removal of the legal impediments that occasioned them could not
repair: in many instances the losses must have actually accrued and taken their
full effect: in others, where no proceedings may have been had, the lapse of so
many years must have created inabilities to pay, in debtors who were originally
competent, and who might have been made to pay, had there been a free course of
justice.

The removal of the impediments, therefore, by opening of the courts of
justice, was not an adequate satisfaction. It could not supercede the
obligation of compensation for losses which had irretrievably accrued by the
operation of the legal impediments, while they continued in force. The claim
for this was still open on the part of Great Britain, and still to be adjusted
between the two nations.

The excuse that these laws were retaliations for prior infractions of treaty
by Great Britain, was in no view an answer to the claim. It may not be improper
to observe, that this excuse implies a palpable violation of the then
constitution of the United States. The confederation v^ste^ the powers of war
and of treaty in the Union. It therefore lay exclusively with congress to
pronounce, whether the treaty was or was not violated by Great Britain, and
what should be the satisfaction. No state individually had the least right to
med^le with the question, and the having done it was a usurpation on the
constitutional authority of the United States.

It might be shown on a similar principle, that all confiscations or
sequestrations of British debts, by particular states, during the war, were
also unconstitutional.




In the first place, as has been proved, the fact of such prior infractions was
too doubtful to be finally insisted upon, and was, after a fruitless effort to
obtain the acquiescence of the other party, properly and necessarily waved; so
that it could not serve as a plea against reparation.

In the second place, if that fact had been indubitable, the species of
retaliation was unwarrantable. It will be shown when we come to discuss the
tenth article, that the debts of private individuals are in no case a proper
object of reprisals; that independent of the treaty, the meddling with them was
a violation of the public faith and integrity, and that consequently, it was
due as much to our own public faith and integrity, as to the individuals who
had suffered, to make reparation. It was an act demanded by the justice,
probity, and magnanimity of the nation.

In the third place, it was essential to reciprocity in the adjustment of the
disputes which had existed concerning the treaty of peace. When we claimed the
reinstatement and execution of the article with regard to the posts; it was
just that we should consent to the reinstatement and execution of the article
with regard to debts. If the obstruction of the recovery of debts was the
equivalent by way of retaliation for the detention of the posts, we could not
expect to have restitu^ion of the thing withheld, and to retain the equivalent
for it likewise. The dilemma was to be content with the equivalent, and abandon
the thing; or to recover the thing and abandon the equivalent: to have both was
more than we could rightly pretend. -- The reinstatement of the article, with
regard to the debts, necessarily included two things, the removal of l^gal
impediments as to the future recovery; compensation for past losses by reason
of those impediments. The first had been effected by the new constitution of
the United States; the last is promised by the treaty.

Did our envoy reply that the reinstatement of the article with regard to the
posts included likewise compensation for their detention? Was it an answer to
this, destitute of reason, that our loss by the detention of the posts, which
resolved itself essentially into the uncertain profits of a trade that might
have been carried on, admitted of no satisfactory rule of computation; while
the principal and interest of private debts afforded a familiar standard, for
the computation of losses upon them: that nevertheless, while this was the
usual, and must be the admitted standard, it is an inadequate one in cases
where payment is protracted beyond the allowed term of credit; since the mere
interest of money does not countervail among merchants, the profits of its
employment in trade, and still less the derangements of credit and fortune,
which frequent^ result to creditors from procrastinations of payment; and that
the final damage to Great Britain in these two particulars, for which no
provision could be made, might well exceed any losses to us by the detention of
the posts?

In the last place, the compensation stipulated was a sine quanon with Great
Br^tain of the surrender of the posts, and the adjustment of the controversy
which had su^sisted between the two countries. The making it such may be
conceived to have been dictated more by the importance of the precedent, than
by the quantum of the sum in question. We shall easily understand this, if we
consider how much the commercial capital ^f Great Britain is spread over the
world. The vast credits she is in the habit of extending to foreign countries,
renders it to her an essential point to protect those credits by all the
sanctions in her power. She cannot forbear to contend at every hazard against
precedents of the invasion of the rights of her merchants and for retribution
where any happen. Hence it is always to be expected, that she will be
pecu^iarly inflexible on this point; and that nothing short of extreme
necessity can bring her to relax in an article of policy, which, perhaps not
less than any other, is a necessary prop of the whole system of her political
economy.

It was, therefore, to have been foreseen that whenever our controversy with
Great Britain was adjusted, compensation for obstructions to the recovery of
debts wou^d make a part of the adjustment. The option lay between compensation,
relinquishment of the posts, or war. Our envoy is entitled to the applause of
all good men, for preferring the first. The extent of the compensation can on
no possible scale compare with the immense permanent value of the posts, or
with the expenses of the war. The sphere of the interferences has been too
partial to make the sum of the compensation, in any event, a very serious
object, and as to war, a conscientious or virtuous mind could never endure the
thoughts of seeing the country involved in its calamities, to get rid of an act
of justice to individuals, whose rights in contempt to public faith, had been
violated.

Having reviewed the general considerations which justify the stipulation of
compensation, it will be proper to examine if the plan upon which it is to be
made is unexceptionable.

This plan contains the following features -- 1. The cases provided for are
those, "where losses and damages occasioned by the operation of lawful
impediments (which since the peace have delayed the full recovery of British
debts, bona fide contracted before the peace, and still owing to the creditors,
and have impaired and lessened the value and security thereof) cannot now, for
whatever reason, be actually obtained in the ordinary course of justice. 2.
There is an express exception out of this provision of all the cases in which
losses and damages have been occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or
other causes, as would equally have operated to produce them, if no legal
impediments had existed, or by the manifest delay, or negligence, or wilful
omission, of the claimants. 3. The amount of the losses and damages for which
compensation is to be made, is to be ascertained by five commissioners to be
appointed as follows: two by his Britannic majesty, two by the President with
the advice and consent of the senate, the fifth by the unanimous voice of these
four, if they can agree, if they cannot agree, then to be taken by lot out of
two persons, one of whom to be named by the two British commissioners, the
other by the two American commissioners. 4. These five commissioners thus
appointed, are before they proceed to the execution of their trust to take an
oath for its faithful discharge, Three of them to constitute a board; but there
must be present one of the two commissioners named on each side, and the fifth
commissioner. Decisions to be made by majority of voices of those present. They
are first to meet at Philadelphia, but may adjourn from place to place as they
see cause. 5. Eighteen months after the commissioners make a board are assigned
for receiving applications, but the commissioners in particular cases may
extend the term not exceeding 6 months. 6. The commissioners are empowered to
take into consideration all cl^ims whether of principal or interest or balances
of principal and interest, and to determine them according to the merits and
circumstances thereof, and as just^ce and equi^y shall appear to them to
require -- to examine persons on oath or affirmation, and to receive in
evidence d^positions, books, p^pers or copies, or extracts thereof, either
according to the legal forms existing in the two countries, or according to a
mode to be divised by them. 7. Their award is to be conclusive; and the United
States are to cause the sum awarded in each case to be paid in specie to the
creditor without de^uction, and at such time and place as shall have been
awarded; but no payment to be required sooner than twelve months from the day
of the exchange of the ratifications of the treaty

This provision for ascertaining the compensation to be made, while it is
ample, is also well guarded.

It is confined to debts contracted before the peace, and still owing to the
creditors. It embraces only the cases of loss or damage in consequence of legal
impediments to the recovery of those debts which will exclude all cases of
voluntary compromise, and can include none where the laws have allowed a free
course to justice. It can operate in no instance where, at present, the
ordinary course of justice is competent to full relief, and the debtor is
solvent, nor in any, where insolvency or other cause would have operated to
produce the loss or damage, if no legal impediment had existed, or where it has
been occasioned by the wilful delay negligence or omission of the creditor.

If it be said that the commissioners have nevertheless much latitude of
discretion, and that in the exercise of it they may transgress the limits
intended, the answer is, that the United States, though bound to perform what
they have stipulated with good faith, would not be bound to submit to a
m^nifest abuse of authority by the commissioners. Should they palpably exceed
their commission, or abuse their trust, the United States may just^fiably,
though at their peril, refuse compliance. For example, if they should undertake
to award upon a debt contracted since the peace, there could be no doubt that
their award would be a nullity. So likewise there might be other plain cases of
m^sconduct, which in honor and conscience would exonorate the United States
from performance. It is only incumbent upon them to act bona fide, and as they
act at their peril to examine well the soundness of the ground on which they
proceed.

With regard to the reference to commissisioners to settle the quantum of the
compensation to be made, this course was dictated by the nature of the case.
The t^ibunals of neither country were competent to a re^rospective adjustment
of loss^ and damages, in many cases which might require it. It is for this very
reason of the incompetency of the ordinary tribunals to do complete justice,
that a special stipulation of compensation, and a special mode of obtaining it
became necessary. In c^nstituting a tribunal to liquidate the quantum of
reparation in the case of a breach of treaty, it is natural and just to divise
one likely to be more certainly impartial than the established courts of either
party. Without impeaching the integrity of those courts, it was morally
impossible that they should not feel a bias toward the nation to which they
belonged, and for that very reason they were unsit arbitrators. In the case of
the spoliations of our property, we should undoubtedly have been unwilling to
leave the adjustment in the last resort to the British courts; and by parity of
reason, they could not be expected to refer the liquidation of compensation in
the case of the debts to our courts. To have pressed this would have been to
weaken our argument for a different course in regard to the spoliations. We
should have been puzzled to find a substantial principle of discrimination.

If a special and extraordinary trib^ was to be constituted, it was
impracticable to contrive a mo^ fair and equitable plan for it, than that which
has been adopted. The remarks on the mode of determining the question
respecting the river St. Croix, apply in full force here, and would render a
particular comment superfluous.

To the objection of the Charleston committee, that the article erects a
tribunal unknown to our constitution, and transfers to commissioners the
cognizance of matters appertaining to American courts and juries, the answer is
simple and conclusive. The tribunals established by the constitution do not
contemplate a case between n^tion and nation arising upon a breach of treaty,
and are inadequate to the cognizance of it. -- Could either of them hold plea
of a suit of Great Britain plaintiff against the United States defendant? The
case therefore required the erection or constitution of a new tribunal and it
was most likely to promote equity to pass by the Courts of both the parties.

The same principle contradicts the position that there has been any transfer
of jur^sdiction from American courts and juries to commissioners. It is a
question not between individual and individual, or between our government and
individuals, but between our government and the British government. Of course,
one in which our courts and juries, have no juri^diction. There was a necessity
for an extraordinary tribunal to supply the defect of ordinary jurisdiction,
and so far is the article from making the transfer imputed to it, that it
expressly excepts the cases in which effectual relief can be obtained in the
ordinary course of justice.

Nations acknowledging no common judge on earth, when they are willing to
submit the questons between them to a judicial decision, must of necessity
constitute a special tribunal for the purpose. The mode by commissioners, as
being the most unexceptionable, has been repeatedly adopted.

I proceed to reply to some other objections which have been made against the
provision contained in this article.

It is charged with fixing a stigma on the national character by providing
reparation for an infraction, which, if it ever did exist, has been done away,
there being now a free course to the recovery of British debts in the Courts of
the United States.

An answer to this objection has been anticipated by some observations
heretofore made. The giving a free course to justice in favor of British
creditors, which has been effected by the new constitution of the United
States, though it obviates the future operation of legal impediments, does not
retrospectively repair the losses and damages which may have resulted from
their past operation. In this respect the effects continued and reparation was
due. To promise it, could fix no stigma on our national character. That was
done by the acts which created the cause for reparation. To make it, was as far
as possible to remove the stigma.

It has been said, that the promise of compensation produces injustice to those
states which interposed no legal impediments to the recovery of debts, by
saddling them with a part of the burden arising from the delinquencies of the
transgressing states. But the burden was before assumed by the treaty of peace.
The article of that treaty which engaged that there should be no lawful
impediments to the recovery of debts, was a guarantee by the United States of
justice to the British creditors. It charged them with the duty of taking care
that there was no legal obstacle to the recovery of the debts of those
creditors, and consequently with a responsibility for any such obstacle which
should happen, and with the obligation of making reparation for it. We must
therefore refer to the treaty of peace, not to the last treaty, the common
charge which has been incurred by interference in the recovery of British
debts. The latter only carries into execution the promise made by the former.
It may be added that it is a condition of the social compact that the nation at
large shall make retribution to foreign nations for injuries done to them by
its members.

It has been observed, that Mr. Jefferson has clearly shown, that interest in
cases like that of the British debts, is liable, during the period of the war,
to equitable abatements and deductions: and that, therefore, the discretion
given to the commissioners on this head, ought not to have been as large as it
appears in the article.

Mr. Jef^rson has no doubt, offered arguments of real weight to establish the
position that judges and juries have, and exercise a degree of di^etion in the
article of interest, and that the circumstances of our war with Britain, a^ ^ng
reasons for abatements of interest. But it was foreign to his purpose and
accordingly he has not attempted to particularise the rules which ought to
govern in the application of this principle to the variety of cases in which
the question may arise -- and he has himself noted that the practice, in
different states and in different courts, has been attended with great
diversity. Indeed, admitting the right to abate interest under special
circumstances, in cases in which it is the general rule to allow it, the
circumstances of each case, are, perhaps, the only true criterion of the
propriety of an exception. The particular nature of the contract, the
circumstances under which it was entered into, the relative situation of
parties, the possibility or not of mutual access; these and other things would
guide and vary the exercise of the discretion to abate. It was, therefore,
right to leave the commissioners, as they are left, in the same situation with
judges and juries; to act according to the true equity of the several cases, or
of the several classes of cases.

Let it be remembered, that the government of Great Britain has to consult the
interests and opinions of its citizens, as well as the government of the United
States those of their citizens. The only satisfactory course which the former
could pursue, in reference to its merchants was to turn over the whole question
of interest as well as principal, to the commissioners. And as this was truly
equitable, the government of the United States could make no well founded
opposition to it.

No. XV.
IT is the business of the 7th art. of the treaty, to provide for two objects:
o^e, compensation to our citizens for injuries to their property, by irregular
or illegal captures or condemnations; the other, compensation to British
citizens for captures of their property within the limits and jurisdiction of
the United States, or elsewhere, by vessels originally armed in our ports, in
the cases in which the captured property having come within our posts and
power, there was a neglect to make restitution.

The f^rst object is thus provided for: 1. It is agreed, that in all cases of
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of the vessels and other
property of citizens of the United States, under color of authority or
commissions from his Britannic Majesty, in which adequate compensation for the
losses and damages sustained, cannot, for whatever reason, be actually obtained
in the ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for the same
will be made by the British government to the claimants; except where the loss
or damage may have been occasioned by the manifest delay, or negligence, or
willful omission of those claimants. 2. The amount of the losses and damages to
be compensated is to be ascertained by five commissioners, who are to be
appointed in exactly the same manner as those for liquidating the compensation
to British creditors. 3. These comm^ssioners are to make a similar oath, and to
exercise similar powers for the investigation of claims with those other
commissioners, and they are to decide according to the merits of the several
cases and to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. 4. The same term of
eighteen months is allowed for the reception of claims, with a like discretion
to extend the term as in the case of British debts. 5. The award of these
commissioners, or of three of them, under the like guards as in that case, is
to be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim and the amount
of the compensation. And lastly, his Brittannic Majesty is to cause the
compensation awarded, to be paid to the claimants in specie, without deduction,
at such times and places, and upon the condition of such releases or
assignments, as the commissioners shall prescribe.

Maturely and dispassionately examined, it is impossible not to be convinced,
that this provision is ample, and ought to be satisfactory. The course of the
discussion will exhibit various proofs of the disingenuousness of the clamours
against it, but it will be pertinent to introduce here one or two samples of it.

It has been alleged, that while the article preceding and this article
provide effecttually for every demand of Great Britain against the United
States, the provision for this important and urgent claim of ours is neither
explicit, nor efficient, nor co-extensive with the object, nor bears any
proportion to the summary method, adopted for the satisfying of British claims.

This suggestion is every way unfortunate. The plan for satisfying our claim,
except as to the description of the subject which varies with it, is an exact
copy of that for making compensation to British creditors. Whoever will take
the pains to compare, will find, that in the leading points, literal conformity
is studied, and that in others, the provisions are assimilated by direct
references; and will discover also, this important distinction in favor of the
efficiency and summariness of the provision for our claim -- that while the
commissioners are expressly restricted from awarding payment to British
creditors, to be made sooner than one year after the exchange of ratifications
of the treaty, they are free to award it, to be made the very day of their
decision, for the spoliations of our property. As to the compensation for
British property, captured within our limits, or by vessels originally armed in
our ports and not restored, which is the only other British claim that has been
provided for, it happens that this forming a part of the very article we are
considering, is submitted to the identical mode of relief, which is instituted
for making satisfaction to us.

So far then is it from being true, that a comparison of the modes of redress
provided by the treaty, for the complaints of the respective parties, turns to
our disadvantage, that the real state of the case exhibits a substantial
similitude with only one material difference, and that in our favor; and, that
a strong argument for the equity of the provisions on each side, is to be drawn
from their close resemblance of each other.

The other suggestion alluded to, and which has been shamelessly reiterated,
is, that Denmark and Sweden, by pursuing a more spirited conduct, had obtained
better terms than the United States. It is even pretended, that one or both of
them had actually received from Great Britain a gross sum on account -- in
anticipation of an ultimate liquidation. In my second number, the erroneousness
of the supposition, that those powers had obtained more than the United States
was intimated, but the subsequent repetition of the idea, more covertly in
print, and very openly and confidently in conversation, renders expedient an
explicit and peremptory denial of the fact. There never has appeared a particle
of evidence to support it, and after chal^enging the asserters of it to produce
the^r proof, I aver^ that careful enquiry at sources of information, at least
as direct and authentic as then is, has satisfied me, that the suggestion is
wholly unsounded, and that at the time of the conclusion of our treaty with
Great Britain, both Sweden and Denmark were behind us in the effect of their
measures for obtaining reparation.

What are we to think of attempts like these, to dupe and imitate the public
mind? Will any prudent citizen still consent to follow such blind or such
treacherous guides?

Let us now, under the influence of a calm and candid temper, without which
truth eludes our researches, by a close scrutiny of the provision, satisfy
ourselves whether it be not really a reasonable and proper one. -- But previous
to this i^ ^quisite to advert to a collateral measure which was also a fruit of
the mission to Great Britain, and which ought to be taken in conjunction with
the stipulation in this article. I refer to the order of the British king in
council, of the 6th of August, 1794, by which order, the door before shut by
lapse of time, is opened to appeals from the British West India courts of
admiralty, to be brought at any time which shall be judged reasonable by the
lords commissioners of appeals in prize causes. This of itself was no
inconsiderable step to wards the redress of our grievances, and it may be
hoped, that with the aid which the government of the United States has given to
facilitate appeals, much relief may ensue from this measure. It will not be
wonderful if it should comport with the pride and policy of the British
government, by pronouncing justice in their courts, to leave as little as
possible to be done by the commissioners.

A cavil has been raised on the meaning of the word, color, which it is
pretended would not reach the cases designed to be entraced, because the
spoliations complained of, were made, not merely by color, but actually by
virtue of instructions from the Br^tish government.

For the very reason, that this subtle and artificial meaning ascribed to the
term, would tend to defeat the manifest general intent of the main provision of
the article, which is plainly to give reparation, for regular or illegal
captures or condemnations of American property, contrary to the laws of nations
-- that meaning must be deemed inadmissible.

But in fact, the expression is the most accurate that could have been used, to
signify the real intent of the article. When we say a thing was done by color
of an authority or commission, we mean one of three things; that it was done on
the pretense of a sufficient authority or commission not validly imparted, or
on the pretense of such an authority or commission validly imparted but abused
or misapplied, or on the pretense of an insufficient authority or commission
regularly, as to form imparted and exercised. -- It denotes a defect of
rightful and just authority, whether emanating from a wrong source, or
improperly from a right source; whereas the phrase, "by virtue of," is most
properly applicable to the valid exercise of a valid authority. But the two
phrases are not unfrequently used as synonimous. Thus in the proclamation of
the British king, of the 25th of May, 1792, he among other things forbids all
his subjests, by virtue or under color of any foreign commission or letters of
or reprisals to disturb, infest, or damage the subjects of France.

In whose mouths does the article put the expression? In those of citizens of
the United States? What must they be presumed to have meant? Clearly this; that
by color of instructions or commissions of his Brittannie majesty, either
exercised erroneously, or issued erroneously, as being contrary to the laws of
nations; the citizens of the United States had suffered loss and damage by
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their property. What is the
standard appealed to, to decide the irregularity or illegality to be redressed?
E^^^^ssly the laws of nations. The commissioners are (...) decide "according to
the merits of the several cases, to justice, equity, and the laws of nations."
Wherever these laws, as received and practiced among nations, pronounce a
capture or condemnation of neutral property to have been irregular or illegal,
though by color of an authority or commission of his Britannic majesty, it
would be the duty of the commissioners to award compensation.

The criticism however fa^ls on its own principle, when tested by the fact. The
great source of grievance, intended to be redressed by the article, proceeded
from the instruction of the 6th November, 1793. That instruction directs the
commanders of ships of war and privateers, to stop and detain all ships laden
with goods, the produce of any colony belonging to France, or carrying
provisions and other supplies for the use of such colony, and to bring the same
with their cargoes to legal adjudication in the British courts of admiralty.
These terms " legal adjudication" were certainly not equivalent, upon any
rational construction to condemnation. Adjudication means simply a judicial
decision, which might be either to acquit or condemn. Yet the British West
India courts of admiralty app^^^ ^o have generally acted upon the term as
synonimous with condemnation. In doing this, they may be truly said, even in
the sense of the objection, to have acted by color only of the instruction.

The British cabinet have disavowed this construction of the West India courts,
and have as we have seen, by a special act of interference, opened a door which
was before shut to a reversal of their sentences, by appeal to the courts in
England. We find also that the term adjudication is used in the XVIIth article
of our late treaty as synonimous only with judicial d^cision, according to its
true import. This if any thing were wanting, would render it impossible for the
commissioners to refuse redress on the ground of the condemnations, if
otherwise illegal, being warranted by the pretended sense of the words legal
adjudication. But in reality, as before observed, their commission will be to
award compensation in all cases in which they are of opinion, that according to
the established laws of nations, captures or condemnations were irregular or
illegal, however otherwise authorized; and this in contempt of the quibbling
criticism which has been so cunningly devised.

2dly. The provision under consideration, obliges the British Government, in
all cases of illegal captures or condemnations, in which adequate compensation
cannot, for whatever reason, be actually had in the ordinary course of justice,
to make full and complete compensation to the claimants which is to be paid in
specie to themselves without deduction at such times and places as shall be
awarded.

They are not sent for redress to the captors, for obliged to take any
circuitious course for their payment, but are to receive it immediately from
the treasury of Great Britain.

3dly. The amount of the compensation in each case is to be fixed by five
commissioners, two appointed by the United States, two by Great Britain; the
fifth by these four, or in (...) of disagr^ement, by lot. These commissioners
to meet and act in (...).

It seems impossible, as has been observed and shown in the analogous cases, to
imagine a plan for organizing a tribunal more completely equitable and
impartial than this -- while it is the exact counterpart of the one which is to
decide on the claims of British creditors. Could it have been believed that so
palpable an error could have been imposed on a town meeting in the face of so
plain a provision, as to induce it to charge against this article, that in a
national concern of the United States, redress was left to British courts of
admiralty? yet, strange as it may appear, this did happen even in the truly
enlightened town of Boston -- The just pride of that town will not quickly
forget that it has been so compromitted.

The truth is, that according to the common usage of nations, the courts of
admiralty of the belligerent parties are the channels through which the redress
of injuries to neutrals is sought. But Great Britain has been brought to agree
to refer all the cases in which justice cannot be obtained through those
channels, to an extraordinary tribunal -- in other words to arbitrators
mutually appointed.

It is here, that we find the reparation of the natitional wrong which we had
suffered. In admitting the principle of compensation by the government itself,
in agreeing to an extraordinary tribunal, in the constitution of which the
parties having an equal voice to liquidate that compensation. -- Great Britain
has virtually and effectually acknowledged the injury which had been done to
our neutral rights, and has consented t^ make satisfaction for it. This was an
apology in fact, however it may be in form.

As it regards our honor, this is anadequate, atonement, and the only cies
usual in similar cases between nations; pecuniary compensation is the true
reparation in such cases -- governments are not apt to go upon their knees to
ask pardon of other governments -- Great Britain, in the recent instance of the
dispute with Spain, about Nootha Sound, was glad to accept of a like
reparation. It merits remark, incidentally, that the instrument which settles
this dispute expressly waves, like our treaty, reference to the merits of the
complaints and pretensions of the respective parties. Is our situation such as
to authorize us to pretend to impose humiliating conditions on other nations?

It is necessary to distinguish between injuries and insults, which we are too
apt to confound. The seizures and spoilations of our property fall most truly
under the former head. The acts which produced them, embraced all the neutral
powers, were not particularly levelled at us, bore no mark of an intention to
humble us by any peculiar indignity or outrage.

These acts are of June 8th, and of November 6th, 1793. The seizure of our
vessels going with provisions to the dominions of France, under the first was
put on the double ground of a war extraordinary in its principle Though this
country has viewed the principle of the war favorably, it is certain that
Europe generally, the neutral powers not wholly excepted, has viewed it in a
different light, so that this wa^ not a mere pretense.
, and of a construction of the laws of nations, which it was said permitted
that seizure; a construction not destitute of color, and apparently supported
by the authority of Vatel, though in my opinion, ill founded. It was accompanid
also by compensation for what was taken, and other circumstances that evinced a
desire to smooth the act. The indiscriminate confiscation of our property, upon
the order of the 6th November, which was the truly flagrant injury, was
certainly unwarranted by that order (and no secret one has appeared) -- and the
matter has been so explained by the British government. It is clear that evils
suffered under acts so circumstanced are injuries rather than insults -- and
are so much the more manageable as to the species and measure of redress. It
would be quioxtism to assert that we might not honorably accept in such a case
the pe^a^y reparation which has been stipulated.

But it is alleged, that in point of interest, it is unsatisfactory -- tedious
in the process -- uncertain in the event; that there ought to have been act^
and immediate indemnification, or at least a payment upon account.

A little calm reflection will convince us that neither of the two last things
was to be expected. There was absolutely no criterion, either for a full
indemnification, or for an advance upon account. The value of the property
seized and condemned (laying out of the case, damages upon captures where
condemnation had not ensued) was not ascertained, even to our own government,
with any tolerable accuracy. Every well informed man will think it probable,
that of this a proportion not inconsiderable was covered French property. There
were, therefore, no adequate data, upon which our government could demand, or
the British government pay a determinate sum. Both governments must have acted
essentially by guess. -- Ours could not in honor or conscience have made even
an estimate but upon evidence. It might have happened that a sum which appeared
upon the evidence that had been collected sufficient, might have proved on
further evidence insufficient. -- Too little as well as too much, might have
been demanded and paid. But it will perhaps be said, that some gross estimate
might have been formed; and that of this, such a part might have been advanced
upon account, as was within the narrowest probable limit, liable to eventual
adjustment. Let us for a moment suppose this done -- What good end would it
have answered? How could the United States have distributed this money among
the sufferers till it was ascertained which of them was truly entitled, and to
how much? Is it not evident, that if they had made any distribution before the
final and perfect investigation of the right of each claimant, it would be at
the risk of making mispayments, and of being obliged to replace the sums
mispaid, perhaps at a loss to the United States, for the benefit of those who
should be found to be better entitled? Would it have been expedient for our
government to have incurred this risk to its constituents? -- And if the money
was to be held undistributed till an investigation of claims was completed, to
what purpose the haste about an advance?

On the other hand; is it in this loose gross way that nations transact affairs
with each other? Do even individuals make indemnifications to one another in so
lumping a manner? Could it be expected of Great Britain, that she would pay
till it was fairly ascertained what was to be paid; especially when she had too
much cause to suspect, that a material proportion of the property claimed might
turn out to be French? Would it have been justifiable on our part, to make her
compliance with such a demand, the sine qua non of accommodation and peace?
Whoever will believe that she would have compiled with so humiliating a
requisition* must be persuaded that we were in a condition to dictate, and she
in a condition to be obliged to receive any terms that we might think fit to
prescribe? The person who can believe this must be, in my opinion, under the
influence of a delirium, for which there is no cure in the resources of reason
and argument.

If it must be admitted that it was matter of necessity that investigation
should precede p^ment; then I see not what more summary mode could have been
devised? Who more capable of proceeding with dispatch than arbitrators
untrammeled with legal forms; vested with powers to examine parties and others,
on oath, and to command and receive all evidence in their own way? Here are all
the means of expedition divested of every clog.

Eighteen months are allowed for preferring claims, but the commissioners are
at liberty to adjust them as fast as they are preferred. In every case in which
it appears to them bona fide, that the ordinary course of justice is inadequate
to relief, they may forthwith proceed to examine and decide. There is no
impediment, no cause of delay whatever, more than the nature of a due
investigation always requires.

The meeting of the commissioners at London was recommended by the
circumstance, that the admiralty courts were likely to concenter there, a
considerable part of the evidence on which they were to proceed; which upon the
whole might favor dispatch as well as more complete justice. In many cases the
decisions of those courts may come under their review.

As to uncertainty of the event, this, as far as it may be true, was
inseparable from any plan, bottomed on the idea of a previous invesstigation of
claims; and it has been shown, that some such plan was reasonable and
inevitable.

It may be also added, that the plan affords a moral certainty of substantial
justice, which is all that can rationnally be expected in similar affairs.
Compensation where due is explicitly stipulated: A fair and adequate mode of
deciding and liquidating it has been settled. All the arguments which were
adduced to prove the probability of good faith, in regard to the posts, apply
equally to this subject. The interest which every nation has in the
preservation of character, and which the most profligate dare not entirely
disregard. The consideration of defeating the fulfillment of the stipulations on
our part, -- the size of the object, certainly not of great magnitude -- the
very discouraging situation for replunging suddenly into a new war, in which
the present war will in every event leave Great Britain. These are reasons
which afford solid ground of assurances that there will be no evasion of
performance.

As to the commissioners, two of the five will certainly be of our choice, a
third may be so likewise; but should it prove otherwise, it will be surprising
if one of the other three, all acting under oath, and having character at
stake, shall not be disposed to do us reasonable justice.

3dly. While their power is co-extensive with all losses and damages from
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations, their sentence in each case is
to be conclusive, and the rules which are to govern it, as prescribed by the
article, are the merits of each case, justice, equity, and the laws of nations.
What greater latitude could have been desired to be given? What greater
latitude could have been given? What else in either case was there to have been
provided for? What is meant by the assertion, that the provision is not
commensurate with the object?

The general and unqualified reference to the laws of nations dismisses all
pretense to substitute arbitrary regulations of G. Britain as rules of
decision. Her instructions or orders, if incompatible with those laws, are
nullities.

Thus the treaty unfetters the quest^ons between us and her, from the
commencement of the war, and with her own consent, commits them at large to a
tribunal to be cons^ituted by mutual choice.

W^ll any man of candor and equity say, that a better provision ought to have
been expected than has been accomplished?

The alternative was, immediate indemnification, by actual payment in whole or
in part, without examination of the extent or justice of claims; or future
indemnification, after a due investigation of both in some equitable and
effectual mode. The first was attended with difficulties on our side, and with
solid objections on the other side. The last was therefore the truly reasonable
course and it has been pursued on a very proper plan. The causes of loss and
damage are fully embraced. They are referred to the decision of an
unexceptionable tribunal, to be guided by unexceptionable rules, and the
indemnification which may be awarded, is to be paid fully, immediately, and
without detour by the British government itself. -- Say ye impartial and
enlightened, if all this be not as it ought to have been!

No. XVI.
THE second object of the seventh article, as stated in my last number, is
"compensation to British citizens, for captures of their property within the
limits and jurisdiction of the United States, or elsewhere by vessels
originally armed in our ports, in the cases in which the captured property
having come within our power, there was a neglect to make re^itution."

This precise view of the thing stipulated, is calculated to place the whole
subject at once before the m^d in its true shape; to evince the reasonableness
of it, and to dismiss the objections which have been made, as being foreign to
the real state of the case. These objections are in substance, that the
compensation promised is of great and indefinite extent and amount; that an
enormous expense is likely to be incurred; and that it is difficult to prove,
that a neutral nation is under an obliga^ion to go the length of the ^tion.

These remarks obviously turn upon the supposition, erroneously entertained or
disingenuously affected; that compensation is to be made for all ^aptures
within our limits or jurisdiction, or elsewhere by vessels originally armed in
our ports, where restitution has not been effected. -- But the truth is, that
its basis is far more narrow -- that instead of extending to all those
captures, it is ^^^fined to the particular cases of them only in which the
captured property came, or was, after the capture, within our power, so as to
have admitted of restitution by us, but restitution was not made through the
omission or neglect of our government. It does not extend to a single case
where the property, if taken within our jurisdiction, was immediately carried
out of our reach -- or where, if taken without our jurisdiction, it was never
brought within our reach, or where if at any time within our reach due means
were employed without success to effect restitution.

It will follow from this, that the cases within the purview of the article
must be very few -- for, except with regard to three prizes made in the first
instance, where special considerations restrained the government from
interposing, there has been a regular and constant effort of the executive, in
which our courts have efficaciously co-operated, to restore prizes made within
our jurisdiction, or by vessels armed in our ports. The extent or amount,
therefore, of the compensation to be made, can by no possible means be
considerable.

Let us, however, examine if the construction I give to the clause be the true
one.

It is in these words: -- "It is agreed that in all such cases where
restitution shall not have been made agreeably to the tenor of the letter from
Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated September 5th, 1793, a copy of which is
annexed to this treaty, the complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are
referred to the commissioners to be appointed by virtue of this article, who
are hereby authorized and required to proceed in the like manner relative to
these as to the other cases committed to them, and the United States undertake
to pay to the complainants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such
sums as shall be awarded to them respectively, etc."

The letter of Mr. Jefferson, by this reference to it and its annexation to the
treaty, is made virtually a part of the treaty. The cases in which compensation
is promised are expressly those in which restitution has not been made
agreeable to the tenor of that letter.

An analysis of the letter will of course unfold the cases intended.

1. It recapitulates an assurance before given by a letter of the 7th August,
to the British minister, that measures were taken for excluding from further
asylum in our ports, vessels armed in them to cruise on nations with which we
were at peace, and for the restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince
William Henry, and the Jane of Dublin; and that should the measures of
restitution fail in their effect, the President considered it as incumbent on
the United States to make compensation for the vessels. These vessels had been
captured by French privateers, originally armed in our ports and had been
afterward brought within our ports.

2. It states, that we are bound by our treaties with three of the billigerent
nations France, Holland, and Prussia, and our treaty with Sweden includes a
like provision.
by all the means in our power to protect and defend their vessels and effects
in our ports or waters, or on the seas near our shores, and to recover and
restore the same to the right owners when taken from them, a^ing, that if all
the means in our power are used, and fail in the effect, we are not bound by
our treaties to make copensation. It further states, that though we have no
similar treaty with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the President, that we
should use t^wards that nation the same rule which was to govern us with those
other actions, and even to extend it to captures made on the high seas and
brought into our ports, if done by vessels which had been armed within them.

3. It then draws this concl^sion, that having for particular reasons, forbore
to use all the means in our power for the restitution of the three vessels
mentioned in the letter of the 7th of August. -- The President thought it
incumbent upon the United States to make compensation for them; and though
nothing was said in that letter of other vessels taken under like circumstances
and brought in after the 5th June, and before the date of that letter, yet when
the same forbearance had taken place, it was his opinion that compensation
would be equally due. The cases then, here described are those in which illegal
prizes are ma^e, and brought into our ports prior to the 7th August, 1793, and
in which we had forborne to use all the means in our power for restitution. Two
characters are made essential to the cases in which the compensation is to be
made; one, that the prizes were brought within our ports -- the other, that we
forbore to use all the means in our power to restore them.

4. The letter proceeds to observe, that, as to prizes made under the same
circumstances, and brought in after the date of tha^ letter, the President had
determined that all the means in our power should be used for their
restitution; that if these failed, as we should not be bound to make
compensation to the other powers in the analogous case, he did not mean to give
an opinion that it ought to be done to Great Britain. But still if any cases
shall arise subsequent to that date, the circumstances of which shall place
them on a similar ground with those before it, the President would think
compensation incumbent on the United States. The additional cases of which an
expectation of compensation is given in this part of the letter, must stand on
similar ground with those before described -- that is they must be
characterised by the two circumstances of a bringing within our ports and a
neglect to use all the means in our power for their restitution. Every where
the idea of compensation is negatived, where the prizes have not come within
our power, or where we have not foreborne to use the proper means to restore
them.

The residue of the letter merely contains suggestions for giving effect to the
foregoing assurances.

This analysis leaves no doubt that the true construction is such as I have
stated. -- Can there be any greater doubt that the expectations given by the
President in the first instance, and which have been only ratified by the
treaty were in themselves proper, and have been properly ratified?

The laws of nations, as dictated by reason, as received and practiced upon
among nations, as recognized by writers, establish these principles for
regulating the conduct of neutral powers. --

A neutral nation (except as to points to which it is clearly obliged by
antecedent treaties) whatever may be its opinion of the justice or injustice of
the war on either side, cannot without departing from its neutrality, favor
one of two belligerent parties, more than the other -- benefit one to the
prejudice of the other -- furnish or permit the furnishing to either, the
instruments of acts of hostility, or any warlike succor or ai^ whatever,
especially without extending the same advantage to the other -- cannot suffer
any force to be exerted, or warlike enterprise to be carried on from its
territory, by one party against the other, or the preparation or organization
there, of the means of annoyance; has a right and is bound to prevent acts of
hostility within its jurisdiction; and if they happen against its will, to
restore any property which may have been taken in exercising them. These
positions will all be found supported by the letter or spirit of the f^llowing
authorities: Barbeyr^c's notes on Puffendorf, B. viii. C. vi. S. 7. Grotius,
B.iii. C. xvii. S. 3. Bynkerhoeck, B. i. C. viii. p. 61 -- 65. C. ix. p. 69 --
70, Vatel, B. iii.C. vii. Bynkerhoeck cites examples of restitution in the case
mentioned.

Every treaty we have made with foreign powers, promises protection within our
jurisdiction and the restoration of proper^y taken there. A similar stipulation
is a general formula in t^eaties, giving an express sanction to the rule of the
laws of nations in this particular.

An act of Congress, of the 5th of June, 1794, which is expressly a declaratory
act, recognizes at large the foregoing principles of the laws of nations,
providing, among other things, for the punishment of any person, who, within
the United States fits out and arms, or at^empts to fit out and arm, or
procures to be fitted out and armed, or is knowingly concerned in furnishing,
fitting out or arming, of any ship or vessel, with intent to be employed in the
service of a foreign state, to cruise or commit host^lities upon the subjects
or citizens of another foreign state, with which the United States are at
peace, or issues or delivers a commission for any such ship or vessel, or
increases or augments, or procures to be increased or augmented, or is
knowingly concerned in increasing or augm^nting the force of any ship of war,
cruiser or other armed vessel, in the service of a foreign state, at war with
another foreign state, with which the United States are at peace, or within the
territory of the United States, begins or sets on foot, or provides or prepares
the means of any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from thence
against the dominions of any foreign state, with which the United States are at
peace.

And our courts have adopted in its fullest latitude, as conformable in their
opinion with those laws, the principle of restitution of property, when either
captured within our jurisdiction, or elsewhere by vessels armed in our ports.
The supreme court of the United States has given to this doctrine by solemn
dec^sions the most complete and comprehenvsie sanction.

It is, therefore, undoubtedly the law of the land, determined by the proper
constitutional tribunal in the last resort, that restitution is due in the
abovementioned cases.

And it is a direct and necessary consequence from this, that where it is not
made by reason of the neglect of the government to use the means in its power
for the purpose. -- There results an obligation to make reparation. For between
nations, as between individuals, wherever there exists a perfect obligation to
do a thing, there is a concomitant obligation to make reparation for omissions
and neglects.

The President was, therefore, most strictly justifiable, upon principle, in
the opinion which he communicated, that in the cases of such omissions or
neglects, compensation ought to be made. And in point of policy, nothing could
be wiser; for had he not done it, there is the highest probability that war
would have ensued.

Our treaty with France forbids us expressly to permit the privateers of the
enemy to arm in our ports, or to bring or sell there the prizes which they have
made upon her. We could not, for that reason, have made the privilege of arming
in ^ports if it had been allowed to France reciprocal -- The allowance of it to
her would consequently have been a clear violation of neutrality, in the double
sense of permitting a military aid, and of permitting it to the one and
refusing it to the other. Had we suffered France to equip privateers in our
ports to cruize thence upon her enemies, and to bring back and vend there the
spoils or prizes taken, we should have become by this the most mischievous foe
they could have: For while all our naval resources might have augmented the
force of France, our neutrality, if tolerated, would in a great degree have
sheltered and protected her cruisers. Such a state of things no nation at war
could have acquiesced in. -- And as well to the efficacy of our endeavors to
prevent equipments in our ports, as to the proof of the sincerity of those
endeavors, it was essential that we should restore the prizes which came
within our reach, made by vessels armed in our ports. It is known, that
notwithstanding the utmost efforts of the government to prevent it, French
privateers have been clandestinely equipped in some of our ports subsequent to
the assurances which were given that the practice would be discountenanced. If
prizes made by such vessels were suffered to be brought into our ports and sold
there, this would be not only a very great encouragement to the practice, but
it would be impossible that it should be regarded in any other light than as a
connivance. In such circumstances can we blame our chief magistrate? Can we
even deny him praise for having diverted an imminent danger to our peace, by
incurring the responsibility of giving an expectation of compensation? The
conjuncture we may remember was critical and urgent. Congress were at the time
in recess. A due notice to convene them in so extensive a country, can hardly
be rated at less than three months.

In this situation our envoy found the business. It is not true, in the sense
in which it has been advanced, that he was to be governed by the fitness of the
thing, unmindful of the opinion of the President. An opinion of the chief
magistrate of the Union, was to a diplomatic agent an authority and a guide,
which he could not justifiably have disregarded. -- The claim of compensation
on the other side was greatly fortified by that opinion. Nor was it a matter of
indifference to our national delicacy and dignity, that the expectation given
by it should be fulfilled. -- It would have been indecent in our Envoy to have
resisted it. It was proper in him, by acceding to it, to refer the matter to
the ultimate decision of that authority, which by our constitution is charged
with the power of making treaties. It was the more proper, because the thing
was intrinsically right. Every candid man, every good citizen, will rejoice
that the President acted as he did in the first instance -- that our envoy
acted as he did in the second, and that the conduct of both has received the
final constitutional sanction.

The opinions of Mr. Jefferson, when they can be turned to the discredit of the
treaty are with its adversaries oracular truths -- When they are to support it,
they lose all their weight. T^ presumption that the le^ter referred to had the
concurrence of t^ judgment of that officer, results from a fact generally
understood and believed, namely, that the proceedings of the President, at the
period when it was written in relation to the war, were conformable with the
unanimous advice of the heads of the executive departments.

This case of British property captured by privateers originally armed in our
ports, fa^sifies the assertion of the adversaries of the treaty, that all the
pretensions of Great Britain have been fully provided for. She had a colorable
ground to claim compensation for all captures made by vessels armed in our
ports, whithersoever carried or howsoever disposed of, especially where the
equ^pment had been tolerated by our government. This toleration was to be
inferred, as well from a forbearance to suppress those vessels when they came
within our power, as from an original permission. Had compensation been
stipulated on this scale, it is not certain that it would not have amounted to
as much more than that which has been promised, as would counterbalance our
claims for negroes carried away, and for the detention of the posts. But,
instead of this, it is narrowed down by the treaty to such prizes of those
vessels as were brought within our ports, and in respect to which we fore^e to
use all the means in our power for restitution. Here, then, is a set off
against doubtful and questionable claims relinquished on our side. Here also is
another proof how much the anta^onists of the rea^y are in the habit of making
random assertions. But can we wonder at it, when we reflect that they have
undertaken to become the instructors of their fellowcitizens on a subject, in
the examination of which they unite a very superficial knowledge with the most
perverse dispositions?

No. XVII.
THE eighth article provides merely, that the commissioners to be appointed in
the three preceding articles shall be paid in such manner as shall be agreed
between the parties, at the time of the exchange of the ratifications of the
treaty, and that all other expenses attending the commissions shall be defrayed
jointly by the two parties the same being previously ascertained and allowed by
the majority of the Commissioners, and that in case of death, sickness, or
necessary absence of a commissioner his place shall be supplied in the same
manner as he was first appointed, the new Commissioner to take the same oath or
affirmation, and to perform the same duties as his predecessor.

Could it have been imagined, that even this simple and equitable provision was
destined not to escape uncensured? As if it was predetermined that not a single
line of the treaty should pass without the imputation of guilt; nothing less
than an infraction of the constitution of the United States has been charged
upon this article. It attempts, we are told, a disposition of the public money,
unwarranted by, and contrary to the constitution. The examination of this
wonderfully sagacious objection, with others of a similar complexion, must be
reserved so the separate discussion which has been promised of the
constitutionality of the treaty.

Let us proceed for the present to the 9th article.

This article agrees that British subjects who now hold lands in the
territories of the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in
the dominions of his Britannic majesty, shall continue to hold them, according
to the nature and tenure of their respecti^e estates and titles therein; and
may grant, sell, or devise the same to whom they please, in like manner as if
they were natives; and that neither they nor their heirs or assigns, so far as
may respect the said lands, and the legal remedies incident thereto, shall be
regarded as aliens.

The misapprehension of this article, which was first ushered into public view,
in a very incorrect and insi^ious shape, and was conceived to amount to the
grant of an indefinite and permanent right to British subjects to hold lands in
the United States, did more it is believed to excite prejudices against the
treaty than any thing that is really contained in it. And yet when truly
understood, it is found to be nothing more than a confirmation of those rights
to lands, which, prior to the treaty, the laws of the several states allowed
British subjects to hold; with this inconsiderable addition, that the heirs and
assigns of those persons, though aliens, may hold the same lands: but no right
whatever is given to lands of which our laws did not permit and legalise the
acquisition.

These propositions will now be elucidated.

The term, HOLD, in the legal code of G. Britain, and of these states, has the
same, and that a precise technical sense. It imports a capacity legally and
rightfully to have and enjoy real estate, and is contra-distinguished from the
mere capacity of taking or purchasing, which is sometimes applicable to the
acquisition of a thing, that is forfeited by the very act of acquisition. Thus
an alien may take real estate by purchase, but he cannot hold it. Holding is
synonimous with Tenure which in the feudal system implies fealty, of which an
alien is incapable. Land, therefore, is forfeited to the government the instant
it passes to an alien. The Roman law nullifies the contract entirely, so that
nothing passes by the grant of land to an alien: -- but our law, derived from
that of England, permits the land to pass for the purpose of forfeiure to the
state. This is not the case with regard to descent, because the succession or
transmission there, being an act of law, and the alien being disqualified to
hold, the law consistent with itself, casts no estate upon him.

The following legal authorities, selected from an infinite number of similar
ones, esttablish the above positions, viz. Coke on Littleton, p. 2.3. "Some men
have capacity to purchase but no ability to hold. Some capacity to purchase,
and ability to hold or not to hold, at the election of themselves and others.
Some capacity to take and hold. -- Some neither capacity to take nor to hold.
And some are specially disabled to take some particular thing. If an alien
christian or infidel purchase houses, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, to
him and his heirs, albeit he can have no heirs, yet he is of capacity to take a
fee simple, but not to hold." The same, p. 8. "If a man, seized of lands in
fee, has issue an alien, he cannot be heir proper defectum subjectiouis."
Blackstone's Commentaries, book III. chap. xviii. 2, "Alienation to an alien is
a cause of forfeiture to the crown of the lands so alienated, not only on
account of his incapacity to hold them, but likewise on account of his
presumption in attempting by an act of his own to acquire real property." Idem,
chap. xix. 1. "The case of an alien born, is also peculiar, for he may purchase
a thing, but after purchase he can hold nothing, except a lease for years of a
house for the convenience of merchandise."

Thus it is evident, that by the laws of England, which it will not be denied,
agree in principle with ours, an alien may take, but cannot hold lands.

It is equally clear, the laws of both countries, agreeing in this particular,
that the word hold used in the article under consideration, must be understood
according to those laws, and therefore can only apply to those cases in which
there was a legal capacity to hold, in other words, those in which our laws and
those of Great Britain permitted the subjects and citizens of the two parties
to hold lands in the territories of each other. Some of these cases existed
prior to the treaty of peace, and where confiscations had not taken place,
there has never been a doubt that the property was effectually protected by
that treaty. Others have arisen since that treaty under special statutes, of
particular states. Whether there are any others depending on principles of
common law, need not be enquired into here, since the late treaty will neither
strengthen nor impair the operation of those principles.

Whatever lands, therefore, may have been purchased by any British subject
since the treaty of peace, which the laws of the state wherein they were
purchased did not permit him to acquire and hold, are entirely out of the
protection of the article under consideration; the purchase will not avail him;
the forfeiture which was incurred by it is still in full force. As to those
lands which the laws of a state allowed him to purchase and hold, he owes his
title to them, not to the treaty.

Let us recur to the words of the article, "British subjects who now hold
lands, shall continue to hold them according to the nature and tenure of their
respective estates and titles therein." But it has been seen, that to hold
lands is to own them in a legal and competent capacity, and that an alien has
no^uch capacity. The lands, therefore, which by reason of the alienage of a
British subject, he could not, prior to the treaty, leg^lly purchase and hold
-- he cannot under the treaty continue to hold. As if it was designed to render
this conclusion palpable, the provision goes on to say, " According to the
nature and tenure of their respective states and titles therein." This is
equivalent to saying they shall continue to hold as they before held. If they
had no valid estate or title before, they will of course continue to have none.
The expressions neither give any new, nor enlarge any old estate.

The succeeding clauses relate only to descents or alienation of the land
originally legally holden. Here the disability of alienage is taken away from
the heirs and asssigns of the primitive proprietors. While this will conduce to
private justice, by enabling the families and friends of the individuals to
enjoy their property by descent or devise, which it is presumable, was the main
object of the provision, there is no consideration of national policy that
weighs against it. If we admit the whole force of the argument, which opposes
the expediency of permitting aliens to hold lands (and concerning which I shall
barely remark here that it is contrary to the practice of several of the
States, and to a p^actice from which some of them have hitherto derived
material advantages) the extent to which the principle is affected by the
present Treaty, is too limited to be felt; and in the rapid mutations of
property, it will every day diminish. Every alienation of a parcel of the
privileged land to a citizen of the United States, will, as to that land, by
interrupting the chain, put an end to the future operation of the privilege;
and the lapse of no great number of years may be expected to make an entire
revolution in the property, so as to divest the whole of privilege.

To manifest the unreasonableness of the loud and virulent clamor, which was
raised against this article, it has been observed by the friends of the
instrument, that our treaty with France not only grants a much larger privi^ege
to the citizens of France, but goes the full length of removing universally and
perpetually from them the disability of alienism, as to the ownership of lands.
This position has been flatly denied by some of the writers on the other side
Decius, in particular, after taking pains to show that it is erroneous; that
the terms, "Goods moveable and immovable," in the article of our treaty with
France, mean only chattels real and personal in the sense of our law, and
exclude a right to the freehold and inheritance of lands, triumphantly plumes
himself on a detection of the fallacy of the writer of certain "Candid Remarks
on the Treaty," who gave the interpretation above stated to that article.

The error of Decius' interpretation, proceeds from a misunderstanding of the
term Goods in the English translation of the article, to which he annexes the
meaning assigned to that term in our law, instead of resorting as he ought to
have done, to the French laws, for the true meaning of the correspondent term
biens, which is that used in the French original. Goods, in our law, no doubt
mean chattel interests; but goods, or "biens," in the French law, mean all
kinds of property, real as well as personal. It is equivalent to, and derived
from, the term "bona" in the Roman law, answering most nearly to "estates," in
our law, and embracing inheritances in land, corporeal and incorporeal
hereditaments, as well as property in moveable things. When it is necessary to
distinguish one species from another, it is done by an adjective; biens meubles
et immeubles," answering to bona or res mobilia, et immobilia, things moveable
and immovable, estates real and personal. The authorities at foot Justinians,
Institutes, Lib. iii. Tit. 10, 11, 12, 13, Lib. iv. Tit. 2. Domat's Civil and
Public Law. Prel. Boo, Tit. 3, Sect. 1, 2. Book iv. Sect. 1.
will show the analogy of these different terms in the three different
languages; but for fixing the precise sense of those used in the treaty; I have
selected and shall quote two authorities from French books, which are clear and
conclusive on the point. One will be found in the work of a French lawyer,
entitled, Collections de Decisions Nouvelles, et de Notions Relatives. A La
Jurisprudence Actiulle, under the article biens Biens. Le mot bien a une
signification generale, and comprend toutes sorts de possessions, comme
meubles, immeubles, acquets, conquets, propres, etc.

On distingue dansles biens des particuliers les meubles and les immeubles, les
acquets, and les propres, and entre^es propres, les paternels and les
maternels, les anciens and les naissans. Les biens meubles sont ceux qui
peuvent se mouuoir and se transporter d'un lieu en un autre, comme des denrees,
des merchandises, des deniers comptans, dela vaisselle d'argent, des bestiaux,
des utensiles d'hotel. Les biens immeubl^s sont ceux qui ne peuvent se mouvoir
ou se transporter d'unlieu dans un autre, comme des heritages, des maisons, etc.


, and is in these words, viz. "The word bien has a general signification and
comprehends all sorts of possessions, as movables, immoveables, purchases,
acquisitions by marriage, inheritances, etc. It is distinguished into these
particulars, movables, immoveables, purchases and inheritances, subdividing
in^eritances into paternal and maternal old and new. -- Moveable biens are
those which may be moved and transported from one place to another, as wares,
merchandises. and current money, pl^te, beasts, household utensils, etc.
Immovable biens are those which cannot be moved from one place to another, a^
inheritances, houses, etc. -- Biens are distinguished again into corporeal and
incorporeal." Another Biens -- C'est en generale tout ce qui compose nos
richesses; il y a deux fortes de biens, les meubles and les immeubles; meubles,
tout ce qui peut etre transporte d'un lieu a un autre, immeubles -- Biens eu
fonds, ou qui sont presume avoir la na ure de fonds -- On distingue deux forts
d' mmeubles, les reels and les fictiss; les immeubles reel sont non sculment la
fubtance meme de la terre quiest ce q'uon appelle le fond, mais tout ce qui est
adherent a sa surface, foit par la nature comme les arbres, soit par la main
des hommes, comme les maisons, and autre batiments -- On a appelle l'autre
espece d'immeubles, immeubles fictifs, parcequ'ils ne sont tells que parfiction;
de ce nombre sont les offices venaux, casuels and les rentes constitute.
is drawn from the celebrate^ institutes of the French law, by Mr. Argou, and
is in these words, ' Biens.' This is in general whatever comp^ses our riches
There ^re two sorts of biens moveable and immovable. -- Moveable, all that may
be transported from one place to another. -- Immovable, lands or what may be
presumed to have the nature of lands. They are distinguished into two kinds,
real and fictitious. Real are not only the substance of the earth, which is
called Fonds, but all that adheres to its surface, whether from nature as from
trees, or from the hand of man, as houses and other buildings. The others are
fictitious, because they are only real by fiction, as offices which are
vendible and subject to fiscal reversion, rent, charges, etc." The
signification of Bona, in the Roman law, corresponds as was observed above,
with that of Biens in the French. "Bonorum appellatio univers^atem quandem et
non singulas res demonstrat," which may be rendered, "The appellation of Bona
designates the totality of property or estate, and not particular things." And
hence it is, that the cessio bonorum of a debtor is the surrender of his whole
fortune.

Both these terms, "bona" and biens, are indiscriminately translated goods,
est^tes, ^ff^cts, property See authorities before cited: See also Puffendorf,
book vi^i. chap. 5. sect. 8. Grotius, book iii. chap. 5, sect. 11, 12. Vatel,
book i. chapter 20, sect. 245, 246, 247.
. In our treaty with France they are translated goods; but it is evidently a
great mistake to understand the expression in the limited sense of our law.
Being a mere word of translation, it must be understood according to the
meaning of the French text: for it is declared in the conclusion of the treaty,
that it was originally composed and concluded in the French Tongue. Moreover,
the term goods, when used in our langu^ge, as the equivalent of the term bona,
or biens, is always understood in the large sense of the original term, in
other words, as comprehending real and personal estate, inheritances as well as
chattel interests.

Having now established the true meaning of the terms, "goods, moveable and
immovable," let us proceed with this guide to a review of the article.

Its first and principal feature is, "that the subjects and inhabitants of the
United States, or any of them, shall not be reputed Aubains in France. This is
the same as if it had been said, "they shall not be reputed Aliens." For the
definition of Aubains, as given in the work before first cited, is this,
"Aubains are persons not born under the dominion of the King;" the exact
equivalent of the definition of Alien in the English law. If our citizens are
not to be reputed Aliens in France, it follows, that they must be exempted from
alien disabilities, and must have the same rights with natives, as to
acquiring, conveying, and succeeding to real and other estate. Accordingly the
article, having pronunced that our citizens shall not be reputed aliens in
France, proceeds to draw certain consequences. The first is, that they shall
not be subject to the droit d'aubaine. The droit d'aubaine was under the
monarchy, one of the regalia; it was the right of the prince to succeed to all
estates or property situate in the kingdom, belonging to foreigners, who died
without legitimate children born in the kingdom.

It is to be observed, that the laws of France permitted foreigners to acquire
and hold even real estates, subject to this right of the sovereign, in case of
demise without issue born under his allegiance. But this right of the
sovereign, as to American citizens, is abrogated by the treaty; so that their
legal representatives, wherever born, may succeed to all the property, real or
personal, which they may have acquired in France.

And in conformity with this, it is further declared, that they may by
testament, donation or otherwise, dispose of their goods, moveable and
immovable (that is, as we have seen, their estates, real and personal) in
favor of such persons as to them shall appear good, and that their heirs,
subjects of the United States, whether residing in France or elsewhere, may
succeed to them, ab intestato, without being obliged to obtain letters of
naturalization.

These are the stipulations on the part of France; and they amount to a removal
from the citizens of the United States of alien disabilities in that country,
as to property. I say as to property, because as to civil and ecclesiastical
employments, it seems to have been a principle of the French law, that the
incapacity of foreigners could only be removed by special dispensations,
directed to the particular object.

What are the correlative stipulations on the part of the United States? They
are in these terms "the subjects of the most Christian King shall enjoy on
their part, in all the dominions of the said States, an entire and perfect
reciprocity relative to the stipulations contained in this article. But it is
at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect the laws made or
that may be made hereafter in France against emigrations, which shall remain in
all their force and vigor, and the United States on their part, or any of them
shall be at liberty to enact such laws relative to that matter as to them shall
appear proper."

Since then the article removes from our citizens the disabilities of aliens as
to property in France, and stipulates for her citizens, an entire and perf^ct
reciprocity in the United States, it follows, that Frenchmen are equally exempt
in the United States from the like disabilities. -- They may, therefore, hold,
succeed to, and dispose of real estates.

It appears, that the sense both of the French and of the American government,
has corresponded with this construction.

In the year 1786, the Marqui^ Bellegarde, and the Chevalier Maziere, sons of
the two sisters of Genesis Ogelthorpe, represented to the Count de Vergennes, the
French minister for foreign affairs, that they met with impediments to their
claims from the laws of Georgia prohibiting aliens to hold lands. Mr. De
Vergennes communicated their complaint to Mr. Jefferson, our then minister in
France, observing that the alien disabilities of the complainants having in
common with those of all Frenchmen, been removed by the treaty between the two
countries, they ought to experience no impediment on that account, in the
su^cession, to the estate of their uncle, and that the interfering laws of
Georgia ought to be repealed so as to agree with the treaty.

Mr. Jesterson, in reply, states the case of the complainants, proving that
they were prec^^ded from the succession for other reasons than that of
alienism; and then adds, that the treaty with France having placed the subjects
of France in the United States on a footing with natives, as to conveyances and
descents of property, there is no necessity for the assemblies to pass laws on
the subject, the treaty being a law, as he conceives, superior to those of
particular assemblies, and repealing them when they stand in the way of its
operation.

Where now Decius is thy mighty triumph? Where the trophies of thy fancied
victory? Learn, that in political, as in other science, Shallow draughts
intoxicate the brain,
And drinking large^y sobers us again.


The fixing the true sense of the article in the treaty with Great Britain is
alone a refutation of most of the objections which have been made to it, by
showing, that they apply not to what really exists, but to a quite different
thing. It may be useful, however, to pass them briefly in review with some
cursory remarks.

The article, it is said, infringes the rights of the states, and impairs the
obligation of private contracts, permits aliens to hold real estates against
the fundamental policy of our laws, and at the hazard of introducing a
dangerous foreign influence; is unequal, because no American has been hardy
enough since the peace to purchase land in England, while millions of acres
have been purchased by British subjects in our country with knowledge of the
risk -- is not warranted by the example of any other treaty we have made? for
if even, that with France should contain a similar provision (which is denied)
still the difference of circum^tances would make it an in apposite precedent
since this was a treaty made flagrante bello, in a situation which justified
sacrifices.

These objections have been formally made and explicitly urged. One writer,
afraid of risking a direct assertion, but infidiously endeavoring to insinuate
misconception, contents himself with putting a question. What, says he, will be
the effect of this article as to the revival of the claims of British subjects,
traitors or exiles?

As to the infraction of the rights of the States, this it is presumed, must
relate to the depriving them of forfeitures of alien property. But as the
article gives no right to a British subject to hold any lands which the laws of
a state did not previously authorize him to hold -- it prevents no forfeiture
to which he was subject by them, and consequently deprives no state of the
benefit of any such forfeiture. With regard to escheats for want of qualified
heirs, it depended on every proprietor to avoid them by alienation to citizens.

As to impairing the obligation of private contracts, it is difficult to
understand what is meant. Since land, purchased by an alien, passes from the
former proprietor, and becomes forfeited to the state, can it be afterward the
subject of a valid private contract? If the effect of the artic^e was to
confirm a defective title derived from the alien, how could this impair ^he
obligation of any other private contract concerning it? But whatever may be
intended, it is enough to say, that the article does not confirm the title to
any land which was not before good. So that the ground of the objection fails.

As to permitting aliens to hold land contrary to the policy of our laws, it
has been shown, that on a true construction, it only applies to the very
limited case of the alien heirs and assigns of persons who before right fully
he^d lands, and is confined to the identical lands so previously holden. that
its greatest effect must be insignificant, and that this effect will
continually decrease.

As to the millions of acres said to have been purchased by British subjects
since the peace, it has been shown that if by the laws of the States in which
the purchases were made, they were illegally acquired, they still remain in the
situation in which they were before the treaty.

As to there being no precedent of a similar stipulation with any other
country; it has been proved that with France we have one much broader. The idea
that this was a sacrifice to the necessity of our situation, flagrante bello,
is new. Are we then to understand that we are in this instance gave to France,
as the price of her assistance, a privilege in our country which leads to the
introduction of a foreign influence, dangerous to our independence and
prosperity! For to this result tends the argument concerning the policy of the
exclusion of aliens. Or is it that no privilege granted to France can be
dangerous?

Those who are not orthodox enough to adopt this last position, may
nevertheless tranquilize themselves about the consequences. This is not the
channel through which a dangerous foreign influence can assail us.
Notwithstanding all that has been said, it may perhaps bear a serious argument,
whether the permission to foreigners to hold lands in our country, might not,
by the operation of private interest, give us more influence upon foreign
countries, than they will ever acquire upon us from the holding of those lands*
Be this as it may, could we not appeal to some good patriots, as they stire
themselves by way of eminence, for the truth of the observation, that foreign
governments have more direct and powerful means of influence than can ever
result from the right in question?

Moreover, there was a peculiar reason for the provision which has been made in
our last treaty, not applicable to any treaty with another country. The former
relative situation of the United States and Great Britain led to the possession
of lands by the citizens of each in the respective territories. It was natural
and just to secure by treaty their free transmission to the heirs and assigns
of the parties.

As to the revival of the claims of traitors or exiles; if property confiscated
and taken away, is property holden by those who have been deprived of it, then
may there be ground for alarm on this score. How painful is it to behold such
gross attempts to deceive a whole people on so momentous a question? How
^cting, that imposture and fraud should be so often able to assume with success
the garb of patriotism! And that this sublime virtues should be so frequently
discredited by the usurpation and abuse of its name.

No. XVIII.
IT is provided by the 10th art. of the treaty, that "neither debts due from
individuals of the one nation, to individuals of the other, nor shares, nor
moneys, which they may have in the public funds, or in the ^ublic or private
banks, shall ever in any event of war, or national differences, be sequestered
or confisca^^d, it being unjust and impolitic that debts and engagements,
contracted and made by individuals, having confidence in each other and in
their respective goverments, should ever be destroyed or impaired by national
authority on account of national differences and discontents."

The virulence with which this article has been attacked, cannot fail to excite
very painful sensations in every mind duly impressed with the sanctity of
public faith, and with the importance of national credit and character; at the
same time that it furnishes the most cogent reasons to desire, that the
preservation of peace may obviate the pretext and the temptation to fully the
honor, and wound the interests of the country, by a measure which the truly
enlightened of every nation would condemn.

I acknowledge, without reserve, that in proportion to the vehemence of the
opposition against this part of the treaty, is the satisfaction I derive from
its existence, as an obstacle the more to the perpetration of a thing, which,
in my opinion, besides deeply injuring our real and permanent interest, would
cover us with ignominy. -- No power of language, at my command, can express the
abhorrence I feel of the idea of violating the property of individuals, which,
in an authorized intercourse in time of peace, has been confided to the faith
of our government and laws, on account of controversies between nation and
nation. In my view, every moral and every political sentiment unite to consign
it to execration.

Neither will I dissemble, that the dread of the effects of the spirit which
patronizes that idea, has ever been with me one of the most persuasive
arguments for a pacific policy on the part of the United States. Serious as the
evil of war has appeared at the present stage of our affairs, the manner in
which it was to be apprehended it might be carried on, was still more
formidable, in my eyes, than the thing itself. It was to be feared, that in the
fermentation of certain wild op^nions, those wise, just, and temperate maxims,
which will forever constitute the true security and felic^ty of a state, would
be overruled, and that a war upon credit, eventually upon property and upon
the general principles of public order, might aggravate and embitter the
ordinary calamities of f^reign war. The confiscation of debts due to the enemy,
might ^ave been the first step of this destructive process. -- From one
violation of justice to another, the passage is easy. Invasions of right, still
more fatal to credit, might have followed; and this by extinguishing the
resources which that could have afforded, might have paved the way to more
comprehensive and more enormous depredations for a substitute. -- Terrible
examples were before us, and there were too many not sufficiently remote from a
disposition to admire and imitate them.

The earnest and extensive clamours against the part of the treaty under
consideration, confirm that anticipation; and while they enhance the merit of
the provision, they also inspire a wish that some more effectual barrier had
been erected against the possibility of a contrary practice being ever, at any
ill-fated moment, obtruded upon our public councils. It would have been an
inestimable gem in our nationa^ constitution, had it contained a positive
prohibition against such a practice, except, perhaps, by way of reprisal for
the identical injury on the part of another nation.

Analogous to this is that liber^l and excellent provision of the British Magna
Charta, which declares, that "if the mercnahts of a country at war with
England, are found here in the beginning of a war, they shall be attached
without harm of body or effects, until its known in what manner English
merchants are treated in the enemy's country, if they are safe, that the
foreign merchants shall also be safe." Si Mercares sint de terra contra nos
guerrina, et tales in venlantur in terra nostra in principio gurrae,
attachientur sine damno corporum suorum vel rerum, donecsciatur a nobis vel a
Capitali Justiciario nostro quomodo mercatores teroe nostrae tractantur, qui
tunc inveniantur^^ terra illa contra nos guerrina; et si nostri salvi sint ibi,
^li salvi si^t in terra nostra. Magna Charta, cap. XXX.
The learned Lord Come pronounces this to be the jus belli, or the law of war:
And the elegant and enlightened Montesquieu, speaking of the same provision,
breaks out into this exclamation -- "It is noble that the English nation have
made this one of the articles of its liber^y." Spirit of law. Book XX. chapter XIV.
How much is to be regretted that our Magna Charta is not unequivocally
decorated with a like feature; and that in this instance, we who have given so
many splendid examples to man^ind are excelled in constitutional precaution for
the maintenance of justice!

There is indeed ground to assert, tha^ the contrary principle would be
repugnant to that art, of our co^stitution, which provides, that "no state
shall pass any law impairing the obligation of contracts." The spirit of this
clause, though the letter of it be restricted to the states individually, must,
on fair construction, be considered as a rule for the United States; and if so,
could not easily be reconciled with the confiscation or sequestration of
private debts in time of war. -- But it is a pity, that so important a
principle should have been le^t to inference and implication, and should not
have received an express and direct sanction.

This position must appear a frightful heresy in the eyes of those who
represent the confiscation or sequestration of debts as our best mean of
retaliation, and coercion, as our most powerful, sometimes as our only weapon
of defense.

But so degrading an idea will be rejected with disdain, by every man who feels
a true and well-i^formed n^tional pride; by every man who recollects and
glories, that in a state of still greater immaturity, we achieved independence
without the aid of this dishonorable expedient The federal government never
resorted to it -- and a few on^y of the State governments stained themselves
with it. It may, perhaps, be said, that the federal government had no power on
the subject; but the reverse is truly the case. The federal government alone
had power. The State governments had none, though some of them undertook to
exercise it. This position is founded on the solid ground that the confiscation
or sequestration of the debts of an enemy is a high act of reprisal and war,
necessarily and exclusively incident to the power of making war, which was
always in the federal government.
; that even in a revolutionary war, a war of liberty against usurpation, our
national councils were too magnanimous to be provoked or tempted to depart so
widely from the path of rectitude; by every man, in fine, who, though careful
not to exaggerate for rash and extravagant projects, can nevertheless fairly
estimate, the real resources of the country, for meeting dangers which prudence
cannot avert.

Such a man will never en^ure the base doctrine, that our security is to depend
on the tricks of a swindler. He will look for it in the courage and constancy
of a free, brave and virtuous people -- in the riches of a fertile soil -- of
an extended and progressive industry, in the wisdom and energy of a well
constituted and well administered government -- in the resources of a solid, if
well supported, national credit -- in the armies, which, if requisite, could be
raised -- in the means of maritime annoyance, which, if necessary, could be
organized -- and with which we could inflict deep wounds on the commerce of a
hostile nation. He will indulge an animating consciou^ness, that while our
situation is not such as to justify our courting imprudent enterprises, neither
is it such as to oblige us in any event to stoop to dishonorable means of
security, or to substitute a crooked and piratical policy for the manly
energies of fair and open war.

What is the consequence of the favorite doctrine, that the confiscation or
sequestration of private debts is our most powerful, if not our only weapon of
defense? Great Britain is the sole power against whom we could wield it, since
it is to her citizens alone that we are largely indebted. What are we to do,
then, against any other nation which might think fit to menace us? Are we, for
want of adequate means of defense, to crouch beneath the uplifted rod, and with
abject despondency, sue for mercy? Or has Providence guaranteed us specially
against the malice or ambition of every power on earth, except Great Britain?

It Is at once curious and instructive to mark the inconsistencies of the
disorganizing sect. Is the question to discard a spirit of accommodation and
rush into war with Great Britain? Columns are filled with the most absurd
exaggerations to prove that we are able to meet her, not only on equal but upon
superior terms -- Is the question, whether a stipulation against the
confiscation or sequestration of private debts ought to have been admitted into
the treaty? Then are we a people destitute of the means of war, with neither
armies, nor fleets, nor magazines -- then is our best, if not our only weapon
of defense, the power of confiscating or sequestrating the debts which are due
to the subjects of Great Britain; in other words, the power of committing
fraud, of violating the public faith, of sacrificing the principles of
commerce, of prostrating credit. Is the question, whether free ships shall make
free goods, whether naval stores shall or shall not be deemed contraband? Then
is the appeal to what is called the modern law of nations, then is the cry that
recent usage has changed and mitigated the rigor of ancient maxims. But is the
question, whether private debts can be rightfully confiscated or sequestered?
Then ought the utmost rigor of the ancient doctrine to govern, and modern
usage and opinion to be discarded. The old rule or the new is to be adopted or
rejected just as may suit our convenience.

An inconsistency of another kind, but no less curious, is observable in a
position repeatedly heard from the same quarter, namely, that the sequestration
of debts is the only peaceable mean of doing ourselves justice and avoiding
war. If we trace the origin of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester
debts, we find it in the very authority, principally relied on to prove it, to
be this (Bynhershoeck, questiones juris publici l. 1. b. 2) "since it is the
condition of war that enemies may be deprived of all their rights, it is
reasonable that every thing of an enemy's found among his enemies, should
change its owner and go to the treasury." Hence it is manifest, that the right
itself, if it exists, presupposes, as the condition of its exercise, an actual
state of war, the relation of enemy to enemy. Yet are we fastidiously and
hypocritically told, that this high and explicit act of war, is a peaceable
mean of doing ourselves justice and avoiding war. Why are we thus told? Why is
this strange paradox attempted to be imposed on us? Why, but that it is the
policy of the conspirators against our peace to endeavor to disguise the
hostilities into which they wish to plunge us with a specious outside, and to
precipitate us down the precipice of war, while we imagine we are quietly and
securely walking along its summit.

Away with these absurd and incongruous sophisms! Blush ye apostles of
temerity, of meanness, and of deception! Cease to beckon us to war, and at the
same time to freeze our courage by the coward^y declaration that we have no
resource but in fraud! Cease to attempt to persuade us that peace may be
obtained by means which are unequivocal acts of war. Cease to tell us that war
is preferable to dishonor, and yet, as our first step to urge us into
irretrievable dishonor. A magnanimous, a sensible people cannot listen to your
crude conceptions -- Why will ye persevere in accumulating ridicule and
contempt upon your own heads?

In the further observations which I shall offer on this article, I hope to
satisfy, not the determined leaders or instruments of faction, but all
discerning men, all good citizens, that instead of being a blemish it is an
ornament to the instrument in which it is contained; that it is as consistent
with true policy as with substantial justice; that it is in substance, not
without precedent in our other treaties, and that the objections to it are
futile?

No. XIX.
THE objects protected by the 10th article, are classed under four heads: -- 1.
Debts of individuals to individuals -- 2. Property of individuals in the public
funds -- 3. Property of individuals in public banks. -- 4. Property of
individuals in private banks. These, if analised, resolve themselves, in
principle, into two discriminations, viz. private debts and private property in
public funds. The character of private property prevails throughout. -- No
property of either government is protected from confiscation or sequestration
by the other. This last circumstance merits attention, because it marks the
true boundary.

The propriety of the stipulation will be examined under these several aspects:
the right to confiscate or sequestrate private debts or private property in
public funds, on the ground of reason and principle -- the right as depending
on the opinion of jurists and on usage -- the policy and expediency of the
practice -- the analogy of the stipulation with stipulations in our other
treaties and in treaties between other nations.

First, as to the right on the ground of reason and principle.

The general proposition on which it is supported, is this, "That every
individual of a nation, with whom we are at war, wheresoever he may be, is our
enemy, and his property of every kind in every place, liable to capture by
right of war."

The only exception to this rule, respects property within the jurisdiction of
a Neutral State, but the exemption is referred to the right of the neutral
nation, not to any privilege which the situation gives to the enemy proprietor.

Reason, if consulted, will suggest another exception -- This regards all such
property as the laws of a country permit foreigners to acquire within it or to
bring into it. The right of holding or having property in a country, always
implies a duty on the part of its government to protect that property, and to
secure to the owner the full enjoyment of it. When ever, therefore, a
government grants permission to foreigners to acquire property within its
territories, or to bring and deposit it there, it tacitly promises protection
and security. It must be understood to engage, that the foreign proprietor, as
to what he shall have acquired or deposited, shall enjoy the rights,
privileges, and immunities of a native proprietor, without any other exceptions
than those which the established laws may have previously declared. How can any
thing else be understood? Every state, when it has entered into no contrary
engagement, is free to permit or not to permit foreigners to acquire or bring
property within its jurisdiction, but if it grant the right, what is there to
make the tenure of the foreigner different from that of the native, if
antecedent laws have not pronounced a difference? -- Property as it exists in
civilized society, if not a creature of, is at least regulated and defined by,
the laws. They prescribe the manner in which it shall be used, alienated, or
transmitted; the conditions upon which it may be held, preserved, or forfeited.
It is to them we are to look for its rights, limitations and conditions. No
condition of enjoyment, no cause of forfeiture, which they have not specified,
can be presumed to exist. -- An extraordinary discretion to resume or take away
the thing without any personal fault of the proprietor, is inconsistent with
the notion of property. This seems always to imply a contract between the
society and the individual; that he shall retain and be protected in the
possession and use of his property so long as he shall observe and perform the
conditions which the laws have annexed to the tenure. It is neither natural nor
equitable to consider him as subject to be deprived of it for a cause foreign
to himself; still less for one which may depend on the volition or pleasure,
even of the very government to whose protection it has been confided: for the
proposition, which affirms the right to confiscate or sequester, does not
distinguish between offensive or defensive war; between a war of ambition on
the part of the power, which exercises the right, or a war of self preservation
against the assaults of another.

The property of a foreigner placed in another country, by permission of its
laws, may justly be regarded as a deposit, of which the society is the trustee.
How can it be reconciled with the idea of a trust, to take the property from
its owner, when he has personally given no cause for the deprivation.

Suppose two families in a state of nature, and that a member of one of them
had by permission of the head of the other, placed in his custody some article
belonging to himself, and suppose a quarrel to ensue between the two heads of
families in which the member had not participated by his immediate councilor
consent, would not natural equity declare the seizure and confiscation of the
deposited property to be an act of perfidious rapacity?

Again, suppose two neighboring nations, which had not had intercourse with
each other, and that one of them opens its ports and territories for the
purpose of commerce to the citizens of the other, proclaiming free and safe
ingress and egress; suppose afterward a war to break out between the two
nations and the one which had granted that permission, to seize and convert to
its own use the goods and credits of the merchants of the other, within its
dominions. What sentence would natural reason, unwarped by particular dogmas,
pronounce on such conduct? If we abstract ourselves from extr^neous
impressions, and consult a genuine moral feeling, we shall not doubt that the
sentence would inflict all the opproprium and infamy of violated faith.

Nor can we distinguish either case, in principle, from that which constantly
takes place between nations, that permit a commercial intercourse with each
other, whether with or without national compact. They equally grant a right to
bring into and carry out of their territories the property which is the subject
of the intercourse, a right of free and secure ingress and egress; and in doing
this they make their territories a sanctu^ry or asylum, which ought to be
inviolable, and which the spirit of plunder only could have ever violated.

There is no parity between the case of the persons and goods of enemies found
in our own country, and that of the persons and goods of enemies foun^
elsewhere. In the former there is a reliance upon our hospitality and justice;
there is an express or implied safe conduct; the individuals and their property
are in the custody of our faith; they have no power to resist our will; they
can lawfully m^ke no defense against our violence, they are deemed to ow^ a
temporary allegiance and for endeavoring resistance w^^ld be punished as
criminals -- a character inconsistent with that of en^my. To make them a prey
is therefore to infringe every rule of generosity and equity -- it is to add
cowardice to treachery. In the latter case there is no confidence whatever
reposed in us; no claim upon our hospitality, justice or good faith; there is
the simple character of enemy with an entire liberty to oppose force to force
-- The right of war consequently to attack and seize whether to obtain
indemnification for an injury received; to disable our enemy from doing us
further harm, to force him to reasonable terms of accommodation, or to repress
an overbearing ambition, exists in full vigor, unrestrained and unqualified by
any trust or duty on our part -- In pursuing it though we may inflict hardship
we do not commit injustice.

Moreover the property of foreigners within our country may be regarded as
having paid a valuable consideration for its protection and exemption from
forfeiture; that which is brought in, commonly enriches the revenue by a duty
of entry. All that is within our territory, whether acquired there or brought
there is liable to contributions to the treasury, in common with other similar
property. Does there not result an obligation to protect that, which
contributes to the expense of its protection? Will justice sanction upon the
breaking out of a war, the confiscation of a property, which during peace,
serves to augment the forces and nourish the prosperity of a state?

The principle of the proposition gives an equal right to subject the person as
the property of a foreigner to the rigours of war. But what should be thought
of a government, which should seize all the subjects of its enemy found within
its territory, and commit them to durance, as prisoners of war? would not all
agree that it had violated an asylum which ought to have been sacred? That it
had trampled upon the laws of hospitality and civilization? That it had
disgraced itself by an act of cruelty and barbarism? Way would it not be
equally reprehensible to violate the asylum which had been given to the
property of those foreigners? Reason, left to its own lights, would determine
all these questions in one way, and severely condemn the molestation, on
account of a national contest, as well of the property as the person of the
foreigner found in our country, under the license and guarantee of the laws of
previous amity.

The case of property in the public funds, is still stronger than that of
private debts. To all the sanctions which apply to the latter, adds that of an
express pledge of the public faith to the foreign holder of stock.

The constituting of a public debt or fund, transferable without limitation or
distinction, amounts to a promise to all the world, that whoever, foreigner or
citizen, may acquire a title to it, shall enjoy the benefit of what is
stipulated. Every transferee becomes by the act of transfer, the immediate
proprietor of the promise. It inures directly to his use, and the foreign
promi^, no more than the native, can be deprived of that benefit, except in
consequence of some act of his own, without the infraction of a positive
engagement.

Public debt has been truly defined, "A property subsisting in the faith of
government." Its essence is promise. To confiscate or sequester it, is
emphatically to rescind the promise given, to revoke the faith plighted; it is
impossible to separate the two ideas of a breach of faith, and the confiscation
or sequestration of a property subsisting only in the faith of the government
by which it is made.

When it is considered, that the promise made to the foreigner is not made to
him in the capacity of member of another society, but in that of citizen of the
world, or of an individual in a state of nature -- the infraction of it toward
him, on account of the fault real or pretended of the society to which he
belongs, is the more obviously destitute of color. There is no real affinity
between the motive and the consequence. There is a confounding of relations.
The obligation of a contract can only be avoided by the breach of a condition
express or implied, which appears or can be presumed to have been within the
contemplation of both parties, or by the personal fault or crime of him to whom
it is to be performed. Can it be supposed that a citizen of one country would
lend his money to the government of another, in the expectation that a war
between the two countries, which without or against his will, might break out
the next day, could be deemed a sufficient cause of forfeiture?

The principle may be tested in another way. Suppose one government indebted to
another in a certain sum of money, and suppose the creditor government to
borrow of a citizen of the other* an equal sum of money. When he came to demand
payment, would justice, would good faith, permit the opposing to his claim, by
way of set off, the debt due from his government? Who would not revolt at such
an attempt? Could not the individual creditor answer with conclusive force,
that in a matter of contract he was not responsible All that can rightfully be
done is to oblige the foreigners, who are subjects of our enemy, to quit our
country.
for the society of which he was a member, and that the debts of the Society
were not a proper set off against his private claim?

With what greater reason could his claim be refused on account of an injury,
which was a cause of war, received from his Sovereign, and which had created on
the part of the Sovereign a debt of reparation? It were certainly more natural
and just to set off a debt due by contract to the citizen of a foreign country
against a debt due by contract from the sovereign of that country, than to set
it off against a vague claim of indemnification for an injury or aggression of
which we complain, and of which the reality or justice is seldom undisputed on
the other side.

The true rule which results from what has been said, and which reason
sanctions, with regard to the right of capture, is this -- "It may be exercised
every where except within a neutral jurisdiction There are exceptions to this
exception; but they depend on special circumstances which admit the principal
exception, and need not be particularized.
, or where the property is under the protection of our own laws," and it may
perhaps be added that it always supposes the possibility of rightful combat, of
attack, and defense. These exceptions involve no refinement, they depend on
obvious considerations, and are agreeable to common sen^e and to nature -- the
spontaneous feelings of equity accord with them. It is indeed astonishing that
a contrary rule should ever have been countenanced by the opinion of any
jurist, or by the practice of any civilized nation.

We shall see in the next number how far either has been the case, and what
influence it ought to have upon the question.

No. XX.
THE point next to be examined is, the right of confiscation or sequestration,
as depending on the opinion of jurists and on usage.

To understand how far these ought to weigh, it is requisite to consider what
are the elements or ingredients which compose what is called the law of nations.

The constituent parts of this system are, 1. The necessary or internal law,
which is the law of nature applied to nations; or that system of rules for
regulating the conduct of nation to nation, which reason deduces from the
principles of natural right, as relative to polit^cal societies or states. 2.
The voluntary law, which is a system of rules resulting from the ineqality and
independence of nations, and which, in the administration of their affairs, and
the pursuit of their pretentions, proceeding on the principle of their having
no common judge upon earth, attributes equal validity, as to external effects,
to the measures or conduct of one as of another, without regard, to the
intrinsic justice of those measures or that conduct. Thus captures in war are
as valid when made by the party in the wrong, as by he party in the right. --
3. The pactitious, or conventional law, or that law which results from a treaty
between two or more nations. This is evidently, a particular, not a general
law, since a treaty on pact can only bind the contracting parties: Yet when we
find a provision universally pervading the treaties between nations for a
length of time, as a kind of formula, it is high evidence of the general law of
nations. 4. The customary law, which consists of those rules of conduct that in
practice are respected and observed among nations: Its authority depends on
usage implying a tacit consent and agreement. This also, is a particular, not a
general law, obligatory only on those nations whose acquiescence has appeared,
or from circumstances may fairly be presumed. Thus the customary law of Europe
may not be that of a different quarter of the globe. The three last branches
are sometimes aggregately denominated the positive law of nations

The two first are discoverable by reason; the two last depend on proof, as
matter of fact. Hence the opinion of jurists, though weighing as the sentiments
of judicious or learned men who have made the subject a particular study, are
not conclusive as authorities -- In regard to the necessary and voluntary law,
especially, they may be freely disregarded, unless they are found to be adopted
and sanctioned by the practice of nations: For where REASON is the guide, it
cannot properly be renounced for mere OPINION, however respectable. As
witnesses of the customary law, their testimony, the result of careful
researches, is more particularly entitled to attention.

If, then, it has been satisfactorily proved as the dictate of sound reason,
that private debts and private property in public funds are not justly liable
to confiscation or sequestration, an opposite opinion of one or more jurists
could not control the conclusion in point of principle. So far as it may
attest a practice of nations, which may have introduced a positive law on the
subject, the consideration may be different. It will remain to examine, upon
their own and other testimony, whether that practice be so general as to be
capable of varying a rule of reason, by the force of usage; and whether it
still continues to bear the same character, or has been weakened or done away
by more recent or modern usage.

I will not avail myself of a position advanced by writers, that usage, if
derogating from the principles of natural justice, is null, further than to
draw this inference, that a rule of right, deducible from them, cannot be
deemed to be altered by an usage partial, contradicted, fluctuating.

With these guides, our futher enquiries will serve to confirm us in the
negative of the pretended right to confiscate or sequestrate in the cases
supposed.

The notion of this right is evidently derived from the ROMAN law. It is seen
there in this peculiar form, "Those things of an enemy which are among us,
belong not to the state but to the first occupant, Digest xii. chap. 1. "Eaquae
res hostiles apud nos, etc."
" which seems to mean, that the things of an enemy, at the commencement of the
war, found in our country, may be seized by any citizen, and will belong to him
who first gets possession. It is known that the maxims of the Roman law are
extensively incorporated into the different codes of Europe; -- and
particularly that the writers on the law of nations, have borrowed l^berally
from them, -- This sou^ce of the notion does not stamp it with much authority.

The history of Rome proves, that war and conquest were the great business of
that people, and that, for the most part, commerce was little cul^ivated. Hence
it was ^turn, that the rights of war should be carried to an extreme, (...)
mit^gated by the softening and human^z^ng influence of commerce. Indeed the
world was yet too young -- moral science too much in its cradle -- to render
the Roman jurisprudence a proper model for implicit imitation: accordingly, in
this very particular of the rights of war, it seems to have been equally a rule
of the Roman law, "That those who go into a foreign country in time of peace,
if war is suddenly kindled, are made the slaves of those among whom, now become
enemies by ill fortune, they are apprehended." In pace quae pervenerunt ad
alteros si belium subita exercisset, little servi officientur, apud quos j^m
hosts suo sato de prebendantur Digest lib. xlix. tit. 15. l. 12.


This right of capturing the property and of making slaves of the persons of
enemies, is reserved, as we learn from Cicero, to the right of kil^ing them,
which was regarded absolute and unqualified, extending to women and children.
Thus it would seem, that in the principle of the Roman law, we might rightfully
kill a foreigner, who had come into our country during peace and was there at
the breaking out of a war with his country -- Can there be a position more
horrible, more detestable?

The improvement of mor^l science in modern times, restrains the right of
killing an enemy to the time of battle or resistance, except by way of
punishment for some enormous breach of the laws of nations, or for self
preservation in case of immediate and urgent danger, and reject altogether the
right of imposing slavery on captives.

Why should there have been a hesitation to reject other odious consequences of
so exceptionable a principle? -- What respect is due to maxims which have so
inhuman a foundation?

And yet a deference for those maxims has milled writers who have professedly
undertaken to teach the principles of national ethics and the spirit of rapine
has continued to a late period to consecrate the relies of ancient barbarism
with too many precedents of imitation. E^se it would not now be a quest^on with
any, Whether the person or prope^ty of a foreigner, being in our country with
permission of the laws of peace, could be liable to molestation or injury by
the laws of war -- merely on account of the war.

Turning from the a^ients to the moderns, we find that the learned Grotius
quotes and adopts as the basis of his opinions, the rules of the Roman law,
though he in several particular^, qualifies them by the humane innovations of
later times.

On the very question of the right to confiscate or sequester private debts,
his opinion, as far as it appears, seems to be at variance with his premises,
^^eering a kind of middle course. His expressions (L.III.C.XX. Sec. XVI.) are
these, "Those debts which are due to private persons, at the beginning of the
war, are not to be accounted for given (that is, when peace is made) for these
are not acquired by the right of war, but only forbidden to be demanded in time
of war therefore, the impediment being removed, that is, the war ended, they
retain their full force." His idea appears from this passage to be, that the
right of war is limited to the arresting of the payment of private debts during
its continuance, and not to the confiscation or annihilation of the debt. --
Nor is it clear whether he means that this arestation is to be produced by a
special act of prohibition, or by the operation of some rule of law which
denies to an alien enemy a right of action. This feeble and hetergeneous
opinion may be conceived to have proceeded from a conflict between a respect
for ancient maxims and the impression of more enlightened views, inculcated by
the principles of commerce and civilization.

Bynkershoeck is more consistent -- Adopting with Grotius, the rule of the
Roman law in its full rigor, he is not frightened at the consequences, but
follows them throughout. Hence he bestows a chapter upon the defense of the
proposition, quoted in a former number (to wit) that Qaestionum Juris Public,
lib. i. c^ 7. "Cum ea sit belli conditio ut hosts sint omni jure spoliati
proscriptique rationis est quascunque res hosticum apud hosts, inventas,
dominum mutare et Fisc^ cedere."
"Since it is the condition of war, that enemies may with full right be
despoiled and proscribed, it is reasonable that whatsoever things of an enemy
are found among his enemies, should change their owner and go to the treasury,"
and in several places he expressly applies the rule to things in action, or
debts and credits, as well as to things in possession.

In confirmation of his doctrine, he adduces a variety of examples which
embrace a period of something more than a century beginning in the year 1556,
and ending in the year 1667, and which comprehend as actors on the principle he
espouses, France, Spain, the States General, Denmark, the Bishops of Cologne
and Munster. But he acknowledges that the right has been questioned, and notes
particularly that when the king of France and the Bishops of Munster and
Cologne in the year 1673 confiscated the debts which their subjects owed to the
confederate Belgians, the States General, by an edict of the 6th of July of
that year, censured the proceeding and decreed that those debts could not be
paid but to the true creditors, and that the exaction of them whether by force
or with consent, was not to be esteemed valid.

If from the great pains which appear to have been taken by this learned writer
to collect examples in proof of his doctrine, we are to conclude that the
collection is tolerably complete, we are warranted in drawing this inference,
that he has not cured any defect, which reason may discern in his principle, by
any thing like the evidence of such a general uniform and continued usage as is
requisite to introduce a rule of the positive law of nations, in derogation
from the natural.

A minority only of the powers of Europe are shown to have been implicated in
the practice, and among the majority not included, are several of the most
considerable and respectable. One of these, Great Britain, is represented as
having acquiesced in it in the treaties of peace between her and some of the
powers, who went into the practice to her detriment, by relinquishing the claim
of restitution -- But war must at length end in peace, and the sacrifices a
nation makes to the latter is a slight argument of her consent to the principle
of the injury which she may have sustained. -- I have not been able to trace a
single instance, in which Great Britain has herself set the example of such a
practice; nor could she do it as has elsewhere appeared, without contravening
an article of Magna Charta unless by way of reprisal for the same thing done
toward her. The suggestion of an instance in the present war with France will
hereafter be examined. In such a question, the practice of a nation which has
for ages figured pre-eminently in the commercial world, is entitled to
particular notice.

It is not unworthy of remark, that the common law of England, from its
earliest dawnings, contradicted the rule of the Roman law. It exempted from
seizure, by a subject of England, the property of a foreigner brought there
before a war, but gave to the first seizer, or occupant, the property which
came thereafter the breaking out of the war. The noble principles of the common
law, cannot cease to engage our respect, while we have before our eyes so many
monuments of their excellence in our own jurisprudence.

It also merits to be dwelt upon, that the United Netherlands, for sometime the
first, and long only the second in commercial consequence, formerly disputed
the right, and condemned the practice of confiscating private debts, though
themselves, in some instances, guilty of it.

And it is likewise a material circumstance, that Bynckershock, who seems to
have written in the year 1737, does not adduce any precedent later than the
year 1667, 70 years before his publication.

The subsequent period will, it is believed, be found, upon strict enquiry,
equally barren of similar precedents. -- The exceptions are so few, The case of
Prussia and the Silesia Loan is the only one I have ^ound.
that we may fairly assert, that there is the negative usage of near a century
and an half against the pretended right. This negative usage of a period, the
most enlightened as well as the most commercial in the annals of the world, is
of the highest authority. The former usage, as being partial and with numerous
exceptions, was insufficient to establish a rule. The contrary usage, or the
renunciation of the former usage, as being general, as attended with few or no
exceptions, is sufficient even to work a change in the rigor of an ancient
rule, if it could be supposed to have been established. Much more is it
sufficient to confirm and enforce the lesson of reason and to dissipate the
clouds which error, and some scattered instances of violence and rapine, may
have produced.

Of the theoretical writers, whom I had an opportunity of consulting, Va^el is
the only remaining one, who directly treats the point. His opinion has been
said to favor the right to confiscate and sequester. But when carefully
analized, it will add to the proofs of the levity with which the opposers of
the treaty make assertions.

After stating, among other things, that "war gives the same right over any sum
of money, due by a neutral nation to our enemy, as it can give over his other
goods;" he proceeds thus, "When Alexander, by conquest, became absolute master
of Thebes, he remitted to the Thessalians, an hundred talents, which they owed
to the Thebans. The sovereign has naturally the same right over what his
subjects may be indebted to his enemies, therefore he may confiscate debts of
this nature, if the term of payment happen in the time of war, or at least he
may prohibit his subjects paying while the war lasts. But at present, in regard
to the advantage and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe have
departed from this rigor. And as this custom has been generally received, he
who should act contrary to it, would injure the public faith; for strangers
trusted his subjects, only from a firm persuasion, that the general custom
would be observed. The state does not so much as touch the sums which it owes
to the enemy. Every where, in case of a war, funds credited to the public, are
exempt from confiscation and seizure. Book iii. chap. ^, sect. 77.
"

The first proposition of the above passage amounts to this, that a "sovereign
naturally, that is according to the law of nature, may confiscate debts which
his subjects owe to his enemies, if the term of payment happen in the time of
war, or at least he may prohibit his subjects from paying while the war lasts."

So far as this goes, it agrees with the principle which I combat, that there
is a natural right to confiscate or sequester private debts in time of war: so
far Vatel accords with the Roman law and with Bynkershoek.

But he annexes a whimsical limitation "If the term of payment happen in the
time of war" -- and there is a marked uncertainty and hesitation -- the
sovereign "may confiscate, or at least he may prohibit his subjects from paying
while the war lasts" -- It Is evident that the circumstance of the time of
payment can have no influence upon the right. If it reaches to confiscation,
which takes away the substance of the thing, the mere incident of the happening
of payment must be immaterial. If it is confined to the arresting of payment
during the war, the reason of the rule, the object being to prevent supplies
going to the enemy, will apply it as well to debts which become payable before
the war, as to those which became payable in the war. Whence this inaccuracy in
so accurate a thinker? Whence the hesitation about ^o important a point, as
whether the pretended right extends to confiscation or simply to sequestration?
They must be accounted for, as in another case by the conflict between respect
for ancient maxims and the impressions of juster views, seconded by the more
enlightened policy of modern times.

But while Vatel thus countenances in the first part of the passage the
opinion, that the natural law of nations authorizes the confiscation or
sequestration of private debts, in what immediately follows, he most explicitly
and unequivocally informs us, that the rule of that law in this respect has
been derogated from by modern usage or custom -- in other words, that the
modern customary law has changed in this particular the ancient natural law. --
Let his own words be consulted -- At present (says he) in regard to the
advantage and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe have departed
from this rigor -- And as this custom has been generally received, he who
would act contrary to it would injure the public faith; for strangers trusted
his subjects only from the firm persuasion that the general custom would be
observed."

The testimony is full, that there is a GENERAL CUSTOM received and adopted by
all the sovereigns of Europe, which obviates the rigor of the ancient rule;
the non observance of which custom would violate the public faith of a nation
-- as being a breach of an implied contract, by the virtue of the custom, upon
the strength of which foreigners trust his subjects.

Language cannot express more clearly a rule of the customary law of nations,
the essence of which, we have seen, is general usage, implying a tacit
agreement to ^onform to the rule -- The one cited is denominated a CUSTOM
generally received a GENERAL CUSTOM; all the sovereigns of Europe are stated to
be parties to it, and it is represented as obligatory on the public faith,
since this would be injured by a departure from it.

The consequence is, that if the right pretended did exist by the natural law,
it has given way to the customary law, for it is a contradiction to call that a
right which cannot be exercised without breach of faith. The result is, that by
the present customary law of nations, within the sphere of its action, there is
no right to confiscate or sequester private debts in time of war, The reason or
motive of which law is the advantage and safety of commerce.

As to private property in public funds, the right to meddle with them is still
more emphatically negatived. "The state does not so much as touch the sums it
owes to the enemy. Every where in case of war, funds credited to the public are
exempt from confiscation and SEIZURE." These terms manifestly exclude seque
stration as well as confiscation.

In another place the author gives the reason of this position, book ii. chap.
xviii. "In reprisals, the goods of a subject are seized in the same manner as
those of the state or the sovereign. Every thing that belongs to the nation is
liable to reprisals as soon as it can be seized, provided it be not a deposit
trusted to the public faith. -- This DEPOSIT is found in our hands, only in
consequence of that confidence, which the proprietor has put in our good faith,
and it ought to be respected, even in case of open war. Thus it is usual to
behave in France, England, and elsewhere, with respect to the money which
foreigners have placed in the public funds." The same principle, if he had
reflected without bias, would have taught him, that reprisals could rightfully
extend to nothing that had been committed with their permission, to the custody
and guardianship of our laws, during a state of peace; and consequently, that
no property of our enemy, which was in our country before the breaking out of
the war, is justlyfiable to them. For is not all such property equally a
deposit, trusted to the public faith? What foreigner would acquire property in
our country, or bring and lodge it there, but in the confidence, that in case
of war it would not become an object of reprisals? Why then resort to custom
for a denial of the right to confiscate or sequester private debts? Why not
trace it to the natural injustice and perfidy of taking away in war, what a
foreigner is permitted to own and have among us in peace? Why ever have
considered, that as a natural right which was contrary to good faith tacitly
pledged? This is evidently the effect of too much deference to ferocious maxims
or antiquity, of undue complaisance to some precedents of modern rapacity.

He had avoided the error, by weighing maturely the consequences of his own
principle in another case: "He who declares war, says he, does not confiscate
the immovable goods possessed in his country by his enemy's subjects: in
permitting them to purchase and possess those goods, he has in this respect
admitted them into the number of his subjects," that is, he has admitted them
to a like privilege with his subjects, as to the real property they were
permitted to acquire and hold. But, why should a less privilege attend the
license to purchase. possess or ^e other kinds of property in his country? The
reason, which is the permission of the sovereign, must extend to the protection
of one kind of property as well as another, if the permission extends to both.

Vate^ advances in this and in the passage quoted immediately before it, the
true principles which ought to govern the question, though he does not pursue
them in their consequences; else he would not have deduced the exemption of
private debts, from confiscation or sequestration, from the customary law of
nations, but would have traced it to the natural or necessary law; as founded
upon the obligations of good faith; upon the tacit promise of security
connected with the permission, to acquire property within or bring property
into our country; upon the protection which every government owes to a property
of which it legalizes the acquisition, or the deposit within its jurisdiction:
and in the case of immovable goods or real estate, of which he admits a right
to sequester the income, to prevent its being remitted to the enemy, he would
have perceived the necessity of leaving this effect to be produced by the
obstructions intrinsically incident to a state of war; since there is no reason
why the income should be less privileged than the substance of the thing.

It appears then, that the doctrine of Vatel, collectively taken, amounts to
this, that there is a natural right of war in certain cases to confiscate or
sequester an enemy's property found within our country; but that, on motives
relative to commerce and public credit, the customary law of Europe has
restrained that right as to private debts, and private property in public
funds. His opinion, therefore, favors the principle of the article of the
treaty under examination, as consonant with the present European law of nations
-- and it is an opinion of greater weight than any that can be cited; as well
on account of the capacity, diligence, information and the precision of ideas,
which characterise the work in which it is contained, as on account of the
recency of that work It appears to have been written about the year 1760.
.

A question may be asked -- Does this customary law of nations, as established
in Europe, bind the United States? An affirmative answer to this is warranted
by conclusive reasons.

1. The United States, when a member of the British empire were in this
capacity a party to that law, and not having dissented from it when they became
independent, they are to be consid^red as having continued a party to it. 2.
The common law of England, which was and is in force in each of these states,
adopts the law of nations, the positive equal^y with the natural, as a part of
itself. 3. Ever since we have been an independent nation, we have appealed to,
and acted upon, the modern law of nations as understood in Europe -- various
resolu^ions of Congress during our revolution -- the correspondencies of our
executive officers -- the decisions of our courts of admiralty all recogn^ze
this standard. 4. Executive and legislative acts, and the proceedings of our
courts, under the present government, speak a similar language. The President's
proclamation of neutrality, refers expressly to the modern law of nations,
which must necessarily be understood of that prevailing in Europe, and acceded
to by this country; and the general voice of our nation, together with the very
arguments used against the treaty, accord in the same point. It is undubitable,
that the customary law of European nations is, as a part of the common law, and
by adoption, that of the United States.

But let it not be forgotten, that I derive the vindication of the article from
a higher source, from the natural or necessary law of nature, from the eternal
principles of morality and good faith.

There is one more authority which I ^all cite in reference to a part of the
question; property in the public funds. It is a report to the British King in
the year 1753, from Sir George Lee, Judge of the prerogative court, Dr. Paul,
Advocate General in the courts of civil law. Sir Dudley Rider, and Mr. Murray,
Attorney and Solicitor General Sir George L^ was afterward the very celebrated
Chief Justice (...), and Mr. Murray was the late Lord Mansfield.
, on the subject of the Sile^ia loan, sequestrated by the King of Prussia, by
way of reprisal, for the capture and condemnation of some Prussian vessels.
This report merits all the respect which can be derived from consummate
knowledge and ability in the reporters; but it would lose much of its weight
from the want of impartiality, which might fairly be imputed to the officers of
one of the governments interested in the contest, had it not since received the
confirming eulogies of impartial and celebrated foreign writers. Among these,
Vatel calls it an excellent piece on the law of nations.

The following is an extract: -- "The King of Prussia has pledged his royal
word to pay the Silesia debt to private men. It is negotiable, and many parts
of it have been assigned to the subjects of other powers. It will not be easy
to find an instance where a prince has thought fit to make re^sals upon a debt
(...) from himself to private men. There is a confid^nce that this will not be
done. A private man lends money to a princ^ upon an engagement of honor,
because a prince cannot be compelled like other men in an adversary way, by a
court of justice. So scrupulously did England and France adhere to this public
faith, that even during the war, they suffered no inquiry to be made whether
any part of the public debt was due to the subjects of the enemy, though it is
certain many English had money in the French funds, and many French had money
in (...)."

The universal obligation of good faith is ^erer^ enforced on special ground,
by the point of honor; to confirm the position that money which a Sovereign or
State owes to private men, is not a proper object of reprisals.

This case of the Silesia debt is the only example within the present century,
prior to the existing war, which I have been able to trace, violating the
immunity of private debts or private property, in public funds. It is a
precedent that can have little weight not only from its singularity, but from
the character of its author. Frederick was a consummate General, a profound
statesman; but he was very far from being a severe moralist. This is not the
only instance in which he tarnished his faith, and the friends of his fame must
regret that he could not plead on this occasion those mighty and dazzling
reasons of state, which are the specious apologies for his other aberr^tions.

It is a^erted, that the present war of Europe affords examples of the
practice, which I reprobate, and that Great Britain herself has given one. The
present war of Europe is of so extraordinary a complexion, and has been
conducted in all respects, upon such extraordinary principles, that it may
truly be regarded as an exception to all general rules, as a precedent for
nothing. It is rather a beacon, warning mankind to shun the pernicious example,
than a model inviting to imitation. The human passions, on all sides, appear to
have been wrought up to a pitch of frenzy, which has set reason, justice, and
humanity, at defiance.

Those who have nevertheless thought fit to appeal to the example of this very
anomalous war, have not detailed to us the precise nature or course of the
transactions to which they refer, nor do I know that sufficient documents have
appeared in this country to gu^de us in the enquiry.

The imperfect evidence which has fallen under my observation respects France
and Great Britain, and seems to exhibit these facts.

France passed a decree s^questering the property of the subjects of the powers
at war with her, and in the same or another decree obliged all those of her
citizens, who had mo^ies owing to them in foreign countries, to draw bills upon
their debtors, and to furnish those bills to the government by way of loan, or
upon certain terms of payment.

The government of Great Britain, in consequence of this proceeding, passed two
different acts, the objects of which were to prevent the payment of those
bills, and to secure the ^ums due for the benefit of the original creditors.
These acts appoint certain commissioners to whom reports are to be made of all
French property in the hands of British subjects, and who are empowered to
receive and sell goods and other effects -- to collect debts, and to deposit
the proceeds in the bank of London, or in other safe keeping if preferred or
required by parties interested. The moneys deposited are to be invested in the
purchase of public stock, together with the interest or dividends arising from
time to time, to be eventually accounted for to the proprietors. The
commissioners have likewise a discretion, upon demand, to deliver over their
effects and moneys to such of the proprietors as do not reside within the
French dominions.

I shall not enter into a discussion of the propriety of these acts of Great
Britain. -- It is sufficient to observe, that they are attended with
circumstances which very essentially discriminate them from the thing for which
they are quoted. The act of the French government was in substance a compulsory
assumption of all the property of its citizens in foreign countries This
extraordinary measure presented two options to the governments of these
countries. -- One to consider the transfer as virtu^lly effected, and to
confiscate the property as being no longer that of the individuals, but that of
the government of France -- the other to defeat the effect of her plan by tying
up the property for the benefit of the original creditors, in exclusion of the
drafts which they were compelled to draw. Great Britain appears to have elected
the latter course. If we suppose her sincere in the motive, and there is
fairness and fidelity in the execution, the issue will be favorable rather
than detrimental to the rights of private property.

I have said, that there was an option to confiscate. A government may
rightfully confiscate the property of an adversary government. No principle of
justice or policy occurs to forbid reprisals upon the public or national
property of an enemy. That case is foreign in every view to the principles
which protect private property. The exemption stipulated by the 10th article of
the treaty is accordingly restricted to the latter.

It appears that the government of France convinced by the effect of the
experiment, that the sequestration of the property of the subjects of her
enemies was impolitic, thought fit to rescind it. -- Hence, on the 19th of
December 1794, the Convention decreed as follows:

"The decree concerning the sequestration of the property of the subjects of
hostile powers is annulled. Such sums as have been paid by French citizens into
the Treasury in consequence of those decrees will be reimbursed."

In the course of the debates upon this decree, it was declared, that the
decrees which it was to repeal, had prepared the ruin of commerce, and had
severed, against the right of nations, the obligations of merchants in
different states. This is a direct admission that the sequestration was
contrary to the law of nations.

As far as respects France, then, the precedent upon the whole is a strong
condemnation of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester.

This formal renunciation of the ground, which was at first taken, is a very
emphatical protest against the principle of the measure It ought to serve us
too as an instructive warning against the employment of so mischievous and
disgraceful an expedient. And as to England, as has been shown, the precedent
is foreign to the question.

Thus we perceive that opinion and usage, far from supporting the right to
confiscate or sequester private property, on account of rational wars, when
referred to the modern standard, turn against that right and coincide with the
principle of the article of treaty under examination.

What remains to be offered will farther illustrate its propriety, and
reconcile it to all reflecting men.

No. XXI.
SINCE the closing of my last number I have accidentally turned to a passage of
VATEL, which is so pertinent to the immediate subject of that paper that I
cannot refrain from interrupting the progress the discussion to quote it; it is
in these words (b. 3. chapter 4. sect. 63) "The sovereign declaring war, can
neither detain those subjects of the enemy who are within his dominions at the
time of the declaration, nor their effects. They came in his country on the
public faith. By permitting them to enter his territories and continue there,
he tacitly promised them liberty, and security for their return." This passage
contains, explicitly, the principle which is the general basis of my argument,
namely, that the permission to a foreigner to come with his effects into, and
acquire others within, our country, in time of peace virtually pledges the
public faith for the security of his person and property in the event of war.
How can this be reconciled with the natural right (controuled only by the
customary law of nations) which this writer admits, to confiscate the debts due
by the subjects of a state to its enemies? I ask once more, can there be a
natural right to do that which includes a violation of faith?

It is plain to a demonstration, that the rule laid down in this passage, which
is so just and perspicuous as to speak conviction to the heart and
understanding, unites the natural with the customary law of nations, in a
condemnation of the pretension to confiscate or sequester the private property
of our enemy found in our country at the breaking out of a war.

Let us now proceed to examine the policy and expediency of such a pretension.

In this investigation I shall assume, as a basis of argument, the following
position, That it is advantageous to nations to have commerce with each other.

Commerce it is manifest, like any other object of enterprise or industry, will
prosper in proportion as it is secure. Its security, consequently promoting its
prosperity extends its advantages. Security is indeed essential to its having a
due and regular course.

The pretension of a right to confiscate or sequester the effects of foreign
merchants in the case in question, is in its principele fatal to that necessary
security. Its free exercise would destroy external commerce; or, which is
nearly the same thing, reduce it within the contracted limits of a game of
hazard, where the chance of large profits, accompanied by great risks would
tempt alone the adventurous and the desperate. Those enterprises, which from
circuitous or long voyage, flowness of sales, incident to the nature of certain
commodities, the necessity of credit, or from other causes, demand considerable
time for their completion, must be renounced* Credit indeed must be banished
from all operations of foreign commerce; an engine, the importance of which to
its vigorous and successful prosecution will be doubted by none, who will be
guided by experience or observation.

It cannot need amplification to elucidate the truth of these positions. The
storms of war occur so suddenly and so often, as to forbid the supposition,
that the merchants of one country would trust their property to any extent, or
for any duration in another country, which was in the practice of confiscating
or sequestrating the effects of its enemies found within its territories at the
commencement of a war.

That practice therefore would necessarily paralize and wither the commerce of
the country in which it obtained. Accordingly, nations attentive to the
cultivation of commerce which were betrayed by temporary considerations into
particular instances of that atrocious practice, have been led by the
experience of its mischiefs, to abstain from it ^n later times. They saw that
to have persisted in it, would have been to abandon competition on equal terms,
in the lucrative and beneficial field of commerce.

It is no answer to this to say, that the exercise of the right might be
ordinarily suspended, though the right itself might be maintained for
extraordinary and great emergencies.

In the first place, as the ordinary forbearance of its exercise would be taken
by foreigners for evidence of an intention never to exer^se it, by which they
would be enticed into large deposits that would not otherwise have taken place;
a departure from the general course would always involve an act of treachery
and cruelty.

In the second place; the possibility of the occasional exercise of such a
right, if conceived to exist, would at least be a slow poison, conducing to a
sickly habit of commerce; and in a series of time would be productive of much
more evil than could be counterbalanced by any ^ood which it might be possible
to obtain in the contemplated emergency, by the use of the expedient.

Le^ experience decide -- Examples of confiscation and sequestration have been
given -- When did the dread of them prevent a war? when did it cripple an
enemy, so as to disable him from exertion, or forced him into a submission to
the views of his adversary? When did it even sensibly conspire to either of
these ends? If it has ever had any such effect, the evidence of it has not come
within my knowledge.

It is ^rue, that as between Great Britain and the United States, the
expectation of such effects is better warranted than perhaps in any other cases
that have existed, because we commonly owe a larger debt to that country, than
is usual between nations, and there is a relative state of things, which tends
to a continuation of this situation.

But how has the matter operated hitherto? In the late war between the two
countries, certain states confiscated the debts due from their citizens to
British creditors, and these creditors actually suffered great losses -- The
British cabinet must have known that it was not impossible the same thing might
happen in another war, and on a more general scale: yet the appearances were
extremely strong, at a particular juncture, that it was their plan, either from
ill will, from the belief that popular opinion would ultimately drag our
government into the war, from the union of these two, or from other causes to
force us into hostilities with them. Hence the apprehension of acts of
confiscation, or sequestration, was not sufficient to deter from hostile views,
or to insure pacific dispositions.

It may be pretended, that the menace of this measure had a restraining
influence on the subsequent conduct of Great Britain. But if we ascribe nothing
to the measures which government actually pursued under the pressure of the
provocations received, we at least find, in the course of European events, a
better solution of a change of policy in the cabinet of Great Britain, than
from the dread of a legislative piracy on the debts due their merchants.

The truth unfortunately is, that the passions of men stifle calculation, that
nations the most attentive to pecuniary considerations easily surrender them to
ambition, to jealousy, to anger, or to revenge.

For the same reason, the actual experiment of an exercise of the pretended
right, by way of reprisal for an injury complained of, would commonly be as
inefficacious, as the menace of it, to arrest general hostilities. Pride is
roused -- resentment kindled; and where there i^ even no previous disposition
to those hostilities, the probability is, that they follow. Nations, like
individuals, ill brook the idea of receding from their pretensions under the
rod, or of admitting the justice of an act of retaliation or reprisal, by
submitting to it. Thus we learn from the king of Prussia himself, that the
sequestration of the Silesia debt, instead of procuring the restoration for
which it was designed, was on the point of occasioning an open rupture between
him and Great Britain, when the supervention of a quarrel with France diverted
the storm, by rendering him necessary as an ally.

Perhaps it may be imagined, that the practice of confiscation or sequestration
would be more efficacious to wound and disable Great Britain, in case of war,
than to prevent it -- But this also, is a vain chimera! A nation, that can at
pleasure raise by loan, twenty millions sterling, would be in little danger of
being disconcerted or enfeebled in her military enterprises, by the taking away
or arresting of three or four millions due to her merchants. Did it produce
distress and disorder among those whom it affected and their connecions? If
that disorder was sufficient to threaten a general derangement of mercantile
credit, and with it of the public finances, the pending war affords an example,
that the public purse or credit could be brought successfully into action for
the support of the sufferers. Three or four millions of exchequer bills applied
in loans, would be likely to suffice to prevent the partial evil from growing
into a national calamity.

But we forget, that as far as the interruption of the payment of the debts due
to her merchants could be supposed to operate upon Great Britain, war itself
would essentially answer the purposes of confiscation or sequestration -- By
interrupting trade and intercourse, it is in fact, in a great degree a virtual
sequestration. Remittances to any extent become impracticable. There are few
ways in which, on account of the state of war, it is lawful to make them; and
debtors are for the most part enough disposed to embrace pretexts of
procrastination.

The inconvenience of deferred payment would, therefore, be felt by
Great Britain, with little mitigation from the bare existence of war; without
the necessity of our government incurring the discredit and responsibility of a
special interference.

Indeed, as far as dread of eventual loss can operate, it ought, in a great
measure to have its effect exclusive of the idea of confiscation. Great Britain
must want reflection not to be sensible, that in making war upon us, she makes
war upon her own merchants; by the depredations upon our trade destroying those
resources from which they are to be paid. If she be indifferent to this
consideration, it will be because she is governed by some motive or passion
powerful enough to dispose her to run the risk of the entire loss -- in the
reliance of obtaining indemnification, by the acquisitions of war, or in the
terms of peace.

Will it be said, that the seizure of the debts would put into the hands of our
government a valuable resource for carrying on the war? -- This upon trial
would prove as fallacious as all the rest. Various inducements would prevent
debtors from paying into the treasury. -- Some would decline it from
conscientious scruples, from a doubt of the rectitude of the thing -- others
with intent to make a merit with their creditors of the concealment, and to
favor their own future credit and advantage -- others from a desire to retain
the money in their own employment, and a great number from the apprehension
that the treaty of peace might revive their responsibility to the creditors,
with the embarrassment to themselves of getting back, as well as they could,
the moneys which they had paid into the treasury. Of this, our last treaty of
peace, in the opinion of able judges, gave an example. These causes and others,
which do not as readily occur, would oppose great obstacles to the execution of
the measure.

But severe laws, inflicting heavy penalties might compel it -- Experience does
not warrant a sanguine reliance upon this expedient, in a case in which great
opportunity of concealment is united with strong motives of inclination or
interest -- It would require an inquisition, justly intolerable to a free
people -- penalties which would confound the due proportion between crime and
punishment, to detect or deter from concealment and evasion, and to execute the
law -- Probably no means less efficacious than a revolutionary tribunal and a
guillotine would go near to answer the end. -- There are but few, I trust, to
whom these would be welcome means.

We conclude, therefore, that the law would be evaded to an extent, which would
disappoint the expectations from it as a resource. Some moneys no doubt would
be collected but the probability is, that the amount would be insignificant
even in the scale of a single campaign. -- But, should the collection prove as
complete, as it ordinarily is, between debtor and creditor, it would little, if
at all, exceed the expense of a campaign.

Hence we perceive, that regarding the measure, either as a mean of disabling
our enemies or as a resource to ourselves, its consequence dwindles upon a
close survey; it cannot pretend to a magnitude, which would apologize, either
for a sacrifice of national honor or candor, or for a deviation from the true
principles of commerce and credit.

But let us take a further view of its disadvantages.

A nation, in case of war, is under no responsibility for the delinqencies or
frauds of its citizens, who are debtors to those of its enemy, if it does not
specially interfere with the payment of the debts which they owe. But if it
interposes its authority to prevent the payment, it gives a claim of
indemnification to its adversary, for the intervening losses which those
delinquencies or frauds may occasion. Whether, on the making of peace, this
would be insisted upon or waved, might depend much on the good or ill success
of the war; but every thing which adds to the catalogue of our enemy's just
pretensions, especially when the fortune of war has been pretty equal, is an
evil, either as an additional obstacle to speedy peace, or as an ingredient to
reader the terms of it less advantageous to ourselves. And it is therefore
unwise in a government to increase the list of such pretensions, by a measure,
which, without utility to itself, administers to the indolence of negligent,
and to the avidity fraudulent, individuals.

Further -- Every species of reprisal or annoyance, which a power at war;
employs contrary to liberality or justice, of doubtful propriety in the
estimation of the law of nations, departing from that moderation, which, in
latter times, serves to mitigate the severities of war; by furnishing a pretext
or provocation to the other side, to resort to extremities, serves to embitter
the spirit of hostility, and to extend its ravages. War is then apt to become
more sanguinary, more wasting, and every way more destructive. This is a ground
of serious reflection to every nation, both as it regards humanity and policy;
to this country it presents itself, accompanied with considerations of peculiar
force. A vastly extended sea coast, overspread with defenseless towns, would
offer an abundant prey to an incensed and malignant enemy, having the power to
command the sea. The usages of modern war forbid hostilities of this kind; and
though they are not always respected, yet, as they are never violated, unless
by way of retaliation for a violation of them on the other side, without
exciting the reprobation of the impartial part of mankind, sullying the glory,
and blasting the reputation of the party which disregards them, this
consideration has in general force sufficient to induce an observance of them.
But the confiscation or sequestration of private debts, or private property in
public funds, now generally regarded as an odious and unwarrantable measure,
would, as between us and Great Britain, contain a poignant sting. Its effect to
exasperate, in an extreme degree, both the nation and government of that
country cannot be doubted. A disposition to retaliate, is a natural
consequence; and it would not be difficult for us to be made to suffer beyond
any possible degree of advantage to be derived from the occasion of the
retaliation. It were much wiser to leave the property of British subjects an
untouched pledge for the moderation of its government, in the mode of
prosecuting the war.

Besides (as if requisite might be proved from the records of history) in
national controversies, it is of real importance to conciliate the good opinion
of mankind; and it is even useful to preserve or gain that of our enemy. -- The
latter facilitates accommodation and peace; the former attracts good offices,
friendly interventions, sometimes direct support from others. The exemplary
conduct, is general, of our country, in our contest for independence, was
probably not a little servicable to us this way; it secured to the intrinsic
goodness of our cause, every collateral advantage, and gave it a popularity
among nations unalloyed and unimpaired, which even stole into the cabinets of
Princes. A contrary policy tends to contrary consequences. Though nations, in
the main, are governed by what they suppose their interest, he must be
imperfectly versed in human nature, who thinks it indifferent whether the
maxims of a state tend to excite kind or unkind dispositions in others, or who
does not know that these dispositions may insensibly mould or bias the views of
self interest. This were to suppose that rulers only reason; do not feel; in
other words, are not men.

Moreover the measures of war ought ever to look forward to peace. The
confiscation of the private property of an enemy, must always be a point of
serious discussion when interest or necessity leads to negociations for peace.
Unless when absolutely prostrate by the war, restitution is likely to
constitute an ultimatum of the suffering party. It must be agreed to, or the
war protracted, and at last it is probable it must still be agreed to. Should a
refusal of restitution prolong the war for only one year, the chance is, that
more will be lost than was gained by the confiscation. Should it be necessary
finally to make it, after prolonging the war, the disadvantage will
preponderate in a ratio to the prolongation. Should it be, in the first
instance, assented to, what will have been gained? The temporary use of a fund
of inconsiderable moment in the general issue of the war, at the expense of
justice, character, credit, and perhaps of having sharpened the evils of war.

How infinitely preferable to have drawn an equal fund from our own resources,
which with good management is always practicable! -- If the restitution
includes damages, on account of the interference, for the failures of
individuals, the loan will have been the most costly that could have been made.
It has been elsewhere observed, that our treaty of peace with Great Britain
gives an example of restitution. The late one between France and Prussia gives
another; one which has since appeared between France and the Landgrave of
Hesse, gives another. This must become every day more and more a matter of
course, because the immunity of mercantile debts becomes every day more and
more important to trade, better understood to be so, and more clearly
considered as enjoined by the principles of the law of nations.

Thus we see, that in reference to the simple question of war and peace, the
measure of confiscation or sequestration is marked with ^ery feature of
impolicy.

We have before seen that the pretension of a right to do the one or the other
has a most inimical aspect toward commerce and credit. Let us resume this view
of the subject. -- The credit, which our merchants have been able to obtain
abroad essentially in Great Britain, has from the first settlement of our
country to this day been the animating principle of our foreign commerce. This
every merchant knows and feels; and every intelligent merchant is sensible that
for many years to come the case must continue the same. This, in our situation,
is a peculiar reason of the utmost force, for renouncing the pretension in
question.

The exercise of it, or the serious apprehension of its exercise, would
necessarily have one of two effects. It would deprive our merchants of the
credit, so important to them or it would oblige them to pay a premium for it
proportioned to the opinion of the risk. Or to speak more truly, it would
combine the two effects; it would cramp credit, and subject what was given to a
high premium. The most obvious and familiar principles of human action
establish, that the consideration for money or property, lent or credited, is
moderate or otherwise, according to the opinion of security or hazard, and that
the quantity of either to be obtained, on loan or credit, is in a great degree
contracted or enlarged by the same rule.

Thus should we, in the operations of our trade, pay exorbitantly for a
pretension, which is of little value, or rather which is pernicious even in the
relations to which its utility is referred. What folly to cherish it? How much
greater the folly ever to think of exercising it. It never can be exercised
hereafter in our coun-try, without great and lasting mischief.

Instead of cherishing so odious a pretension as "our best, our only weapon of
defense" -- Wisdom admonishes us to be eager to cast it from us, as a weapon
most dangerous to the wearer, proscribed by the laws of nations, by the laws of
honor, and by every principle of sound policy.

Every merchant ought to desire that the most perfect tranquillity on this
point in foreign countries, should facilitate to him on the best and cheapest
terms the credit for which he has occasion. And every other citizen ought to
desire, that he may be thus freed from a continual contribution in the enhanced
price of every imported commodity he consumes, toward defraying the premium
which the want of that tranquillity is calculated to generate.

No. XXII.
THE anology of the stipulation in the 10th article, with stipulations in our
other treaties, and in the treaties between other nations, is the remaining
top^c of discussion. After this, attention will be paid to such observations,
by way of objection to the article, as may not have been before expres^ly or
virtually answered.

The 20th art. of our treaty of amity and commerce with France, is in these
words, "for the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed, that
if a war shall break out between the said two nations, six months after the
proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and towns
where they live for selling and transporting their goods and merchandises, and
IF ANY THING be taken from them, or any INJURY be done them within that term by
either party, or the people of either, full satisfaction shall be made for the
same."

The 18th art. of our treaty of amity and commerce with the United Netherlands,
is in these words, "for the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is
agreed, that if a war should break out between their high mightinesses, the
States General of the United Netherlands and the United States of America,
there shall always be granted to the subjects on each side, the term of nine
months, after the date of the rupture, or the proclamation of the war, to the
end that they may retire with their effects and transport them where they
please, which it shall be lawful for them to do, as well as to sell and
transport their effects and goods with all freedom and without any hindrance,
and without being able to proceed, during the same term of nine months to any
arrest of their effects, much less of their persons; on the contrary, there
shall be given them for their vessels and effects which they would carry away,
passports and safe cond^cts for the nearest ports of their respective
countries; and for the time necessary for the voyage."

The 22d art. of our treaty of amity and commerce with Sweden, is in these
words, "In order to favor commerce on both sides as much as possible, it is
agreed, that in case war should break out between the two nations, the term of
nine months after the declaration of war shall be allowed to the merchants and
subjects respectively on one side and the other, in order that they may
withdraw with their effects and movables, which they shall be at liberty to
carry off or sell where they please, without the least obstacle -- nor shall
they seize their effects and much less their persons, during the said nine
months; but on the contrary, passports, which shall be valid for the time,
necessary for their return, shall be given them for their vessels and the
effects which they shall be willing to carry with them -- and, if any thing is
taken from them or any injury is done to them by one of the parties, their
people and subjects during the term above prescribed, full and entire
satisfaction shall be made to them on that account."

The 23d article of our treaty of amity and commerce with Prusssia, contains
this provision, "If war should arise between the two contracting parties, the
merchants of either country, then residing in the other, shall be allowed to
remain nine months to collect their DEBTS and settle their affairs, and may
depart freely, carrying off all their effects without molestation or hindrance."

These articles of four and the only commercial treaties we had with foreign
powers, prior to the pending treaty with Great Britain, tho differing in terms,
agree in substance except as to time, which varies from six to nine months. --
And they clearly amount to this, that upon the breaking out of a war between
the contracting parties in each case, there shall be for a term of six or nine
months for full protection and security to the persons and property of the
subjects of one, which are then in the territories of the other, with liberty
to collect their debts, The term "debts," is only expressed in the Pussian
treaty, but there are in the other treaties terms which include debts, and this
is the manife^t s^^rit and intent of all.
to sell their goods and merchandises, and to remove, with their effects,
wheresoever they please. -- For the term of six or nine months, there is a
complete suspension of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester, giving
or being designed to give an opportunity to withdraw the whole property, which
the subjects or citizens of one party have in the country of the other.

The differences between these stipulations and that in the article under
examination are chiefly these: -- the latter is confined to debts, and property
in the public funds and in public and private banks, without any limitation of
the duration of the protection -- The former comprehends, in addition, goods
and merchandises, with a limitation of the protection to a term of six or nine
months; but with the intent and supposition that the term allowed may and will
be adequate to entire security. The principle, therefore, of all the
stipulations is the same -- each aims at putting the person^ and property of
the subjects of one enemy, especially merchants, being within the country of
the other enemy at the commencement of a war, out of the reach of confiscation
or sequestration.

The persons, whose names are to our other treaties on the part of the United
States, are Benjamin Franklin, Silas D^^ne, Arthur Lee, John Adams, and Thomas
Jeff^rson. The three first are to the treaty with France -- Mr. Adams is singly
to that with the United Netherlands, Dr. Franklin, singly to that with Sweden,
and these two, with Mr. Jefferson, are jointly to that with Prussia. The treaty
with Sweden was concluded in April, 1783; that with Prussia, in August, 1785.
These dates repel the idea, that considerations of policy, relative to the war,
might have operated in the case.

We have consequently the sanction of all these characters to the principle,
which governed the stipulation entered into by Mr. Jay, and not only from the
ratification of the former treaties at different periods, distant from each
other, by different descriptions of men in our public councils, but also from
there never having been heard, in the community, a l^sp or murmur against the
stipulation, through the period of 17 years counting from the date of the
treaty with France, there is just ground to infer a coincidence of the public
opinion of the country.

I verily believe, that if in the year 1793 a treaty had been made with
England, containing an article similar to the 10th in the present treaty, it
would have met with general acqui-escence. The spirit of party had not then
predisposed men's minds to estimate the propriety of a measure according to the
agent, rather than according to its real fitness and quality. What ^ould then
have been applauded as wise, liberal, equitable and expedient, is now in more
instances than one, under the pestilential influence of that baneful spirit
condemned as improvident, impolitic and dangerous.

Our treaty with Prussia, the 23d article of which has been cited, is indeed a
model of liberality for the principles it contains, does honor to the parties,
and has been in this country a subject of deserved and unqualified admiration.
It contradicts, as if studiously, those principles of restriction and exclusion
which are the foundation of the mercantile and navigating system of Europe. It
grants perfect freedom of conscience and worship to subjects and citizens, with
no other restraint than that they shall not insult the religion of others:
adopting the rule, that free ships shall make free goods, it extends the
protection to the persons as well as to the goods of enemies. Enumerating, as
contraband, only arms, ammunition and military stores," it even provides that
contraband articles shall not be confiscated, but may be taken on the condition
of paying for them. It provides against embargoes of vessels and effects. It
expressly exempts women, children, scholars of every faculty, cultivators of
the earth, artizans, manufacturers, and fishermen, unarmed and inhabiting
unfortified towns, villages and places, -- and in general, all others, whose
occupations are for the common subsistence and benefit of mankind, their
houses, fields and goods, from molestation in their persons and employments and
from burning, wasting, and destruction, in time of war; and stipulates payment
at a reasonable price for what may be necessarily taken from them for military
use. It likewise protects from seizure and confiscation, in time of war,
vessels employed in trade, and inhibits the granting commissions to private
armed vessels, empowering them to take or destroy such trading vessels, or to
interrupt their commerce; and it makes a variety of excellent provisions to
secure to prisoners of war, a humane treatment.

These particulars are stated as evidence of the temper of the day, and of a
policy, which then prevailed, to bottom our system with regard to foreign
nations upon those grounds of moderation and equity by which reason religion
and philosophy had tempered the harsh maxims of more early times. It is painful
to observe an effort to make the public opinion, in this respect retrogade, and
to infect our councils with a spirit contrary to these salutary advances
toward improvement in true civilization and humanity.

If we pass from our own treaty to those between other nations, we find that
the provisions, which have been extracted from ours, have very nearly become
formulas in the Conventions of Europe. As examples of this may be consulted,
the following articles of treaties between Great Britain and other powers
(towit) the xvii. article of a treaty of peace and commerce with Portugal, in
1642; the xxxvi. article of a treaty of peace, commerce and alliance, with
Spain, in 1667; the xix. article of a treaty of peace, and the ii. of a treaty
of commerce with France both in 1713, and the xii. article of a treaty of
commerce and navigation with Russia, in 1766.

The article with Portugal provides, that if difficulties and doubts shall
arise between the two nations, which give reason to apprehend the interruption
of commerce public notice of it shall be given to the subjects on both sides,
and after that notice, two years shall be allowed to carry away their
merchandises and goods, and in the mean time there shall be no injury or
prejudice done to any persons or goods on either side.

The articles with France, in addition to the provisions common in other cases,
particularly stipulate, that during the term of the protection (six months)
"subjects on each side shall enjoy good and speedy justice, so that during the
said space of six months, they may be able to recover their goods and effects
entrusted as well to the PUBLIC as to private persons."

The article with Russia, besides stipulating an exemption from confiscation
for one year, with the privilege to remove and carry away in safety, provides
additionally, that the subjects of each party "shall be further permitted
either at or before their departure, to consign the effects which they shall
not yet have disposed of, as well as the debts that shall be due to them to
such persons as they shall think proper, in order to dispose of them according
to their desire and for their benefit, which debts the debtors shall be obliged
to pay in the same manner as if no such rupture had happened."

All these articles are, with those in our treaties, analagous in principle, as
heretofore particularly explained to the 10th article of the treaty under
discussion. That of the British treaty with France designates expressly debts
due from the public as well as those due from private persons. That with Russia
goes the full length of our tenth article; empowering the creditors on each
side to assign the debts, which they are not able to collect within the term of
their residence to whomsoever they think fit, for their own benefit, and
declaring that these debts shall be paid to the assignees in the same manner as
if no rupture had happened.

There is a document extant, which may fairly be supposed to express the sense
of the government of France, at the period to which it relates, of the
foundation of these stipulations. It is a memorial of Mr. Bussy, minister from
the Court of France to that of London, for negotiating peace, dated in the year
1761, and contains these passages. "As it is impracticable for two Princes, who
make war with each other, to agree between them which is the aggressor with
regard to the other, equity and humanity have dictated these precautions that
where an unforseen rupture happens suddenly and without any previous
declaration, foreign vessels, which, navigating under the security of peace,
and of treaties happen, at the time of the rupture, to be in either of the
respective ports, shall have time and full liberty to withdraw themselves.

"This wise provision so agreeable to the rules of good faith, constitutes a
part of the law of nations, and the article of the treaty, which sanctifies
these precautions, ought to be faithfully executed, notwithstanding the breach
of the other articles of the treaty, which is the natural consequence of the
war."

"The Courts of France and Great Britain used this salutary precaution in the
treaties of Utrecht and Aix la Chapelle."

These passages place the security stipulated in the treaties for the persons
and property of the subjects of one party found in the country of another, at
the beginning of a war, upon the footing of its constituting a part of the law
of nations which may be considered as a formal diplomatic recognition of the
principle for which we contend. As this p^n was not itself in di^pute betw^en
the two gov^ (...), but merely a collateral inference from it, applicable (...)
at sea, prior to a declaration of war, it may be regarded as a respectable
testimony of the law of nations on the principal point.

If the law of nations confers this exemption from seizure upon vessels, which
at the time of the rupture, happen to be in the respective ports of the
belligerent parties, it is evident that it must equally extend its protection
to debts contracted in a course of lawful trade. Vessels are particularly
mentioned, because the discussion turned upon vessels seized at sea. But the
reference to the treaties of Utrecht and Aix la Chapelle, shows that the
minister in his observation, had in view the whole subject matter of the
articles of those treaties, which provide for the security of merchants and
their effects in time of war.

This conformity, in principle, of the article under examination, with the
provisions in so many treaties of our own and of other nations, taken in
connection with the comment of Mr. Bussy, brings a very powerful support to the
article. It is additional and full evidence that our Envoy, in agreeing to it,
did not go upon new and untrodden ground; that on the contrary, he was in a
beaten tract; that in pursuing the dictates of reason, and the better opinion
of writers as to the rule of the law of nations respecting the point, he was at
the same time pursuing the examples of all the other treaties which we had
ourselves made, and of many of those of other countries.

It is now incumbent upon me to perform my promise of replying to such
objections to the Article as may remain unanswered by the preceding remarks. It
is with pleasure I note that the field is very narrow -- that indeed there
scarcely remains any thing which is not so frivolous and unimportant as almost
to forbid a serious replication -- It will therefore be my aim to be brief.

It is said there is only an apparent reciprocity in the article, millions
being due on our side, and little or nothing on the other.

The answer to this is, that no right being relinquished on either side, no
privilege granted, the stipulation amounting only to a recognition of a rule of
the law of nations, to a promise to abstain from injustice and breach of faith,
there is no room for an argument about reciprocity further than to require that
the promise should be mutual as is the case -- This is the only equiva^ent
which the nature of the subject demands or permits. -- It would be
dishonorable to except a boon merely for an engagement to fulfill a moral
obligation -- Indeed, as heretofore intimated, the true rule of reciprocity in
the stipulations of treaties is equal right, not equal advantage from each
several stipulation.

But it has been shown that the stipulation will be beneficial to us, by the
confidence which it will give on the other side, obviating and avoiding the
obstructions to trade, the injuries to and encumbrances upon credit, naturally
incident to the distrust and apprehension, which after the question had been
once moved, were to be expected -- Here, if a compensation were required, there
is one -- Let me add as a truth, which perhaps has no exception, however
incongenial with the fashionable patriotic creed, that in the wi^e order or
Providence, Nations in a temporal sense may s^ trust the maxim, that the
observance of justice carries with it its own and a full reward.

It is also said, that having bound ourselves by Treaty, we shall hereafter
lose the credit of moderation which would attend a forbearance to exercise the
right. But it having been demonstrated that no such right exists, we only
renounce a claim to the negative merit of not committing injustice, and we
acquire the positive praise of exhibiting a willingness to renounce explicitly
a pretension which might be the instrument of oppression and fraud -- It is
always honorable to give proof of upright intention.

It is further said, that under the protection of this stipulation the King of
Great Britain, who has already sp^dated in our funds (the Assertors would be
puzzled to bring proof of the fact) may engross the whole capital of the Bank
of the United States, and thereby secure the uncontrouled direction of it --
that he may hold the stock in the name of his Ambassador, or of some Citizen of
the United States, perhaps a senator, who if of the Virtuous twenty* might be
proud of the honor -- that thus our Citizens in time of peace might experience
the mortification of being beholden to British Directors, for the accomodations
they might want, that in time of war our operations might be cramped at the
pleasure of his majesty, and according as he should see fit or not to
accomodate our government with loans -- and, that both in peace and war we may
be reduced to the abject condition of having the whole capital of our National
Bank administered by his Britannic majesty.

Shall I treat this rhapsody with seriousness or with ridicule?

The capital of the bank of the United States is ten millions of dollars,
little short at the present market price, of three millions of pounds sterling
-- but from the natural operation of such a demand in raising price, its not
probable that much less than four millions sterling would suffice to complete
the monopoly. I have never understood, that the private purse of his Britannic
majesty, if it be true as asserted, that he has already witnessed a relish for
speculation in our funds (a fact however from which it was natural to infer a
more pacific disposition toward us) was so very ample as conveniently to spare
an item of such size for a speculation across the atlantic. But perhaps the
national purse will be brought to his aid As this supposes a parliamentary
grant, new taxes and new loans, it does not seem to be a very manageable thing,
without disclosure of the object, and if disclo^^d, so very unexampled an
attempt of a foreign government would present a case completely out of the
reach of all ordinary rules, justifying by the manifest dang^r to us even war
and the confiscation of all that had been purchased. For let it be remembered,
that the article does not protect the public property of a foreign government,
prince, or state, independent of the observation just made, that such a case
would be without the reach of ordinary rules. It may be added, that an attempt
of this kind, from the force of the pecuniary capital of Great Britain, would
as a precedent threaten and alarm all nations. -- Would consequences like these
be incurred?

But let it be supposed, that the inclination shall exist and that all
difficulties about funds have been surmounted -- still to effect the plan there
must be in all the stockholders a willingness to sell to the British king or
his agents, as well as the will and means on his part to purchase. Here too
some impediment might be experienced -- There are persons who might choose to
keep their property in the shape of bank stock, and live upon the income of it,
whom price would not readily tempt to part with it. Besides, there is an
additional obstacle to complete success. The United States themselves are
proprietors of two millions of the bank stock.

Of two things, one, either the monopoly of his Britannic majesty would be
known (and it would be a pretty arduous task to keep it a secret especially if
the stock was to stand as suggested in the name of his ambassador) or it would
be unknown and concealed under unsuspected names -- In the former supposition,
the observations already made cur. There would be no protection to it from the
article -- and the extraordinary nature, of the case would warrant any thing --
Would his majesty or the parliament choose to trust so large a property in so
perilous a situation?

If to avoid this, the plan should be to keep the operation unknown, the most
effectual method would be to place the stock in the names of our own citizens.
This it seems would be attended with no difficulty; since even our senators
would be ambitious of the honor; and if they should have qualms and fears,
others more compliant could no doubt be found amongst the numerous sectaries or
adherents of Great Britain in our country. -- probably some of the patriots
would not be inexorable if properly solicited. Or in the last resource persons
might be sent from Great Britain to acquire naturalization for the express
purpose.

In this supposition too, the article would be at the least innocent:

For its prov^sions are entirely foreign to the case of stock standing in the
names of our own citizens. It neither enlarges nor abridges the power of the
government in this respect.

Further, how will the article work the miracle, of placing the bank under the
management of British Directors? It gives no new rights, no new qualifications:

The constitution of the bank (sections 5 and 7 of the act of incorporation)
has provided with solicitude these important guards, against foreign or other
sinister influence -- 1. That none but a Citizen of the United States shall be
eligible as a DIRE^TOR. 2. That none but a stockholder actually resident within
the United States, shall vote in elections by proxy. 3: That one fourth of the
directors, who are to be elected annually, must every year go out of the
direction. 4. That a director may at any time be removed and replaced by the
stockholders at a gen^ral meeting. 5. That a single share shall give one vote
for directors while any number of shares, in the same person, copartnership or
body politic, will not give more than thirty votes.

Hence it is impossible, that the bank can be in the management of British
directors -- A British subject being incapable of being a director. It is also
next to impossible that an undue British influence could operate in the choice
of directors, out of the number of our own citizens. The British king, or
British subjects out of the United States, could not even have a vote by
attorney in the choice. Scheme^ of secret monopoly could not be executed,
because they would (...) betrayed, unless the secret was confined to a small
number. A small number, no one of whom could have more than thirty votes, would
be easily overruled by the more numerous proprietors of single or a small
number of shares; with the addition of the votes of the United States.

But here again it is to be remembered, that as to combinations with our own
citizens, in which they were to be ostensible, for any pernicious foreign
project -- the article under consideration is perfecctly nugatory -- It can do
neither good nor harm, since it merely relates, as to the exemption from
confiscation and seizure on our part, to the known property of British subjects.

It follows, therefore, that the dangers pourtrayed to us from the speculating
enterprises of his Britannic majesty are the vagaries of an overheated
imagination -- or the contrivances of a spirit of deception -- and that so far
as they could be supposed to have the least color, it turns upon
circumstances, upon which the treaty can have no influence whatever. In taking
pains to expose their futility, I have been principally led by the desire of
making my fellow citizens sensible, in this instance as in others, of the
extravagancies of the opposers of the treaty.

One artifice to render the article unacceptable has been to put cases of
extreme misconduct, on the other side, of flagrant violations of the law of
Nations, of war, of justice and of humanity; and to ask whether under such
circumstances the confiscation or sequestration of debts, would not be
justifiable -- To this the answer is, that if circumstances so extraordinary
should arise as, without the treaty, would warrant so extraordinary an act,
they will equally warrant it under the treaty. For cases of this kind are
exceptions to all general rules. They would excuse the violation of an express
or positive, as well as of a tacit or virtual pledge of the public faith: which
describes the whole difference between the existence and nonexistence of the
article in question. They resemble those cases of extreme necessity (through
excessive hunger for instance) which in the eye of the law of nature will
excuse the taking of the property of another, or those cases of extreme abuse
of authority in rulers, which amounting unequivocally to tyranny, are admitted
to justify forcible resistance to the established authorities. -- Constitutions
of government, laws, treaties all give way to extremities of such a description
-- the point of obligation is to distinguish them with sincerity, and not to
indulge our passions and interests in substituting pretended for real cases.

A writer, who disgraces by adopting the name of CICERO, makes a curious remark
by way of objection. He affirms that the article is nugatory, because a treaty
is dissolved by a state of war, in which state the provision is designed to
operate. If this be true, the article is at least harmless, and the trouble of
painting it in such terrific colors might have been spared. But it is not
true. Reason, writers, the practice of all nations accord in this position,
that those stipulations which contemplate the state of war, in other words
which are designed to operate in case of war, preserve their force and
obligation when war takes place. VATEL B. iii. chapter x:
To what end else all the stipulations which have been cited from so many
treaties* This writer is as profligate as he is absurd -- Besides imputing to
CAMILLUS, in general terms a number of things of which he never dreamt, he has
the ^ffrontery to forge as a literal quotation from him (calling it his own
language and designating it by inverted commas) a passage respecting the
impressing of seamen, which certainly not in terms, nor even (...) substance,
upon fair construction, is to be found in any thing that he has wri^en: Not
having all the numbers of (...) at hand, I may mi^^ake, in attributing to him
the principal sentiment, which is (...) memory, but I have ^der my eye the
number which wi^ (...) his forgery.


Previous to a conclusion, I shall observe ban^ly with a view to accuracy, that
the article leaves unprotected all vessels, goods and merchandise, every
species of property ind^ed, except debts between individuals in the public
funds and in public and private banks. With this exception, whatever before may
have been liable to confiscation or sequestration, still remains so,
notwithstanding any thing contained in this article.

To overrate the value and some of our own arguments is a natural foible of
self love -- to be convinced without convincing others is no uncommon fate of a
writer or speaker -- but I am more than ordinarily mistaken if every mind open
to conviction will not have been satisfied by what has been offered -- that the
tenth article of the treaty lately negociated with Great Britain, does nothing
but confirm by a positive agreement a rule of the law of nations -- indicated
by reason, supported by the better opinion of writers, ratified by modern
usage, dictated by justice and good faith, recognized by formal acts and
declarations of different nations, witnessed by diplomatic testimony,
sanctioned by our treaties with other countries, and by treaties between other
countries -- and conformable with sound policy and the true interests of the
Unit^d States.

The discussion has been drawn out to so great a length, because the objections
to this article are amongst those which have been urged with the greatest
warant^ and emphasis against the treaty, and its vindication from them, if
satisfactory, must ^o far toward securing to it the public suffrage. Citizens
of America! it is for you to perform your part of the task, it is for you to
we^gh with candor the arguments which have been submitted to your judgments, to
consult without bias the integrity of your hearts; to exile prejudice and to
immolate on the altar of truth, the arti^es of cabal and falsehood! There can
then be no danger that patriotism will have to lament, or national honor to
b^ush at, the sentence which you shall pronounce.

The articles, which adjust the matters of controversy between the two
countries, all those which are permanent, have now been reviewed. Let me appeal
to the conferences of those who have accompanied me in the review -- if these
articles were all that composed the treaty, would it be better, that they
should exist -- or that all the sources of rupture and war with Great Britain
should have survived the negotiation to extinguish them, and should still
actually subsist in full vigor? If every enlightened and honest man must
prefer the former -- then let me make another observation and put another
question. The remaining articles of the treaty, which, constituting its
commercial parts, expire by their own limitation at the end of twelve years. It
is in the power of either party consistently with the instrument to terminate
them at the end of the expiration of two years after the present war between
France and Great Britain.

Is it at all probable that they can contain any thing injurious, considering
the short duration, which may be given to them, as to counter-balance the
important consideration of preserving peace to this young country; as to
warrant the excessive clamours which have been raised, as to authorize the
horrid calumnies which are invented; and to justify the systematic efforts
which are in operation to convulse our country and to hazard even CIVIL WAR. In
applying the character of dishonesty and turpitude to the principle of
confiscation or sequestration; I am far from intending to brand as dishonest
men, all those whose opinions favor it; I know there are some ardent spirits
chargeable with the error, of whose inntegrity I think well.


CAMILLUS.


