THE CASTLE OF TRUTH, A MORAL TALE. FROM THE TALES OF THE CASTLE.

BY THE COUNTESS DE GENLIS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by STEWART and COCHRAN, No. 34, South
Second-street, M,DCC,XCV.

THE CASTLE OF TRUTH, A MORAL TALE.
THE beautiful Queen Altemira married Phanor, the most amiable and handsome of
the Genii. -- She was very importunate with the Genius to conduct her to his
Castle the evening they were married. Phanor sighed, and looking tenderly on
the Queen, replied, I for ever forsake it on your account. It is not in my
power to conduct you to my palace; but as you cannot live there, I for ever
abandon it. Reign as sovereign of my heart, and your own faithful subjects: be
satisfied with that empire, and question me no farther?

And shall I never see your castle, my Lord?

I really hope, said Phanor, the day will come when you may see it with safety.

O! when! replied Altemira, keenly.

You may, in sixteen years, if you are then anxious.

Sixteen years! O heavens!

Let me beg of you, both for your quiet and mine, to think no more of it till
that time.

Altemira was very anxious, reflected, complained and wept, but Phanor would
not yield -- They loved each other sincerely, and all the unhappiness Altemira
knew was a prudent husband; indeed had it not been for her perpetual
questioning about the Castle, they would have lived very comfortably.

The Queen was happily delivered of a Princess, who was endowed with every
qualification possible, by her father the Genius, and named Zeolide. She was
uncommonly lovely, and was scarcely fourteen years of age when her parents
chose her a future husband, who should be worthy of so accomplished a Princess,
the Prince Philamir, who adored her. -- They consulted Zeolide, who declared
she loved the Prince, above all who had ever sought her.

The time was now at hand, when Altemira was to have her curosity indulged, to
which she looked forward with much impatience, and resolved her daughter should
not be married till her return from the Castle.

They had been sixteen years married, and she entreated her husband to set off
immediately. -- You shall this evening hear my story, and if you then continue
in the same mind, tomorrow you shall be transported thither. Altemira wished
her daughter to be present, and Phanor, though unwilling, consented, and being
sat between the two Princesses in Altemira's apartment, he thus began.

THE HISTORY OF PHANOR THE GENIUS.
HOWEVER superior to mortals our art may render us, it can make no impression
on the heart; I was born with uncommonly strong passions, and my father saw,
with regret, that I would never be discre^^ nor happy, without some centuries
experience.

Mean time I fell in love with a fairy called Prudina, who was highly esteemed
for her prudence, virtue and circumspection; she was by much my elder; and was
valued more for her knowledge than beauty; this attachment did me honor: she
discovered it first herself, and told me of it; I could not believe it, and was
preparing to deny it, when observing she seemed certain, I thought it best to
delay and examine myself.

Prudina then began to chide me for a passion which she termed childish and
foolish, but did it with so much tenderness, that she only showed me by her
lectures, there was a possibility of gaining a place in her affections; and
thus the love she anticipated became real. I declared my feelings, and my love
was returned. Animated by this, I hinted marriage, which she declined till she
had proved me; engaging at the same time not to tattle, and requiring a like
promise of me; thus we loved and nobody knew.

As I one night was traveling through the Air to Prudina's Castle, cries of a
very pitiable sort reached my ears, and made me stop; when looking around, I
observed a youth, surrounded by his Slaves bearing torches, who seemed racked
with dreadful agonies; his attendants were numerous in carriages and on
horseback; and they re-echoed his complainings, which heightened the terror of
the scene. I approached them, and expressed a wish to be made acquainted with
the cause of their distress. You behold, said the young man, the Prince Zimis,
celebrated for his love to the Princess Eliana; with whom I would have been
married, had not Phormidas, that cruel Genius, become deeply enamoured of
Eliana. She hated him, and he began to despair. Seizing this favorable
opportunity, I set out with my Princess and their attendants for my own kingdom
to celebrate our nuptials.

Just as we had entered a dismal forest, Phormidas attacked us, and tore my
charming Eliana from my arms.

These three days past I have been in vain endeavoring to trace the Ravisher,
and here I stop, overcome with fatigue and despair, waiting the end of my
unhappy days.

Distressed with the miseries of this unhappy Prince, I did all in my power to
comfort him. I told him how much I was interested in his distresses; that my
power was superior to that of Phormidas; I entreated him to retire to his own
kingdom, where he should be again happy with Eliana before break of day. So
saying, I left Zimis and his Train, and rushed into the air, to spend the night
in avenging the oppressed, which I had dedicated to love. I darted with
aamazing velocity to the Royal Palace of the king of the Genii, acquainted him
with the melancholy story, and begged his assistance to restore Eliana to the
arms of her lover.

Our Sovereign took me by the hand, and told me, he would give to me the honor
of this adventure, and for that purpose would inform me of other particulars.
Then leading into a superb saloon, ornamented with an infinitude of glasses, we
must enquire, said he, into her present situation, that we may adapt our
assistance to the emergency of the case: then touching one of the glasses with
a golden wand, a Lady of perfect beauty appeared: notice, said he, in what
situation she is. Presently the picture was completed, and I observed Eliana in
a garden alone, overcome with grief, sitting in a swing, which at times reached
almost to the clouds. Her condition distressed me. The Genius smiled; then
mysteriously shaking his head, you will see what will afflict you more. He then
gave me a Talisman, by means of which I might transport myself into the
presence of Eliana whenever I pleased; but said he, be prudent, cool and
courageous, and if you complete this perilous undertaking gloriously, you shall
name your own reward. When he had so said he left me with my Talisman, and I
instantly wished myself with Eliana; immediately I was in a garden, heard
voices, looked about, and by the light of the moon, which shone uncommonly
bright, I saw at some distance the same Eliana I had seen in the glass; and
what astonished me much, she was in the very same posture, swinging with the
utmost force.

A little sylph who stood by her thus addressed her. It does well enough to
swing a little now and then, but to be swinging, swinging, swinging constantly
thus, is harsh, I think. How happy are you Zumio, replied the Princess, that
can thus support your spirits, you are also a slave as well as me, but not
treated with half the barbarity -- Oh to what a ridiculous punishment am I
condemned -- Barbarous Genius -- more barbarous Fairy -- Here she was obliged
to stop, for now, her swinging was increased to such a pitch, that she could
not fetch her breath.

I now understood, the unhappy Eliana was enchanted in this distressing swing.
I approached her, proffered my services, acquainted her with the situation of
her lover, engaged to restore her to her freedom; and begged she would freely
communicate all that had happened her. Alas! Alas! said she, my Lord, Revenge
and Jealousy have invented an enchantment, which I fear you will not be able to
break; so cruel, so distressing are the terms which must first be fulfilled.

My Story, continued she, is shortly this; having been separated from my
husband, by the cruel Phormidas, I was instantly carried to his Castle. I
endeavored to put an end to my wretched existence, and would certainly have
done something fatal to my life had not the Castle opened at the roof, and a
Lady, or rather Fairy, made her appearance, riding in an ebony car drawn by
four dreadful bats. -- Phormidas was just then prostrate before me; but
immediately rose in great confusion: The Furious Fairy, assuming a most
imperious and terrible voice, spoke in the following manner:

And do you thus betray me, perfidious wretch? Do you thus, vile ingrate,
prefer a mortal to Me, who, on thy account have forsaken the most handsome of
all the Genii? But, you shall not deceive me, and if you expect forgiveness,
surrender to me the Princess, whom I will punish, and at the same time preserve
her life. Keep in mind, if you refuse, that I am capable of much indeed to be
revenged; I adore, while she abhors thee.

The affrighted Genius, kissed his chains, and submissively surrendered me to
the Fairy. She took me into her car, which ascending through the clouds in less
than three minutes brought us here. I then prostrated myself before her,
entreated her compassion, begged she would restore me to Zimis, and used every
argument in my power to assuage her fury. She hesitated a little, then raised
me, with these words, I am not, princess, revengeful, but whimsical; and if you
will indulge me in a certain humor, which I have just taken into my head, all
that has passed will be forgiven. I have a singular predilection for swinging,
sit down in this swing -- The thought appeared to me ridiculous, but still it
was an easy atonement, and I sat down very well pleased; but I was no sooner
seated, than the Fairy, with a terrible voice, thus addressed me:

Swing here without ceasing for thirty years, unless one of my lovers shall
within that time prove fickle without my knowing it.

At that moment the Swing began to swing so violently that I instantly swooned
away; Zumio, the little sylph you just now spoke with, run to my assistance and
with trouble recovered me; at first I gave up myself to despair, but I soon
became calm, when I reflected, that from what she said, it was evident she had
lovers, and it would be strange indeed, if none of them deceived her.

There is no doubt, replied Zumio, were it not for that valuable turquoise ring
she possesses, which, so soon as any of her lovers cease to admire her, or are
in any degree unfaithful, turns as yellow as gold. By day, the Fairy constantly
wears this ring; and lest it should be stolen while she sleeps, it is enclosed
in a casket of brass, every night, and is deposited in a grot dug in her
garden, the gate of which is guarded by twelve terrible Crocodiles, six
Basilisks and four Dragons, who emit large stones of fire and spue out
scorching flames from their terrible jaws. If you then, my lord, continued
Zumio, undertake the glorious enterprise, consider what dangers await you: but
if you prove victorious, how glorious the achievement? how important in its
consequences? when you are informed that all these surrounding gardens are
filled with beautiful princesses and ladies, who are here enchanted and
condemned to dreadful and tormenting punishments by the Jealous Fairy. For her
barbarity has not been confined to rivals only, but all who have given her
umbrage have shared the same fate; and she is the enemy of all, who are
remarkable for beauty, wit, virtue and other valuable accomplishments. For my
own part, I was once her most admired page; I carried her most private letters
and billets-doux; unluckily I became the object of her suspicion, and am now
her prisoner.

Heavens! cried I, interrupting Zumio, what is her infamous name; tell me, O
tell me, the name of such a monster.

Alas, my lord, replied Zumio, her hypocrisy is as remarkable as her
wickedness. She is adored by the Genii, and supposed to be the most virtuous of
her tribe -- How will you be astonished to hear -- her name is -- Prudina.
Amazed, I left them precipitately, and by means of my Talisman, was instantly
at the gate of this well defended cavern. It would be tiresome to you to repeat
the obstacles I surmounted, suffice it, that prompted by every noble, every
animating principle, and incited by rage, malice and hatred, I overcame, and
that only because being a Genius I was immortal. The monsters I vanquished; I
tore down the gates and reduced them to powder; and then snatched the casket,
with its precious contents. The ring was a beautiful citron-colour; so placing
it on my finger, I swore it should never be removed.

The instant I had done so, the garden re-echoed from a thousand voices, the
joyful acclamations of Liberty! Liberty! grateful thanks to Phanor! Freedom!
Liberty!

Immediately I left the Grotto, and found the garden filled with young and
beautiful ladies, differently dressed, who were running about embracing and
congratulating one another, while they repeated with loud voices, Thanks to the
Genius Phanor! Liberty! Liberty! As the day began to break, I soon discovered,
leaning on the arm of the little Sylph, the incomparable Eliana. Observing me,
she run toward me, exclaiming, see, see, our brave deliverer! immediately her
companions followed her example, some madly kissing me, some hugging me in
their arms, some clasping my knees, and others seizing me by the hands and
arms. One more frantic than the rest, leapt upon my back, and with a shrill
voice sounded in my ear the words of Liberty, Liberty. This disturbing
exclamation, was continued so long and so violently, that I was almost stunned
with the noise, when the Sovereign of the Genii himself approached, mounted on
a white Elephant; he instantly ordered the noisy company to be silent, and
addressed me thus. It belongs to you, Phanor, to give sentence on Prudina, as
the Sole Ruler of her fate.

Her character, Gracious Sire, replied I, is unveiled; which is sufficient
Revenge, but I entreat in behalf of these her unfortunate victims, whom I
recommend to your pity; command them to be transported each to their native
country, their friends, their Lovers, or where their hearts wish.

Immediately, the Genius raised his scepter and they all vanished; now said he,
turning to me, I engaged to perform whatever you wished as a reward, and I will
fulfill; but let me advise you to consider well, before you determine, and when
you have done so, come to me.

Having thus said, he left me; I accordingly resolved immediately to quit a
place, which only furnished me with gloomy reflections, when I accidently
observed the little sylph, Zumio, conversing at the back of a tree, with one of
the most beautiful women I had ever seen. I was greatly astonished; when he
came up to me and told me, he was determined to cleave to me at all hazards,
and therefore had not left the Garden. This beautiful Lady, said he, will tell
you her own history, if you incline. Undoubtedly, replied I.

She smiled assent; and sitting down by her, I entreated her to communicate
freely, what had determined her to remain there.

My Lord, said she, the other Ladies have all Lovers or husbands; I neither.
Their fidelity, I approve, but cannot follow. But as you wish to hear an
account of my adventures, I shall certainly attempt it.

THE HISTORY OF AGELIA.
MY heart is uncommonly tender, and my imagination lively; I have a great share
of sensibility and delicacy, so I am easily captivated, but hard to fix. When I
am first enraptured, I view every thing in the favorable way, and not only
adore my lover, but deify him; when accident or peculiar circumstances expose
the reality, I find I have been carried away by delusion; and appear as one
arising from a pleasant dream, which vanishes, leaving nothing solid. This
effort of reason mankind call inconstancy, yet with me it is the effect of
deception, not satiety or whim.

It was my misfortune, about two years since, to become the rival of Prudina; I
had been for three months the favorite of a youth, to whom she took a fancy;
this ended in my confinement; I was transported hither, and while she led me by
the hand across the garden, I gave place to the keenest anguish. Agelia, said
she, be not so terrified, I will not be harsh; your appearance pleases, and
were it not for that air of inconstancy, and fickleness, you would delight me:
I will therefore make it more my study to amend than chastise you, for you have
interested me much in your behalf. I was not however imposed on by her
pretenses. We walked on, from garden to bower, and from bower to grove, till at
length not a tree was to be seen; we were in a wide extended plain, bounded by
the surrounding horizon. The prospect was something like a sea scene, were it
not, that the noise of the waves, the motion of the ship, and the reflection of
the sun beams on the water, animate this picture; while where we were, there
was nothing to relieve the mind under the astonishing uniformity of the plain
round us. No shrub, flower, nor herb was to be seen, but a beautiful short
grass, all of one species. An universal calm and profound silence reigned
throughout this vast solitude; and not an insect or bird was to be seen, nay
not a cloud to vary ever so little the uniform blueness of the sky. At first
this view rather produced an agreeable feeling; I was transported with
admiration and rapture. It delights me, said Prudina, to perceive the scene
pleases you; it is calculated to soften the vigorous sallies of your
imagination, though time and reflection will be necessary to complete it, I
therefore propose that you should remain here, where no variation will disturb
you; the sky will be always serene, never cloudy, no alteration of day and
night, no inclemency of seasons, perpetual day will ever charm you.

When she had thus spoken, she ordained me to walk with a stately noble step,
around this lawn, for thirty years, unless, said she, one of my lovers shall
within that time prove fickle without my knowing it. Having thus said, she
vanished: and I found myself compelled to walk at a slow steady pace, not
having it in my power to turn to the one hand or the other, of stopping or
sitting down to rest.

At first the idea of this constant walk at the same pace I found very
disagreeable, but I did not then know the extent of my punishment. I beheld the
inconceivably rich and extensive carpet, surrounded by a clear and pleasant
horizon, with ^^pture. Can it be, said I, that grass and sky, green and blue,
can furnish so remarkable and striking a prospect! Thus it is that the sublime
is formed by grandeur and simplicity.

The fresh idea of my lover, the expectation that the fairy might be imposed
upon without her knowledge, and such like philosophic raptures as the the
above, solaced me for a few hours. But this rapture soon cooled, disgust took
place of ecstasies, the boundless extent of never ceasing verdure, which
ravished me so much, soon became tiresome, loathsome and insipid; no variety,
nothing to attract my attention, the recollection of unfortunate love was all
the object of my thoughts; and even this by degrees was effaced.

Fatigued fancy soon lost all its strength, my wandering ideas became
undetermined; my fanciful hopes forsook me; even my passion itself took the
flight, and thus was I alone in this almost incomprehensible expanse. When a
dangerous mistake is rectified by reason, to subdue it brings comfort and we
are happy. But however noble and praiseworthy it may be to subdue our
passions, there is something truly disheartening in them quitting us; the
imagination is in some degree annihilated, and the heart faded. Passions must
either be conquered by reason or vanquished by time.

Thus painfully situated I traversed my endless road. My tears forsook me, I
had not even strength enough of mind to be afflicted, but I became dispirited,
so gaping about I gave place to unbearable weariness; the only real object of
desire which I felt in my mind was once more to have a prospect of animated
nature; a shrub, a hill or a dwelling would have ravished me; thundering, rain,
storms, wind, nay a cloud, would have afforded an agreeable sensation. The very
absence of night, the moon and stars, were grating to me; in short, any change
of any sort was at this time my idea of happiness. Now it was that I
experienced that Prudina could not have taken a more effectual method to punish
my levity and inconstancy, than this ingenious device.

You will therefore easily conceive, my lord, that summit of joy to which I was
raised, when I, thanks to your valor, found myself enabled to walk fast or
slow, to sit down or rise up, and in the midst of this garden. My lover has
surely now forgotten me, by eighteen months absence; and if he has not, how can
I possibly endure his never ceasing complaints; all countries and climes are
therefore equal to me, for I wish not to return to my own: and I care not where
I spend my days if I am not doomed to vast plains or boundless lawns.

Agelia having thus finished her history, I arose, and with my wand, describing
a circle in the air, transformed the palace and gardens of the fairy, into a
superb palace, situated on the top of a hill, and found ourselves standing on
the terrace, which commanded a most delightful prospect. The view of rocks,
water-falls, precipices, villages, flocks and herds, and the sea, quite
transported the happy Agelia; for all the pleasing and majestic objects of
nature were united, but no plains. There, said I to Agelia, you are Queen; and
if you wish me gone, speak the word, and however great the sacrifice, you shall
be obeyed; for my happiness is to see you satisfied.

Her reply at first was tender and perplexed; but she soon resumed her
accustomed gaiety and was uncommonly pleasant throughout the day: toward
night, she fell into a kind of languid melancholy, which added to her charms,
and made her so beautiful that I lost my heart irrecoverably.

I conducted her to the terrace after supper, where the prospect of the
star-bedizzened sky amazed her; she trembled, and gaped up in rapture. Oh,
cried she, what an amazing spectacle!

Falling at her knees, I ventured to confess my admiration and love. She heard
me attentively, and was affected, she wept, I pressed her for an answer. Having
paused a little and wiped off her tears, Phanor, said she, I sensibly feel your
kindness, and your tender behavior, but give me time to look into mine own
heart, and to know more of yours. And then left me.

I instantly examined my turquoise ring, and to my great joy found that she
loved me. The day following I pressed still more urgently for an answer. I
dread, says she, lest I should impose both on you and myself.

Fear not, my beauteous Agelia, said I in a rapture, and prostrating myself
before her, I know I am beloved; I cannot doubt my happiness -- at these words
I ceased, perceiving in Agelia's looks, that she considered my certainty as
presumptuous; and in truth, it had a vain appearance. She appeared reserved,
and treated me somewhat disdainfully. I found it necessary to be more prudent,
and assumed a tone of despair. Agelia softened, and in a little time
acknowledged I had gained her heart; the day, the happy day was fixed, when two
hearts so suddenly cemented by love were to be still more closely united at the
altar of Hymen.

I was walking on the terrace with Agelia on the evening preceding the
wished-for day; she fixed her eyes on the ocean which washed the palace walls.
I had remarked that for two days past she had appeared more absent and much
less enraptured than formerly, yet my ring retained its usual color, and her
appearance of consequence distressed me the less. Pausing a little, she turns
to me. Cannot you, said she, with whom almost every thing is possible, make
these rocks and mountains disappear; for the prospect is quite overloaded, and
the eye has no relief; you have too much water; those dreadful rocks terrify
the mind, and it is painful to hear the roarings of the sea.

And have these Landscapes, in which you so much delighted formerly, wearied
you, my Agelia, said I; since that is your will then, they also shall
disappear, however highly I value them, and they are dear to me indeed, since
it was here, you first promised to be mine.

She made me no answer, but gave me her hand with a look of mildness and love:
I kissed it with rapture. She at this moment, cast her eye upon my ring, and
with a seemingly careless air, pulled it off my finger. This rather startled
me, however, fearful to raise her suspicion, I suffered her to examine it more
closely.

This ring is of a beautiful color, said she, but I hate turquoise; Oh fie! it
is badly mounted; I dislike it much; and with these words, she raised her arm
and cast it into the sea, without allowing me time to suspect her intention,
much less to preserve what I considered as a most valuable treasure.

I stood fixed with surprise; and Agelia looked at me with a certain sort of
mischievous delight which provoked me; -- I restrained myself a little, but
soon gave vent to every reproach which could be incited by the most violent
rage and passion. She looked at me with great composure. Having heard me to an
end, I acknowledge said she, the secret qualities of your ring I have been
informed of. A suspicion of it has hung about me some days, and Zumio satisfied
me. Infamous Zumio, I exclaimed!

I made him believe I was in the secret, and led him on to betray you; he has
been prudent enough; but like many others outwitted by a woman; for human
wisdom, penetration, nor philosophy have not yet discovered an antidote for
female powers, and this, even Genii themselves have experienced. But, my Lord,
if your distress at losing this turquoise is on my account, it is vain, for I
am not in the least degree disposed to deceive you.

But why, cruel woman, have you deprived me of this valuable ring; which would
have prevented all doubts, and rendered protestations useless?

But, my lord, I delight in talking, now the ring left me nothing to chatter
about; and you yourself must acknowledge that such a bond, was not paying me a
compliment. How generous, noble and delicate would it have been, after I had
been pouring out my lovesick effusions into your bosom, for you to sneak into
a corner and demand confirmation from your ring? You say you love me; I believe
you, without a ring. I will explain love to you. Whenever I confessed my love
to you, you should have taken this villainous Talisman, this high-prized
treasure, and cast it for ever from you, saying, This is now useless, since I
am so well assured of her love.

I heard her out with amazement; then falling on my knees, I entreated her
forbearance and pardon.

Forbearance! exclaimed she, you are insensible of its worth; the injuries you
have just mentioned, did I not forgive? and when I cast your ring into the sea,
could you not recollect, that it had not changed its color; but your rage,
that unworthy passion you just now vented --

O my Agelia, have patience, you harrow up my soul. You cannot now, my lord,
dive into my heart as before, but I will not even now deceive you; my word is
far more to be depended on than any ring -- Hear me then, and believe me -- I
love you not, nor ever shall.

These words she pronounced so steadily and coolly, that they left me no room
to question their reality. My love for her was of the most fervent kind; this
misfortune I could not support, I gave place to despair. Falling at her feet, I
bedewed them with my tears, and besought her, to leave me only a gleam of hope.

Let this teach you, said she, the value of your ring, you cannot bear the
truth, and therefore entreat me to deceive you -- It is very proper to endeavor
to remove fantasies which disturb or distress us, but why should we those that
amuse and comfort us? Take an advice from me, my lord; and by all means be on
your guard in future, never to apply your attention in constructing a Talisman
like that from which I have relieved you; for when you do, depend upon it, you
are but constructing fresh torments. Be on your guard against men, and be
jealous of them, but never let your friend or mistress be suspected.

Her advice was a good one, but as my misfortunes were not yet at an end, I
disregarded it. Nothing would have effect on Agelia, she continued unmoved; and
I found it necessary to leave her, overwhelmed with despair, and spent some
months at a distance from her, where I gave full vent to my grief. I was
attended here, by Zumio, who was so much attached to me, so cheerful and
gentle, that I forgot he was the undesigned source of my misery, and made him
my constant companion; besides I could talk to him of Agelia.

Zumio entertained me from time to time with accounts of his travels, for he
had seen much of the world, and told his story gracefully. Among other things
he frequently talked to me of a Princess, he named Arpalisa, of whom he said so
many fine things, that he raised my curiosity about her -- Is she as handsome
as Agelia, said I?

As handsome as Agelia! replied Zumio, in derision; You had never fallen in
love with her, had you seen Arpalisa; Agelia is pleasant and agreeable enough,
with a little dash of wit at times; but at best she is whimsical to an extreme,
wild and uncommonly thoughtless; it is foolish to compare her with Arpalisa,
who is a most complete model of perfection; her beauty dazzling; the depth of
her understanding astonishing; her accomplishments, virtues, greatness of soul,
sensibility and extent of knowledge would enchant you -- Oh, did you hear her
discourse on friendship.

There was no stopping of Zumio, when he began to talk of Arpalisa; till at
length the daily hearing so much of her, gave a great inclination to see this
wonderful Princess.

In spite of all Agelia had said, I could not help regretting the want of the
ring: I had still my reward to ask from the sovereign of the Genii; so after
much uncertainty and many resolutions I at length went to him, and asked him to
construct me a castle, into which whoever entered, should be compelled by a
secret charm, to speak whatever were their secret thoughts; while, I myself
only, as possessor of the castle, should have an exemption from the general
law: for, Discretion, said I, is necessary for a lover, and I would not wish to
expose myself to act improperly. I besought the sovereign, that in the Castle,
I might hear the language of sincerity; see things as they really are: and
those who speak should speak their real thoughts; I entreated, that those who
wished to deceive, might not be sensible of their saying the very contrary of
their meaning; that they should not hear themselves, but suppose they really
expressed that flattery with which they meant to impose on others -- This
double charm was absolutely necessary, otherwise many would keep silence.

Rash thoughtless Phanor, replied the Genius, what an imprudent request? -- My
oath is however sacred; therefore go to your own place, and in place of the
house you have formerly possessed, that which you have desired will be in its
room. I have here a box for you, which will preserve you from its dangerous
laws; preserve it, and you will speak only what you wish; or any person in
whose possession it may be; but be careful to preserve it, as I cannot make
another of the kind. I took the box from the monarch of the Genii, and departed
with many expressions of gratitude.

I now found a Castle, in the spot where the former stood, the dazzling
appearance of which charmed me: It was built of a composition which had all the
splendour, strength and transparency of the most resplendent Diamond; the
workmanship noble, yet light; and ornamented with various precious stones; on
the Golden Doors, was the following inscription, ' The Castle of Truth.'

I touched the gates with my wand, as I entered, pronounced these words,
whosoever enters the gates of this Castle must remain three months; and I swear
by my Art, that unalterable oath, I never will cancel this law. Then opening
the gates I commanded free access to all who inclined.

I soon experienced the danger attending a Castle of Truth. My slaves and
attendants now answered me with the utmost candor and honesty, every question
I asked them; and very soon so provoked my rage, that I speedily closed the
doors on them all; and indeed, their fidelity and attachment have never been
replaced to me. I even began to be displeased with Zumio; I saw into his real
character, and found he was both deficient in discernment and understanding;
that multiplicity of unmeaning words to which he gave free scope disgusted me,
and I was astonished they had ever entertained me. I found a great many faults
in him, I did not know of before; he was very obstinate, contradicted me at
every word; in short, I was disgusted with his want of politeness.

As he still said, however, he had a friendship for me, I did not come to an
absolute rupture with him; but I scolded or snapped at him continually, and he
insolently replied my pride was insupportable. I commanded him to be silent; he
would shrug his shoulders, mock me, alternately show anger or vexation, and
thus we passed our time, either sullenly, or wrangling with each other.

Quite tired of his tete-a-tete, I continually hoped some travelers, invited
by the brilliant aspect of my Palace, would wish to enter; but passengers
contented themselves with admiring it; they approached it eagerly, but as soon
as they read the inscription, as eagerly left it, and pursued their way.

One day as I stood with Zumio, on a balcony, we saw a magnificent Chariot at a
distance, driving toward the Palace. I knew by my Art this Chariot belonged to
a King, accompanied with seven or eight Courtiers. As it approached, Zumio
said, at last I hope we shall have a visitor, for which I shall be very glad,
for I have been most dreadfully dull ever since I have been here.

As Zumio spoke, the Chariot advanced to the gates; the King read the
inscription, and his first movement was to enter; but the courtiers grew pale,
shuddered, and detained him. The King persisted for some time; at last he
suffered himself to be persuaded, and withdrew; the Courtiers once more
recovered their breath, turned the Chariot precipitately away, and soon were
out of sight.

So they are gone, cried Zumio, with chagrin; but while you will persist to
leave that cursed inscription over the gate, we shall never see a soul. You are
so wilful! -- I really never met with a Genius so obstinate and stupid.

Your insolence is beyond all bounds, Zumio.

Oh! what you want truth and compliments both at once; your folly is really
incomprehensible, and at some moments you are as inconsistent and foolish as
you are proud.

Shocked at his excessive impertinence, I was going to drive him from me, when
I perceived a figure that fixed my whole attention. A venerable old man, with a
majestic presence that inspired respect, and a mild placidity in his
countenance, which interested the heart in spite of itself, approached with a
book in his hand, reading, and walking slowly.

When he came opposite the Castle gates, he lifted up his eyes, and read the
inscription. Oh, thou, said he, whom for these forty years I have sought! O!
celestial Truth, am I then in my latter days permitted to see thee unclouded,
and as thou art?

So saying, the old man entered the Palace.

So here is one at last, said Zumio, and instantly left me to go and meet the
stranger. I followed my little hair-brained Sylph, and we soon met the old man.
Zumio flew; come in, come good man, said he, you are very welcome, especially
if you can rid us of our horrid dullness. You are old, have been in various
scenes of life, and can tell us a good many stories; but first, pray what is
your name?

Gelanor, replied the old man; in my youth I lived among men; I have been a
great traveller, and for these last twenty years have devoted my days to
solitude.

Ah! I perceive, interrupted Zumio, you are a Philosopher; we shall not be much
the merrier for you. -- Nor will you find much entertainment here, for
Philosophers are curious; you, no doubt, imagine you may study mankind in this
place, but that is your mistake; you will find no body here but this Genius, my
Master, and me: he, as you perceive, is not very communicative; besides, there
is nothing original in his character. As for me, it is true, I have a deal of
wit, many virtues and accomplishments, and it will take you some time to know
me.

I know you better at present, replied Gelanor, smiling, than you seem to know
yourself.

I now spoke in turn, and asked him what was his opinion of himself?

I am good, said he, but imperfect; yet cannot conceive, after having led a
life of reflection, and of endeavors to know my own heart, how I can still
have so many defects and foibles. This idea, however, is so often present to my
mind, that it preserves me from pride, and makes me indulgent. My public and
private actions are irreproachable; but I often experience interior sensations
which are humiliating; and were I to render an exact and circumstantial account
of all the ideas which present themselves to my imagination, I am afraid I
should not be found much wiser than others.

When he had said thus, I approached Gelanor, and embraced him with most
respectful affection. Oh, my father! said I, I cannot express my admiration;
you are a true philosopher, and I shall ever honor, shall eternally respect
all those who resemble you.

Some days after this conversation, I determined to obliterate the inscription
from the gates of my Palace. I then quitted Gelanor and Zumio, and, without
telling them my project, guided by that curiosity which Zumio had inspired,
departed for the kingdom of the Princess Arpalisa. Fearing Zumio's
indiscretion, I would neither take him with me, nor impart my design.

I soon came to this celebrated Princess, who would not receive me till
evening, and I was then introduced into a superb saloon, lighted in a most
agreeable manner, the wax lights were all within crystal, covered with white
gauze, or set in vases of alabaster; which artifice produced a softness,
somewhat like clear moonlight. The Princess was seated on a Throne of gold,
over which was a pavilion, decorated with drapery of silver gauze; garlands of
roses formed elegant festoons, and crowns were suspended over her head.

Arpalisa was clothed in magnificent robes, garnished with precious stones. Her
appearance was dazzling, and her beauty seemed to me regular and majestic;
though the was not very young, I admired her shape; her noble air, the
surprising fairness of her complexion, and was charmed with her conversation.

The next day my admiration was more increased, when, by the orders of the
Princess, I was conducted into a gallery full of paintings, and informed they
were all the performances of Arpalisa; they were on the most interesting
subjects; Temples to Friendship, sacrifices to Friendship, Friendship
triumphing over love: Time crowning and embelishing friendship: or Altars to
Benevolence, Benevolence enlightened by Virtue, Compassion exciting
Benevolence, etc. etc. In fine, it was not possible to leave this gallery,
without a full persuasion that Arpalisa was the most gentle and virtuous
Princess in the universe.

From thence I was led to the Laboratory, and, returning, my Conductor told me,
in confidence, that the Princess employed her time, with equal advantage, in
Astronomy and Mathematics. As I had a particular love for those sciences, I was
enchanted at the discovery: though the high opinion I had before conceived of
the Princess was almost incapable of increase.

There was a Concert in the evening, and a Symphony of Arpalisa's composition
was performed. The Princess then sat down to the harpsichord, and sang; her
voice did not appear very remarkable, but, in fact, it was almost entirely
drowned by the accompanyments; but an excellent musician who sat by my side,
assured me, she sung in a superior style; and I found he had reason to say so,
for every body was in raptures.

After supper, they made extempore Poetry and Enigmas, which gave the Princess
an opportunity of showing her wit. I could not recover from my amazement; what
I heard was incredible, and I found it would not be possible long to preserve
my liberty in the presence of so accomplished a Princess.

Every body retired at midnight, and I remained alone with Arpalisa, and her
bosom friend Telira. The two friends were reclined on a couch, and tenderly
folded in each other's arms; the picture was delightful; I contemplated it in
silence, and listened while they said every thing the sublimest friendship
could dictate. Arpalisa gave me so lively, and so affecting an impression of
her love for Telira, that I was moved even to tears.

I could not forbear to testify, in part, the admiration she inspired; I
praised her talents, her knowledge, and introduced the subjects of Astronomy
and Mathematics; but Arpalisa, with a tone of the utmost modesty, stopped me, by
saying, I am exceedingly vexed, my Lord, you have been persuaded I employ my
leisure hours on subjects so little proper for a woman; and were it true I had
a taste for such sciences, I would make it a law with myself never to own it.
Pedantry and affectation are utter strangers to my heart -- And my pretensions
really are very few.

This uncommon modesty finished her conquest. I was in transports, and returned
to my chamber only to think of Arpalisa. I passed a part of the night in
writing to her and making verses upon her. I invented the most ingenious and
brilliant feasts; she seemed sensible of my attention; I declared my passion,
and she owned that, my power and rank out of the question, she partook my
passion; but by an insurmountable delicacy, she never could resolve to marry a
Genius; for, after a while, added she, you might attribute that to ambition,
which was the pure effect of love. Oh, that you had been born less illustrious!

Such sentiments enchanted, yet drove me to despair.

At other moments, Arpalisa would vaunt the mild content of her present
situation. I have no ambition, said she, Friendship is the charm of my life;
Love I have never known, and dread to know; for I have a heart too fond, a
sensibility too delicate; I am happy and peaceable, and must not flatter you; I
cannot resolve to sacrifice such pure and perfect content. No, my Lord,
incapable of feigning, incapable of the least coquetry, I would not give you
deceitful hopes. Quit this Palace, fly me for your own repose -- and for mine.

Love at last, however, was triumphant, and Arpalisa consented to give me her
hand.

Prudina had rendered me so suspicious, I was determined not to wed even the
divine Arpalisa, till I had first heard her in the Palace of Truth. I doubted
not her sincerity, yet it was impossible I could sacrifice to her the proof of
my Palace. I told her I could wed only in my territories, but took care not to
mention a word of the charm. She consented to accompany me, and only required
Telira should go with her; for, said she, I could not endure separation from so
dear a friend. We departed, and soon found ourselves in the avenues to my
Castle.

The aspect of this redoubted place, gave the most lively emotions. I am going,
said I, to discover the true state of the heart of her I love; if she be such
as I imagine, how much I shall reproach myself for having thought the proof of
this Castle necessary; and if she be not, what an angelic illusion shall I lose!

At last we entered the Castle, and I cast a trembling eye on my Princess; but
what was my surprise, when I discovered the celestial, the seraphic Arpalisa,
was forty-eight years old; was loaded with paint, had pencilled eyebrows,
false hair, and a made up form; in fine, that she was bald, red-haired, old,
and crooked.

Zumio, who had come to meet me, did not know her in the Castle of Truth; and
burst out a laughing, as soon as he beheld a figure so ridiculous, leaning
familiarly and triumphantly on my arm. I was so much disconcerted that I
hastily quitted the Princess, without troubling myself about what she might
think of my behavior.

Zumio followed me; I give you joy of your good fortune, my Lord, said he; you
have, indeed, found a most rare beauty. I really wonder how you could make such
a conquest; your choice, however, proves how substantial your taste is, and you
never need fear a rival, or the torments of jealousy.

A single word deprived Zumio of all his pleasantry; I only named Arpalisa, and
he stood confounded and aghast.

After a moment's silence, my Lord, said he, I easily conceive your chagrin and
disgust: but though the beauty of this Princess be borrowed, though her
complexion, shape, and flowing hair, are all artificial, I yet flatter myself
we have not been deceived in her soul, her understanding, and talents; and as
she has said she loves you, I am persuaded you will find she spoke truth.

If so, said I, Zumio, If I have had the misfortune to make such a woman love
me, what will become of me? My only consolation, my only hope, is to find her
perfidious.

An attendant now came, to tell me the Princess was inquiring for me, and
decorum obliged me to go.

I found her alone in a chamber, and extended on a couch, she had a
handkerchief and a smelling-bottle, and, as soon as she perceived me, began to
make the most strange contortions.

What ails you, madam! said I; are you not well?

She made no reply, but continued her contortions, and I repeated my question.
She then cast a languishing look at me, and said, I am pretending to be in a
fit.

I see you are, replied I.

Well, and are not you affected?

How can I avoid it? But why are you in a fit?

Because you left me so coldly, when I entered the Palace; and I want to
persuade you my sensibily is excessive, and that I passionately love you.

And do you really love me?

I! not the least in the world. I love nothing.

Here the Princess thinking she had spoken the most tender things possible,
pretend-to weep and dry her eyes, and I recovered. Freed from all inquietude, I
now thought proper to prolong a conversation which diverted me; and taking
Arpalisa by the hand, You quite melt me, said I; who can be insensible to so
many charms, and so much love? -- But how your hand shakes!

Yes, said she, I do that on purpose, to make you believe I have convulsive
motions.

But it must be very fatiguing.

Not in the least, habit has made me expert. -- But you shall presently see
something more; I have not played half my tricks yet; before we have done you
shall see me faint.

Pray, tell me what is become of Telira.

Oh, we have quarrelled.

What, already?

Yes, and I mean to persuade you, that Telira is in part the cause of the
situation in which you now see me.

Why, what has passed between you?

Oh! you never heard such insolence; she told me I was deceitful, vain,
envious, insensible; that my pride was unmeasured, my ambition insatiable. I
replied, I had never really loved her; that it was all affectation, and that
had she been handsomer and more amiable, she would have given me offense; that
I had not the least regard for her, nor would make the least sacrifice to serve
her.

It is inconceivable that this should vex her.

Oh! she left the room in a fury.

Did you ever repose confidence in her?

I never had confidence in any person. I desire no friends but dupes and
slaves; not but I have often confided my secrets, but then it was merely
through vanity; and I always disguised or altered facts, and added
circumstances, for lies cost me nothing when they would give me consequence.

You are quite adorable, and so benevolent!

Yes, I love pomp and show excessively.

When we are united, you shall dispose of all my treasures. How many wretches
will you relieve with my wealth?

Oh! I will certainly keep it all myself.

Divine Arpalisa, how you enchant me! What an astonishing union of Virtue, Wit,
and Knowledge; for it is in vain you would deny you are as learned as
beautiful? Your Courtiers told me all; they assured me the evening before we
departed, there was not in the whole nation so profound a mathematician as
yourself.

They are paid to say so, and are disgraced if they do not. I am exceedingly
ignorant, though I wish to be thought otherwise.

How modest! -- and then your paintings --

Are every one done by Zolphir.

And the charming Symphonies --

Are all composed by Gerastus.

You are really unique in this world.

It is certain no person ever had more art, or carried dissimulation farther;
for I have imposed upon the most knowing and clear-sighted people.

Arpalisa in pronouncing this phrase, certainly intended a most modest answer;
for she took so humble an air, with down-cast eyes, and made such comic and
ridiculous grimaces, that I could with difficulty restrain myself from
laughter. Her tone of voice, and the faces she made, agreed so ill with what
she uttered, and formed a contrast so singular and pleasant, that I found it
impossible to sustain the conversation any longer. I rose to leave her; she
called me with a feeble voice, telling me, at the same time, she was going to
close her eyes, and to fall into dreadful convulsions. I got away, and went to
relate my adventure to the Sylph and the Philosopher.

You pretend, said I to Gelanor, this Castle can only give me pain, and that it
can never be of use to me while I am attatched to the world; that, in a word,
it is only fit for one who is already undeceived by reason, and freed from the
power of the passions; but do you not now see its use? For had not I brought
Arpalisa hither, I should have married a woman at once old, ugly, deceitful,
ambitious, and wicked.

But, my Lord, replied Gelanor, you might, without setting foot in this Castle,
have easily seen this woman nearly as she is, had you been less subject to take
things on trust, and had you less vanity. Learn to see with your own eyes, to
judge from facts, and not from the opinions of others; do not so easily believe
it is impossible when you think proper to act the lover, you should not be
beloved; and I may assure you, that you will in no part of the world become the
dupe of such women as Arpalisa.

Do you think it no advantage, said I, a little touched, to hear a Philosopher
speak to me with so much freedom.

When you do not reject truth, replied Gelanor, she will always approach you;
she is not shut up within these Castle walls, but is omnipresent upon earth,
and is seen more or less disguised, according to the weakness, pride or
sincerity with which she is sought; mortal eyes could not support her presence
in every incident of life, and thus it is she is seen in this Castle, where she
destroys all sweet and innocent illusions, as well as dangerous errors; she
here wears so savage a form, so pitiless, so hard, so rude, that she wounds and
disgusts even when she might be useful.

These reflections did not make me change my opinion; experience only could
make me wise.

I questioned Zumio what had passed in the Castle during my absence. Ever since
your inscription has been erased, answered Zumio, we have had plenty of
visitors; and the crowd is now great; the company is numerous, but the bands of
society are broken; dispute's, endless quarrels, and gross rudenesses are
continually heard. Politeness is absolutely banished; they rail at each other
without art or indulgence; they cannot caluminate, but the most biting rancour
makes them amends; they hate openly, exclaim, scold, and continue an eternal
uproar, of which you can form no idea.

And how do the women behave?

More ridiculous in general than the men; the slightest subject engenders
mortal hatred, and they discover falsehood so meditated, and artifices, often
so puerile, as scarcely to be credited. One tells us, she hopes we shall
believe the sight of a Spider makes her ill* another, that she is going to make
us imagine she shall fall into hysterics at the sight of a Cat; and even when
they have no particular views to answer, some will practice deceit, for so they
think they do, merely for amusement: but, continued Zumio, coquettes are most
of all disgusting, for they discover so much effrontery, sentiments so
perverse, tricks so absurd, so --

What, interrupted I, has not one virtuous woman entered the Castle!

Pardon me, my Lord, there is one.

Zumio stopped, and seemed embarrassed. What is the matter, Zumio, said I, what
ails you? Speak, I insist upon it.

I am in love, and am mortally afraid you should become my Rival.

And would you not sacrifice your Love to me?

No, indeed.

No! You, who have assured me there is no sacrifice you would not make to
secure my happiness!

I exaggerred greatly. I am much attached to you, but I should hesitate to
deceive you for Rosamond.

The confession is expressive and passionate. -- And Rosamond is very charming.

There is not her equal in the universe; her heart is honest and unpolluted,
and deserving the love of a Sylph.

And you love her?

The purity of her sentiments please me, and she has told me she has an
inclination for me.

If you are beloved, what have you to fear? For should ambition seduce her, she
will be obliged to speak truth, and cannot therefore persuade me I have the
preference.

Oh! I am certain of her heart; I am only fearful she should turn your head,
and that you then might trouble our repose.

Oh! fear nothing, Zumio, I am no tyrant; besides, I do not wish to become your
rival; and I protest I can converse without trouble or danger, however charming
she may be, so long as you shall have her affections.

Since you are resolved to see her, let me go first and speak to her

Why so?

Because --

Nay, answer.

Because I wish to prejudice her against you by telling her your faults.

You are very obliging, but I will not give you that trouble; tell me only if
she knows the effect of this Castle.

Undoubtedly; she has been here these six weeks, and it is scarcely possible to
live in it two days without finding that out.

Followed by the sorrowful and zealous Zumio, I went to find Rosamond, but met
Arpalisa. As soon as she saw me, my Lord, cried she, what kind of a place is
this you have brought me to? What strange people are assembled in this Castle?
I went into the Saloon for a moment, and there I found the very worst kind of
company; women so stupid, men so coxcomical. -- Such rudeness! -- I never
beheld such manners; if you knew the insolence I have been offered -- I was in
despair to see every body admiring a young Lady they call Rosamond. I
endeavored to dissemble my vexation, but could not; and so I called aloud,
Gentlemen, come here, look at me, think of me, pay your addresses to me, and
leave that young beauty, whom I detest, since she pleases and attracks all the
men.

No sooner had I addressed them thus, than they all burst out a laughing, and
hooted, and mocked, as if I had said the most ridiculous thing in the world; I
then told them I was the Queen of the Castle, and that tomorrow I should be
your Bride; on which their hue and cry began again, and they were even insolent
enough to call me old mad-woman. -- Give me vengeance, my Lord, and drive this
Rosamond from the Castle.

Then she has particularly offended you?

She is the only one who offered me no insult, but my hatred is not the less
strong; she obtained new praises of her mildness and modesty, and besides she
is so beautiful. -- I have endeavored to defame her as much as possible before
you; therefore tell me, my Lord, whether what I have said to you, has made any
impression upon you.

A very strong one I assure you; and I will go and seek Rosamond immediately,
to tell what I think of your justice and moderation.

Go not near her, my Lord, she will seduce you.

Pray be calm. Zumio, conduct the Princess to her apartment.

So saying, I waited not for an answer, but flew to find Rosamond, who was in
fact what love and envy painted her; her beauty was angelic, her modesty and
understanding wonderful. I looked, listened, and envied the happiness of Zumio;
but as, thanks to the Box which the King of the Genii had given me, I could
dissemble my thoughts, I did not inform Rosamond of the strong impression she
made upon my heart; I contented myself with only reading here is; she told me she
was neither coquetish nor inconstant; that Zumio was the first object she had
loved; that she had not any violent passion for him at present, but that she
felt her love would soon equal Zumio's.

I quitted Rosamond, enchanted by her beauty, wit, and character. In the
evening I was out of temper, and especially with Zumio; he complained; I became
more vexed, and drove him from my presence, but called him back a moment after,
not to do him justice, but to prevent his being with Rosamond; I felt my own
tyranny, which love would not of itself have produced; but Zumio enraged me, by
the rudeness and severity of his expressions and reproaches.

The sage Gelanor in vain endeavored to make peace between us; alas, said he,
were you not in this Castle, and otherwise in the same situation, Zumio would
disguise his injurious fears, and excessive resentment, and appear mild and
moderate, and you would then be equitable and generous. Remember, my Lord, he
is forced to speak what he thinks; remember he is under the dominion of love
and anger, and that tomorrow he will not think as he does today.

Do you not see, exclaimed Zumio, that Phanor only wants a pretext to banish me
the Castle, that he may drive me from Rosamond; for do not suppose, that he,
like us, is obliged to speak what he thinks; his art preserves him from any
such necessity: he will not own it, because he is naturally suspicious* but I
have found him out in more than twenty falsehoods: thus while he reads our
secrets, in spite of ourselves, his own are locked up. What cowardice! what
unworthy meanness!

This reproach, which I but too much merited, drove me so furious, that had it
not been for Gelanor, I should certainly have committed some fatal crime. Stop,
madman, cried the Philosopher, stop, complete not your dishonor by avenging
yourself on a defenseless Rival.

The authoritative voice of virtue brought me to myself; but Gelanor could not
convince me of my error without vexing me; I left him hastily, and went and
shut myself in my own apartment, that I might indulge, without constraint, my
chagrin and ill-humour.

I became gloomy, impatient, morose, fled society, wandered mournfully in my
Castle, and sought for Rosamond against my will; she avoided me when I
endeavored to approach her; I saw so much perplexity and disdain in her
countenance that I durst not speak.

I found her one evening alone in the garden, sitting in a bower, plunged in a
deep reverie. I advanced, and perceiving she had been weeping, I asked her the
cause of her inquietude? She sighed, Zumio, replied she, has just left me; I
saw he was dissatisfied with me, and that afflicts me.

Dissatisfied! said I, with extreme pleasure, why?

Rosamond made me no answer, except by a look of indignation. In vain did I
press and question her; she was obstinately silent; hope entered my heart.
Zumio was dissatisfied -- Rosamond durst not speak; I imagined she read my
heart and was affected: all my resolutions, all the obligations I had to
Zumio's attachment were forgotten. I fell at her feet, and declared my love in
the most passionate terms. I could obtain no answer, but neither could I
observe the coloring of anger on the beauteous cheeks of Rosamond; on the
contrary, I thought her eyes spoke satisfaction. I again solicited an answer
with fresh ardour; Rosamond, still mute, made a motion as if to rise and fly
me. I fearing to displease, would not constrain, and therefore left her.

Full of hope, or rather not doubting my happiness, I sought for solitude to
think on Rosamond. I had walked thus two hours, when Zumio suddenly appeared,
animated by the most violent rage. So, perfidious Spirit, cried he, you have
seduced Rosamond. I have observed for some days past her silence and
thoughtfulness, and at last the Die is cast; she has declared she loves me no
longer, but that she adores you.

Zumio! What is it you tell me! Dearest Zumio! I am sorry for you -- But oh! be
generous enough to sacrifice your love.

I am obliged to sacrifice it, but at the same time my friendship for you is
gone.

Nay, Zumio --

You merit not a friend; nor will I ever forget or forgive treachery so black.

Accuse me not of treachery, Zumio, for you never confided in me. You suspected
me before I thought of Rosamond; had it not been for your unjust jealousy, your
injurious reproaches and passions, Phanor had never been your rival; but you
insulted, vexed, aggravated me, and so highly offended me, that for a moment I
forgot our friendship. I have been weak, but not perfidious; besides, in
robbing you of Rosamond's heart, I have broken no sacred engagements; she had
not promised to give you her hand. Hope was all she had granted. Triumph then,
dear Zumio, over your resentment, and make not my wrongs greater than they are.
Rosamond is altered, think not of her, and torment me not with such distressing
complaints.

When I had said this, I drew near to take Zumio in my arms; but he immediately
drew back; and run off, saying, I detest you.

I was astonished, yet happy, and forgave him his anger, and without troubling
myself more about it, flew to find Rosamond. She received me at first with
great perplexity; but how excessive was my joy, when she blushing owned she
loved me, and me only; that she had never felt for Zumio more than an emotion
of preference, but her love for me was real.

Do you indeed love me for myself, cried I, has ambition no -- Here Rosamond
interrupted me; -- dare you presume to think it; banish such suspicions, my
Lord, they are insults. I never had other ambition than that of pleasing you;
and if you had no Castle but a cottage to offer me, all the Kings and Genii of
the world would be refused for you.

You may more easily imagine, than I describe, the motions I felt at hearing an
answer like this in the Castle of Truth. How much did I congratulate myself on
the possession of this Castle, which procured me happiness so pure; for, said
I, could I have persuaded myself any where else, that in this answer there was
no exaggeration.

To expedite our nuptials I left her, and gave orders for their being
solemnized next day. The news soon resounded through the Castle. As for
Arpalisa, she had known the Charm above a fortnight, and had shut herself up in
her apartment there, to hide from all eyes her fury and her shame; and there to
wait, as she did with inexpressible impatience, the expiration of the three
months, which she was obliged to remain in this enchanted Castle. Zumio, become
my enemy, was with her; for my own part, being totally occupied about Rosamond,
I neither felt the happiness of being justly despised, nor was I in a condition
to think of the wrong I had done.

It was a long and wearisome night! Hymen's torch was not to be lighted till
day, and then I was to wed the most beautiful and lovely lady upon earth.
Certain of her virtue, the goodness of her disposition, the purity of her mind,
sure of being passionately beloved. I again found that bliss which, for a
moment, Agelia taught me to taste. Rosamond, less lively, less poignant than
Agelia, had neither her caprices nor singularities, but the happiness I
anticipated with her, promised to be more permanent and substantial, as I
thought.

Aurora no sooner begun to send her beams into my chamber, than I, unable to
restrain my impatience, rose and flew to Rosamond's apartment. I took a basket,
garnished with flowers and precious stones, into which I put a billet, which I
was desirous she should receive when she awaked; and I entered her chamber,
without either being seen or heard; Rosamond was asleep; and, after having
placed the basket at her feet, I hesitated a little, her beauties astonishing
me.

The merest accident caused me to cast my eye on her table, just as I was about
to retire; but what was my stupefaction, when I beheld, upon that table the
Box, the Talisman, which the Sovereign of the Genii had given me, that I myself
should not be subjected to the charm of the Castle.

I supposed I had been mistaken by an accidental resemblance; for searching in
my pocket, I there found a box: I again recovered my breath, took confidence,
examined carefully, and thought that that I found in my pocket was the true
one. Taking up the other, however, which lay on the table, for farther
conviction, I could no longer doubt my misfortune. I perfectly saw by comparing
them together, that Rosamond's was the Talisman, and that which I had was a
counterfeit.

Amazed and perplexed, I could form no probable conjecture concerning this
adventure, but took the Talisman, put the counterfeit on the table, again
snatched up my basket, in order to retire hastily, lest I should be suspected.

My vexation and passion I cannot describe. I knew not how or when Rosamond had
procured my Talisman, but it was evident there was treachery at the bottom. So
then! cried I, all the power of magic is unable to cope with the perfidy of
women; even here in this Castle, they fall upon schemes to impose on us.

Whenever Rosamond arose, I waited on her; I was in great agitation, which she
soon perceived, and enquired the cause.

I have had some disagreeable thoughts, I replied, and somehow I dread that
Zumio shares your affections.

You wrong me much indeed then.

I was transported at hearing this, and was restored almost to my former
Paradise, when she said,

My constancy is unshaken; my virtue is real and not to be shaken; you are
going to become my shusband, and I would prefer death to the infamy of
betraying you, I made no promise to Zumio, commit no crime in renouncing him,
and my pride is gratified by sacrificing my Love.

What say you, replied I, in astonishment.

Why are you so much surprised, said Rosamond? are you not convinced of my Love?

Do you think I should?

Indeed I must confess it is Zumio I love; but my virtue might easily triumph
over that inclination, for I will see Zumio no more, but attach myself to you;
gratitude and duty are all powerful over my heart; you are vain, I am virtuous,
and I can easily make you believe I love you above all men.

I now found it impossible to keep within bounds; my passion overcame me, and
Rosamond soon perceived I had found out the deception of the Talisman.

Alas! exclaimed she, now will Zumio have ample vengeance on his ambitious
mistress and perfidious friend, and heaven is just. Yes, my Lord, ambition
seduced my soul; informed of your passion by Zumio, I regretted the rank and
power which such a marriage would confer on your consort; Zumio enraged,
overwhelmed me with reproaches, and irritated me; I commanded him to leave me;
you soon after appeared, and unwilling you should know my thoughts, I
determined to to be silent; scarce had you quitted me, ere I saw shining among
the green herbs, the fatal Talisman, which in all likelihood, had fallen out of
your pocket when you so passionately threw yourself at my feet; by a very
singular chance, I happened to possess a box of rock crystal, very like your
Talisman, and at first I thought it was my own box: but examining further, I
discovered the mystic characters which are engraved upon the lid, I then no
longer doubted it was a Talisman. Zumio had told me the enchantment of the
Castle had no effect on you; and I guessed that this box was the preservative
which might, perhaps, guard you from the effects of this dangerous charm; I
immediately ran to my chamber, sought for, and found my own box, and with a
diamond's point, traced, and perfectly imitated the mysterious ciphers. This
operation over, Zumio came, and on him I first tried the virtue of your
Talisman; I told him I did not love him, and found the box gave me the
capability of disguising my thoughts. Zumio left me in despair; I went to find
and meet you. I had but one fear, which was, that you had discovered my theft,
though scarcely two hours had passed since it had happened; but soon found you
had not. While you expressed your transports, I adroitly slipped my crystal box
into your pocket, and kept yours. I knew the cheat must in time be discovered,
if we remained here, but I flattered myself I should easily prevail on you
quickly to quit this Castle. I had been tempted by opportunity, spurred on by
ambition, I had not leisure to weigh coolly the dangers of an undertaking at
once so foolish and improper.

My Lord, you are now acquainted with every thing concerning this affair; and I
sincerely regret having deceived you; I reproach myself more for having
sacrificed Zumio; but I have discovered no malice, have not debased myself; and
though deprived of the Talisman, and obliged to speak truth, I still can say I
love virtue; and that I never should have violated its sacred duties, had I
become your wife, in consequence of my plan.

I was now compelled to love Rosamond with all her ambition; penetrated with
regret, overwhelmed with despair, and more in love than ever, I cast myself at
her feet. Oh, Rosamond! cried I, it is impossible for me to vanquish the
passion you cannot participate; I am not beloved; but deign, at least, to give
me the right ever to love you; deign still to reign in this Castle; let Hymen
for ever unite your destiny to mine. Come, I am ready to attend you to the
Altar.

I am neither bold, my Lord, nor mean; had I married you, I doubt not you
should have been happy; but now when even that hope is fled, I never will be
yours.

This uncommon delicacy delighted me, and I vainly essayed to vanquish it; she
persisted in her refusal; I again saw Zumio; told him all that had passed. She
took the resolution, the same day, to quit the Castle of Truth, and Zumio
declared he was determined to follow her. I flatter myself, added he, that when
we have left this accursed Castle, Rosamond may persuade me she has only been
guilty of a slight wrong toward me, the remembrance of which I ought to lose.
Farewell, my Lord, and as I engage I never shall again enter these walls, if
you abide here; farewell, for ever.

And will you, Zumio, abandon me?

As Rosamond loves you not, I no longer hate you; but my resentment against you
is still strong; were I able to conceal it, as I have still much attachment for
you in my heart, and likewise much compassion, I might be capable to console
you, and excite your gratitude and admiration, by sacrificing a woman, who, it
must be owned, would have sacrificed me; but you rend my heart, I can disguise
nothing; it is not possible to show myself more generous, or less vindictive
than I really am; besides, should I hereafter repent the having made such a
sacrifice, you would instantly know it, and I should lose its fruits;
therefore, adieu, my Lord; and if you wish to preserve friends, follow my
counsel, and take another dwelling.

To add to my grief, Zumio left me and followed Rosamond; thus, in one unhappy
day, my friend and mistress forsook me.

The Philosopher remained; prompted by his curiosity, he continued in a place,
which furnished a Philosopher with many subjects for reflection. Touched to see
my profound grief, he pressed me to abandon my Castle. No, Gelanor, said I, no;
here will I stay till I have found an amiable woman of virtue and sensibility
who may yet make amends for all the calamities my unhappy love has produced.

As I was walking one day through a bower of myrtles and orange trees, Gelanor
came to seek me. Here are two guests, said he, a man and a woman of a
delightful form, who have unthinkingly entered the Castle, and are exceedingly
afflicted to learn they are obliged to remain here three months; they are
consulting together, and I believe, mean to ask your permission to be married
here; but, in all likelihood, a quarter of an hour's conversation will rob them
of that wish, for no more time is requisite here to make a breach between the
happiest of lovers.

While Gelanor was thus speaking, the youth approached: I advised him,
enquiring if he yet continued firmly resolved to marry his mistress?

I am indeed, my Lord, said he, and as my resolution is not occasioned by Love,
there is the less fear of a relapse.

And are you not in love?

I am not; formerly I loved this lady personally, as she did me, but an
extraordinary accident tore my mistress from me, only to persecute her; this I
knew, but knew not into what part of the world she was carried. Love obliged me
to go in search of her; and I left my country, vowing never to return till I
had found her whom I adored. My travels lasted three years; Love followed, or
rather guided my path, for the first year; but the way at length became too
wearisome for him, and he left me; I however, did without him, and continued my
route; but I soon traveled slower, and stopped oftener, till my fidelity
vanished, for I stopped too long.

But friendship and honor made me again recollect my engagements; I continued
my travels, and found the woman I had so passionately loved, but who now was no
more than a dear and interesting friend. She was deeply affected by all I had
done for her; incapable of deceiving me, she confessed she no longer had the
power of participating that love she supposed we inspired; for that during so
long an absence, another object had touched her heart. At present, added she, I
am free, and I am never more liable to the seductions of love; let sincerity,
Oh Nadir! be thought the best proof of my gratitude; and if, after this
confession, you love me still, to you I am ready to devote my life; you have
lost an ardent lover, and in her room have got a steady friend and constant and
affectionate wife.

Her honesty delighted me, and in return I ceased to dissemble; I opened my
heart to this generous, amiable friend, pressed her to unite her destiny to
mine, and obtained the promise of her hand, when we got home again.

In about a month after our departure, we approached the loved land that gave
us birth, when happening to see this magnificent Castle, curiosity invited us
to enter; but since we are obliged to pass three months here, let me conjure
you, my Lord, to allow us to defer our union no longer.

If your mistress agrees, I said, I had no objection.

Be pleased to ask her, my Lord, she comes.

I looked about, and beheld her coming -- I trembled; my heart beat violently,
I started to meet her -- Heavens! cried I, it is Agelia -- I was not deceived,
it was she herself; surprise, confusion, feelings unaccountable, mixed with
grief, vexation and joy; emotions all violent and diverse, rendered me
unmovable. Agelia was silent for a moment, then laughed aloud, and so, my
Lord, said she, you are incorrigible -- For I now know the virtue of your
Castle -- And has all my admonitions and advices produced this effect?

Her raillery I could not bear, the rather as she spoke most cheerfully and
without concern; distracted, despairing, I made no reply, but precipitately
retired, to conceal feelings which it was impossible to dissemble. I never,
hitherto, had really loved any but Agelia; and this passion, which was so true
and strong, was instantly rekindled; I saw her again, found her more amiable,
more charming than ever; her manners were so natural, and her mind so candid,
that even in the Castle of Truth her accomplishments shone with undiminished
luster.

Love no longer influenced Nadir; Agelia felt only friendship for him; hope
again seduced me; I spoke to, conjured Agelia to prefer me to the indifferent
Nadir: remember, said I, that I love you to excess, while he does not.

Love, my Lord, said Agelia, evaporates, but the remembrance of generous
actions remains, and this it is which makes attachments durable. I might forget
the love of Nadir, but never that he has traveled almost through the world for
these three years, in hopes of serving me.

Alas! replied I, and must I see you in the possession of Nadir, and be driven
to extremity?

Such extremity is the whim of an hour. Can you seriously ask me to sacrifice
so faithful, so generous a friend? -- You who had not the trifling merit
(trifling, because it is involuntary) to regret for any reasonable space of
time, the mistress whom you had lost by your own fault; the inhabitants of this
Castle are not remarkable for their taciturnity; I have questioned them, and,
you may well suppose, know the Anecdotes of Arpalisa and Rosamond: speak not
then to me of a passion I no longer feel. Open your eyes, my lord? you are born
virtuous and amiable; but while you preserve this injurious suspicion and
imprudent curiosity, which characterise you at present, you neither can know
repose nor happiness. Think what this fatal infatuation of wishing to penetrate
the secret foldings of the heart you love has already cost you: without
mentioning myself; remember Rosamond, who was charming, sincere, virtuous,
sensible of benefits, capable of gratitude, and, in any other place but this,
of making you perfectly happy. Remember the amiable little Zumio, who so
sincerly loved you, and whom you drove from you. Oh cease, my Lord, to wish to
destroy necessary illusions; abandon this fatal Castle, or for ever renounce
friendship, love, society, and, in fact, all those connections and enjoyments
which render life comfortable.

What she said, struck me the more, because Agelia, with firmly not to be
shaken, persisted in her resolution to wed Nadir. Unable to support the cruel
sight, I came at length to a determination; and wishing, at least to gain the
esteem of Agelia, heaped benefits on Nadir; left the Castle, engaging myself
never to enter these gates if impelled by jealousy or suspicion.

I think, replied Agelia, your engagement would be more to the purpose, were
you never to come here again on any account whatever.

It is not in my power to engage for that, answered I, but to prove to you I do
not intend to come often, or stay long, I here give you, dearest Agelia, the
Talisman, which the ambitious Rosamond once purloined; this box, as you know;
is a certain preservative against the enchantment of the Castle; you are
obliged to stay here three months, and in that time it may be of some service
to you. Farewell for ever.

If you allow me to give it to Nadir, replied Agelia, I will accept it; deceit
is always painful, but to be deceived is often the greatest of pleasures. If he
should dive into my thoughts; so therefore allow me to put your Talisman into
his hands.

The Talisman is yours, do with it what you think proper, to your happiness I
sacrifice it; but now, obliged as I am to speak what I think, deign, for the
last time, to hear a faithful avowal of the passion you inspire. Never, Agelia,
have I loved any as I have loved you; never shall I forget you. Adieu! pity the
unhappy Phanor; for your compassion and regard is the only mitigations my grief
permits.

While I thus spoke, I observed the tears of the lovely feeling Agelia begin to
flow; too much affected to reply, she gave me her hand, which I bathed with my
tears. -- At length I tore myself from her, quitted her for ever, left the
Castle of Truth, and I have never since returned to it.

Phanor having thus finished his story, thus addressed Altemira. -- This is the
secret I have had the fortitude, for sixteen years, to conceal. Never, dear
Altemira, have I doubted your virtue or affection: the Castle of Truth cannot
add to the esteem I have for you; it might enfeeble, or at least disturb, for a
moment, that sincere attachment by which we are at present united; and, if you
take my advice you will never attempt a journey of such risque.

My dear Phanor, replied Altemira, I am anxious to have an opportunity of
repeating, in the Castle of Truth, that I never loved any but Phanor.

Such a declaration was in in some degree agreeable to the Genius, especially
that the Queen was so firmly resolved, since it proved so well her virtue; he
only required she should seriously reflect for six months; and if, said he, you
are then of that mind, we will immediately prosecute the journey.

The time being elapsed, Altemira was anxious to depart, and take with her her
daughter, and Prince Philamir, who was to espouse Zeolide. My daughter, said
she, is certain of the heart of Philamir; but she desires he should read hers
likewise, and, ere he receives her hand be assured of her faith. The Prince
knows the effects of the Castle, yet ardently wishes to go with us; Zeolide
wishes to take her dear and amiable friend, Palmis, so beloved by her and us,
and whom I propose acquainting what is the charm of the Castle this evening.

I have a plan also, replied Phanor, to take thither three or four Courtiers,
whom I should not be sorry to know, and whom I shall not inform of the secret
of the much to be dreaded place whither they are going; for were I so to do, I
imagine they would find some pretext to be excused taking such a journey: on
which account, Philamir and Zeolide, must be enjoined in secrecy.

Altemira and Zeolide, that night, confided the secret to their friend, and
Palmis at first showed more surprise than eagerness to take this journey.
However, after some reflection, Palmis said, I have nothing essential to
reproach myself of; my attachment to you is genuine, not feigned, I therefore
wish to attend you.

Palmis acknowledged at same time she loved a young Courtier, named Chrisel,
whose natural levity she feared. Chrisel was a man of fashion, and such a
quality does not inspire love with confidence. Palmis wished her lover might go
with them, to which Phanor consented.

The hour of departure arrived, Altemira, Zeolide, Philamir, and Palmis, were
the only persons who knew the secret of the Castle of Truth; and, in proportion
as they approached it, their gaiety decreased; melancholy and inquietude
invaded their hearts; Zeolide was the most tranquil, but Philamir became
thoughtful and absent; the gloom of Palmis was visible, and the Queen was
alarmed at remarking the trouble of Phanor. The Courtiers, who knew not the
cause, vainly endeavored to enliven the lost gaiety of the Genius: the Queen
and Zeolide, the Lover of Palmis, the amiable and brilliant Chrisel, never
discovered more grace or greater desire to please; and when conversing with
Palmis in secret, he painted his passion with so much feeling and heat, that
her suspicions vexed her.

One of these Courtiers who attended Phanor, was a man of an odd character,
seldom met with in Courts. Aristeus (so he was called) had done the State great
service, arrived at the highest honors by merit alone; he did not come to
court till his youth was past, and he brought thither a bluntness and
moroseness in his manner, that gave him an air of originality, which had the
greatest effect, because it formed so strong a contrast to the manners usually
seen in such places. A rigid and satiric Courtier is not very likely to become
a favorite; but his success for that very reason was at first as great as his
singularity amusing; but finding afterward his understanding equalled his
ill-humour, they endeavored too late to get him driven out; so he was settled
at Court, as both Altemira and Phanor valued him.

But what is most remarkable when established there, he did not alter his
behavior; for he not only forbore false panegyric, but he was never even heard
to praise; and though very capable of zealously serving his friends, he never
said an agreeable or pleasant thing, nor was a friendly offer known to escape
him.

The Castle of Truth was now at hand, and Phanor had a private conversation
with the Queen. I confess to you, said he, I cannot enter this Castle, which
has been so fatal to me, without chagrin, nor can I dissemble. I stand greatly
in need of your indulgence, What husband, who has been married seventeen years,
can say he never has been chargeable with a fault -- Too minute investigation
will rather vex you.

I shall ask you no questions then, my Lord, replied the Queen in a pet.

Nor will I you, said Phanor.

I am under no apprehensions from yours, my Lord, therefore do not fear to meet
them.

I heartily confess to you, that as the most scruplous candor will be
necessary I have some dread, replied Phanor.

Acknowledge then, said Altemira, you at present deeply regret you sacrificed
your precious Talisman, which gave you the happy power to conceal your thoughts
in the Castle of Truth from Agelia, that beautiful fair one.

The Genius gave no answer but a sigh; and the Queen gave place to a fit of
melancholy.

The shining walls of the Castle now appeared, more than one heart was
agitated, but they felt too late all the consequences of so dangerous a voyage.
They descend, proceed, and enter the fatal gates.

On entering the Castle, the first object that caught the attention of the
Genius was the venerable Gelanor, the virtuous Philosopher, whom he had left
above eighteen years before in the Castle of Truth. Phanor hastily left the
Queen, glad of a pretext to be at some distance from her; and ran to salute
Gelanor, with whom he retired into the Gardens.

My Lord, said the Philosopher, who is this you have brought with you?

A wife I have married.

A wife! Strange! Did you reflect well?

Her virtue is undoubted.

Many husbands, my Lord, within these nineteen years, have I known enter this
Castle with the same security, and leave it convinced of their mistake.

Such doubts distress not me; Altemira knows the effects of this Castle, yet
would come hither. I have little uneasiness concerning what I may know of her,
but much for what she may learn of me. -- But tell me, venerable Sage, satisfy
my curiosity. -- Time has not yet effaced Agelia from my memory; and every
thing here recalls her rememerance -- Did she marry Nadir, when I left you?

She did, my Lord, and that very hour, gave him the Talisman she had of you.
Nadir, touched by so delicate and generous a procedure, determined never to
question her, and thus they passed three months in the most perfect
understanding. -- My Lord, take a lesson from them.

If the Queen inclines, I agree.

As Gelanor and the Genius were thus conversing, Zeolide was walking with the
Queen, and the rest of the newly arrived travelers. The young Princess and
Philamir were a little before. After a moment's silence, Philamir said, Ever
since I have been in this place, I have found an insurmountable embarrssment. I
dare not speak my thoughts; I tremble lest what I say here should not seem
sufficiently warm.

So then heretofore you flattered.

Perhaps I did.

Base man! half my feelings were not expressed.

What an enchanting speech! adorable Zeolide?

But, say, did you ever love me?

You alone I have loved: on you depends my happiness.

Enough, enough, replied the Princess. -- Yes, dear Philamir, we will prove,
that even this Castle cannot be fatal to true Lovers; and that far from
destroying it increases affection, by dissipating all the doubts which is too
often felt by a lively passion.

While she thus spoke, Altemira and Palmis came up; Philamir left them, and the
princesses separated themselves from the groupe of Courtiers that followed them
in the gardens; and Philamir and Chrisel went into a thicket, at the entrance
of which they saw a young woman sitting on a bank. She was handsome, and
Chrisel would go and speak to her. The Prince soon found she was but just
arrived, and that she no more than Chrisel knew how impossible it was to
conceal her thoughts. He enquired her name; Asema, she replied.

Your manner is whimsical and flirting, which is agreeable enough, said
Chrisel, thinking he had praised her extravagantly, and astonished to see with
what an air of surprise and disdain she received his compliment. -- And so,
said he, you are a woman, and is not flattery agreeable.

Is that your flattery: you think me ugly, perhaps?

Ugly! I just now said you are the most delightful creature I ever saw.

You are fantasticle indeed, Sir, but it matters not; for, I value Simple
Honesty.

You have a deal of penetration indeed, Sir,

I am sure at least you have plenty of sincerity.

Lord, Sir, sincerity, I never speak truth; it is all an air I assume to impose
upon you.

Chrisel could not stifle a laugh, and Asema turning toward Philamir, said,
Why are you so very silent, my Lord?

Why do you ask?

As I would wish to make a conquest of you.

I cannot say I ever met a lady so singular.

And you delight me exceedingly; I dare say you have strong passions, and are
easily imposed on.

I have been in love.

Very childishly I doubt not. Are you deeply smitten?

Deeply, and on my success my happiness depends.

No doubt -- and it makes me happy.

Why so?

I like vastly to set lovers at variance. Is your mistress here?

Yes.

I Will seek her out, and if she is handsome enough to pique my vanity, will
render you faithless. I shall walk this evening in the Orange-Grove; and I tell
you so expressly, that you may come and meet me there. So saying, she rose, and
Philamir going to detain her, said, Do not you see by my air of affectation, I
want to make you believe I think you a dangerous man, and consequently shun you?

She then very modestly retired.

This lady, said Chrisel, is really the most extraordinary and odd kind of
person I ever met. Women are all coquettes and deceitful, but she is the only
one I have ever seen who was indiscreet enough to own it; her wish to seduce,
and her excessive imprudence, make her truly whimsical and original. Were I in
your place, my Lord, I would not neglect to meet her.

Is that your real opinion?

Certainly -- would you be so scrupulous because you are in love with Zeolide?
-- Childish-folly!

What, replied Philamir, would it be practical to turn the brain of such a
coquetish girl as her?

I doubt not, if you manage prudently.

I have no such plan -- Yet I have a wish to attend the appointment.

The sudden appearance of Palmis interrupted the conversation; she had not yet
an opportunity of speaking alone with Chrisel, therefore, as soon as she saw
him she approached, and the Prince left them together. Palmis was agitated; she
dreaded to question her lover; and Chrisel, thinking about something else, did
not remark her perplexity. At last Palmis, fetching a deep sigh, said, Why are
you silent, Chrisel? Are you thinking of me?

No sooner did he hear the question, than assuming the most passionate manner
possible, and tenderly kissing the hand of Palmis, Chrisel replied, Oh! no, I
never think or trouble myself about you, I protest I do not.

How! Faithless man, cried Palmis.

Do you doubt my truth? Ah, Palmis, how unjust you are. Yes, said he, falling
on his knees, it has been my study to deceive you. Ambition and vanity alone
have attached me to you. Do justice, Palmis, to your Lover, for he is incapable
of affection; be comforted, be secure, and let these sincere protestations
drive all doubts from your mind. -- But why is anger so visible in your looks?
-- How have I offended you? And wherefore today will you not believe me? -- Do
you wish me to swear? -- Oaths cost me nothing.

Wretch, cried Palmis, I can listen no longer.

Tears impeded speech, and overwhelmed with excessive grief, she sunk on a
garden-seat; Chrisel still kneeling, feigned to weep. Do not you see, said he,
how I pretend to shed tears: really, beauteous Palmis, you quite weary me, and
though you are naturally as unreasonable as insipid, I never before saw you so
intolerably tiresome.

Begone, said Palmis, repelling Chrisel with indignation, you give me horror.

There is, certainly, said Chrisel, something I cannot understand in all this:
perhaps, said he, with an air of freedom, you wish to break with me; if so,
speak; there is no necessity for all these tears, this tragic tone; let us
remain friends at least; and this I wish because your credit and favor may yet
be useful to make my fortune.

Palmis made no other answer, than by rising with impetuosity; and as she flew
from him, darted a look of contemptuous rage at Chrisel.

The Courtier stood confounded, and as he reflected on this strange adventure,
heard a tumult of voices. He walked toward the noise, and entered into a
verdant Amphitheatre full of passengers newly arrived, to the number of about
thirty, sitting on the grass-banks, and forming a circle round Gelanor.
Chrisel, as he entered, asked why they were all assembled;

My Lord, said Gelanor, for these nineteen years I have done the honors of
this Castle; have neglected nothing to make it agreeable to strangers, and have
only required one thing in return, which is, to follow me to this place, and
answer a single question which I put to each person.

And what question is that, pray?

I only desire to know if they are happy.

Well, and have you found many people satisfied with their condition?

Their names are all written in a book, and I am still at the first page; but
alas! we ought not to wonder at this, since virtue and reason alone can give
happiness.

Have you begun your Catechism of today?

Yes; I have questioned nearly half this assembly. Will you, Sir, be kind
enough to answer me?

Oh, willing. I have been very successful at Court, made a great fortune,
ruined half a score women, who all before they knew me had excellent
reputations; and yet I am not happy, am weary of myself, enjoy nothing, but
wish for what I do not possess, with an ardour that consumes me.

Let us pass on to another, said Gelanor. What say you, grave stranger?
addressing himself to a little olive-coloured man with a disdainful air.

I am called a Philosopher, said the stranger, in an imperious and dogmatic
tone.

Then, comrade, answered Gelanor, smiling, you are happy.

I happy! no indeed.

And what prevents you?

Pride. I associate myself with some others like myself, and among us we have
formed a vast and hardy project. We wished to reign and domineer over the minds
of men; and we had a celebrated Magician for a Chief, who gave us a Talisman,
on which were engraven these three words, Benevolence Tolerance, Philosophy. My
friend, said the Magician, the virtue of these three words is such, that to
obtain your end, you have only incessantly to repeat them, and rest faithfully
attached and submissive to your chief. With this Talisman and my protection,
you will want neither knowledge nor genius; you may daringly say, and write all
the extravagancies which shall enter your imagination, you shall have an
exclusive authority to reason wrong; be inconsistent, trouble established
order, overturn moral principles and corrupt manners, without losing your
consequence; if you are attacked make no reply, beware of discussion. I permit
insults only, and declamations void of meaning, but no reasoning; keep
constantly repeating the same thing, Benevolence, Tolerance Philosophy. Should
it be proved you are neither benevolent, tolerant, nor a Philosopher, be not
frightened, only repeat and cry with more force and obstinacy than ever, these
three sacred and magic words, Benevolence, Tolerance, Philosophy, and you shall
triumph over all your enemies, at least as long as I shall live. So spoke this
great enchanter, and his promises had their full effect; but* alas! we have had
the misfortune to lose a chief so worthy of our regret; and since his death,
the Talisman has lost its virtue, and our empire is no more. Usurpers as we
are, our partisans are vanquished, we can excite no more confusions and are now
forgotten.

This speech the assumed Philosopher concluded with a sigh.

Zoram, one of Phanor's Courtiers, joined the company: hold, cried Chrisel,
addressing himself to Gelanor, if you want to find a happy* man interrogate
this, whose mirth is so great it approaches folly, amusing himself with every
thing, enthusiastic, and whimsical -- Is it not so?

Such are my pretensions, he replied.

Pretensions! Are you not distractedly fond of hunting, painting, music, --

I am fatigued with hunting; the best music in the world to me is only noise,
and I have no taste for painting; but I keep hounds, hire musicians, and buy
pictures; that is, I ruin myself, to make the world suppose I am entertained
and pleased.

But come, no joaking, say seriously.

This satisfies me, replied Gelanor; and now let me question this Lady, who is
sitting in the midst of that agreeable group of children and young Ladies. You
are the mother of a family, madam, said Gelanor.

My children are these around.

And are you happy?

Say, my children, the question is for you.

When she had spoken, her two eldest daughters, with tears of joy in their
eyes, ran to her arms with the most tender exexpressions of gratitude; and
crying, with all our hearts we love her.

And have I this day beheld a happy person; -- Say Madam, your name?

Eudemonia.

Pray favor me with answers to a few questions. How long have you enjoyed the
pure and affecting happiness, of which you now present so enchanting a picture?

Since I have been a mother.

How do you live?

Very retired; my children occupy my attention one half of the day; friendship
and study the other.

Are your friends numerous?

They are not; but they are faithful.

Are you possessed of great riches?

I am not; nor ever shall.

Why?

I have no taste for pomp; and know no other use for money, but to distribute.

Are you very ambitious?

No, indeed; not even for my children; for reason and experience have taught
me, honors and wealth are not the source of happiness.

The Philosopher took his book from his pocket, and with inexpressible joy in
his countenance, inscribed Eudemonia's name.

Zoram and Chrisel quitted the garden, and went toward the Castle; the little
Court of the Genius assembled in the Saloon; Aristeus the satiric and surly
Courtier, already mentioned was speaking to the Queen, who was surprised to
find that he had lost so much of his moroseness; that his manners were more
mild, and that he could say obliging things. Zoram and Chrisel entered the
Saloon; the Princess was going to her music, and turning her harp, Philamir sat
beside her, and the sorrowful unhappy Palmis leaned languishingly against a
pillar, thought of the perfidious Chrisel, and was mournfully silent. Chrisel
approached Phanor, who was thoughtfully walking. Being desirous of saying
something civil of the Queen, he followed the Genius, and as soon as he was
near enough Altemira to be heard, stopped, and with a look of great
complaisance, addressing himself to the Genius, said, how much the Queen shows
her age today; it is not possible to think that she is less than thirty-eight
at least.

The Queen, though still beautiful, was no longer vain of her person, but
smiled. You flatter sometimes Chrisel.

That was my inclination at present, madam.

Does my dress please you?

I dislike it much; it does not suit your age.

Then with a most obliging and gentle tone and manner, Chrisel, quite satisfied
with himself, and with what he had said, made his obeisance and returned to the
Genius.

Zoram went up to Palmis, and, desirous of awakening her from her reverie, by
inciting agreeable ideas in her mind, said, Good God! madam, your eyes are sunk
in your head, and how red your nose is; you do not look handsome today at all.
Nay, do not affect that disdainful air, nor think what I say is flattery to
deceive; believe me, it is the truth.

Zeolide was sitting, and preluding on her instrument; Zoram, in order to
maintain his reputation for a connoisseur passionately fond of music, hastily
approached, with every demonstration of gladness. The Princess sang, and
accompanied herself; Zoram listened, and beat out of time, clapping as if he
had been mad. Before the air was half over, he exclaimed, still continuing his
hand applause, How wearisome, and tiresome it is!

The Princess was a little disconcerted and stopped; I am quite delighted,
madam, said he to see you the dupe of these affected transports; it was to act
transport, that I made this bustle.

The rest of the courtiers were astonished to hear him, and absolutely supposed
poor Zoram was mad. Chrisel, who was particularly intimate with him, wishing to
appear afflicted for his misfortune, put on an air of tender amazement, and
exclaimed, Poor Zoram how happy I am to see him thus! I shall gain by it; I
will this very evening solicit Phanor for his place.

And so, taking Zoram by the arm, he left the Saloon, dragging him away.

The Princess then asked her lover, laughing, if he, like Zoram, thought the
air she had been playing, insipid?

I was not attending, replied Philamir, something else took up my thoughts.

Zeolide blushed with vexation, and Aristeus said, I, madam, have not lost a
bar of it, and I think the air a very good one, and I am in raptures with your
voice.

Is it possible, Aristeus, interrupted the Genius, what are you becoming a
gallant flatterer?

That I do not propose, he replied, but I am neither so frigid nor unfeeling as
I appear; I am somewhat cross and wish to be thought singular, for which reason
I pass my life in snarling and finding fault, entirely from a spirit of
contradiction; besides, I have made it a law with myself, never openly to
praise nor flatter, but on important matters, and not directly.

How now; -- I conceive your meaning; Pray, did you never flatter me?

I possess your esteem, because you believe I have not; yet love me, because I
really have; you believe, simply enough, that a man with a gruff tone and blunt
manners, cannot flatter; you are suspicious of other Courtiers, but in full
security with me; but flattery can take various forms, nor is there more than
one way to escape its seductions, and that is to be insensible to them. You
love flattery, and I give it you; I naturally hate it, and had you despised it,
I should never have had this meanness to reproach myself with; but thus only
could I obtain your confidence; if I deceive sometimes, you force me to it; and
had not you corrupted me, I never should have used artifice; I feel how much I
am debased, remember it, am enraged at you, and regard you not, although your
servant.

Get out of my sight, insolent! cried Phanor, with his eyes inflamed with fury,
let me never behold you again.

Zeolide was sadly affrighted at these words, she hastily rose, and followed by
Palmis, went into the gardens. Alas! said Zeolide, I begin to find how fatal
this Castle is; this unfortunate Aristeus, who has done the State so many
services, is disgraced and ruined* -- And have I any reason to be better
satisfied? How did Philamir answer me? It was for him I sang, yet he deigned
not to listen. What then did he think of? Ah! had I only enquired -- I say no
more. -- Oh, Palmis, judge what I feel.

I see nothing you have to complain of, replied Palmis, coldly.

What! the indifference, the cruel disdain of Philamir.

You are ridiculously suceptible.

This is a strange expression.

Alas! I have not the power to choose. -- Pardon me, madam.

You are not affected by my grief; I see you do not love me -- Ah! no doubt, it
is impossible for persons of my rank to be beloved for themselves. How unhappy
am I!

The Princess could not retain her tears as she spoke. -- You are unjust,
replied Palmis; do not calumniate human nature thus; if a Prince wishes to know
whether the praises given him are sincere, and whether he be really beloved,
let him ask his own heart; let him judge himself; if he disdains flattery, and
is capable of friendship, he may be certain he has tender and faithful friends.

Well, Palmis, I detest flattery, and love you.

And I, madam, have no friend in the world so dear to me as you are.

Zeolide answered Palmis by kissing her with transport. Be certain, henceforth,
added Palmis, your rank cannot injure the sentiments you are born to inspire.
In our secret conversations, your friendship and confidence establishes a
perfect equality between us; you are amiable, and have a feeling heart; I daily
receive new benefits from you, and inclination and gratitude are the sacred
ties by which we are for ever united.

Oh, my dear Palmis, cried Zeolide, how happy do you make me?

You cannot now doubt of my attachment, replied Palmis, and yet I fear this
Castle; remember, madam, that without condescension, without those delicacies
and attentions which come from the heart, friendship could not subsist.

Zeolide assured Palmis, that nothing hereafter could ever deprive her of
friendship and love.

While the two friends were thus conversing, Philamir did not forget, that the
coquette Azema had given him a rendezvous in the Orange-grove; and it seemed so
curious and amazing to read the heart of a woman of that character, that he had
not the fortitude to resist the opportunity; besides, I am certain, said he,
Azema cannot seduce me; Zeolide will know nothing of the affair, and
consequently will ask no questions. The latter reflection determined the
Prince, and he immediately went toward the grove. Here he found Azema
negligently extended on the grass, and in such a manner, as to leave a pretty
foot, and the half of a pretty leg exposed. Her eyes were down-cast; she seemed
lost in a profound reverie, and did not appear to perceive the Prince, who
gently approached.

Whenever the prince came up to her, Azema affected surprise, and got up --
Have I frightened you, said Philamir?

I wish to assume an air of modesty and surprise, I have been waiting for you
above an hour, in the same attitude in which you sound me; and I flatter
myself, added she, with down-cast eyes as if she was taken by surpize, my leg
and foot were noticed.

The Prince smiling, said he had never seen any thing more charming, and Azema
hid her face with her fan. -- What is your reason for that, said Philamir?

I wish you to suppose I am blushing.

Pray what think you of me, said Philamir?

I am pleased with you, and wish to captivate you.

I wish I had not been pre-engaged.

If so; what then?

Why this would be a critical minute.

Critical! say you, that is pretty.

I have a feeling heart; I doubt I Would be in love.

My imagination is warm, which will suit you -- I know I Will captivate you.

I am rather doubtful, you are so confident.

I shall now let you see my arm, and for that purpose I will take off my glove,
pretending to be warm.

The Prince when seeing one of her hands, replied, how elegantly turned and
white.

I shall now pretend to be offended with the liberty you have taken, and pout,
as you see; after which I will turn very sentimental.

She then drew away her hand with dignity, and turned her back on Philamir. --
Will you be long in a pet, said he?

Just to draw your attention to my fine shape and flowing inglets.

Entertained with her schemes, Philamir exclaimed, what flowing hair!

Philamir in fact observed she really had fine hair, an elegant shape, and one
of the prettiest faces in the world. After a moment's silence, Azema said to
him, if you had common sense, this is the instant in which you would fall at my
knees, at which I should then appear agitated.

The Prince could not withstand the curiosity he had, to know how Azema would
act tenderly, and accordingly did as she described. -- So! so! cried she, and
are you conquered!

Say, charming girl, what you now think?

I am enraptured -- The Princess I have seen and hate. -- Oh! what will her
vexation be, when she shall know I have robbed her of her Lover, for know it
she shall? and soon I will tell her of it myself, for it will delight me to see
her despair. -- She is so beautiful, and so good, that they speak of nothing
here but of her bounty, charms, and virtue; but I will defame her; I will -- if
in my power her reputation shall suffer.

While she said this she was struck with the indignation she saw painted in the
countenance of Philamir. What, Prince, said she, do you suspect me of
affectation? Think you there is any exaggeration in the animated sentiments I
wish to impress you with?

It were to be wished, said the Prince, rising, that all the monsters of your
species were obliged to speak with the same sincerity, that they might only
have the influence to occasion dislike and detestation.

Saying this, he immediately withdrew, reflecting as he went on this adventure.
Into what snares, said he, might curiosity alone lead a person of my age, from
a wish to see how far such a woman could go. I found myself kneeling to her; I
despised her, was not her dupe, yet she amused me; appeared charming; and had
she not discovered a soul so base and vile, Zeolide would for an instant have
been out of mind.

With these reflections, Philamir returned with melancholy steps toward the
Castle, when Gelanor came from a Grove, and said, Come hither, my Lord; come,
and if possible, stop Zoram and Chrisel from murdering one another.

What is it you say?

In passing two hours ago, across the garden, they mutually accused each other
with madness; but meeting with a guest, who informed them of the virtues of the
Castle, they were terrified to think what they had said to the Genius and the
Queen, and went privately to concert what measures were best to take. From this
conversation they learn, that they really had no friendship for each other;
each questioned, was forced to confess they had committed reciprocal wrongs
formerly and recently, till they resolved to fight, and are at present within a
few yards of us.

Show me where they are, said the Prince, I will attempt to reconcile them.

My Lord, replied Gelanor, you know not how difficult it is to effect an
agreement in the Castle.

The moment the combatants were beginning the attack, Philamir joined them.
Forget past grievances -- be reconciled.

Chrisel instantly ran toward Zoram with a good grace, who met him with open
arms. Zoram said, with a smiling countenance, I here vow everlasting malice.

Chrisel immediately rejoined, So do I.

How! exclaimed the Prince?

Notice his baseness, cried Zoram; yet I have the same thoughts.

Keep silence, and be quiet, I entreat you, cried Philamir; were it in my
power, my Lord, answered Chrisel, to deceive, I would trick the traitor; but we
are forced to speak what we think, and cannot conceal our mutual resentment. I
see it is useless to strive against the invincible virtue of this Castle, for I
am obliged to speak truth. I, who have carried the profound art of
dissimulation so far, the fruits of ten years labor are now gone.

The first attack was yours Chrisel, said Philamir; endeavor therefore to say
a single word in excuse to Zoram, who I am sure will be moderate and easily
satisfied.

If I should attempt it, said Chrisel, I will only widen the breach.

Fight we must, said Zoram, honor would have it so; deign therefore, my Lord,
to be a witness of the combat. I flatter myself, that at the very first wound,
however slight it may be, you will run to part us. So saying, they again drew
their swords, and the combat began. (...) a few minutes Chrisel was touched in
the hand. Stop, said Philamir, it is sufficient.

With all my heart, replied Chrisel; however, my Lord, be explicit if you think
it necessary. I am ready to go on. I am very much attached to life, but it is
not so valuable as honor.

These are also my sentiments, said Zoram.

Part then peaceably, said Philamir, hohour is satisfied.

Upon this they went away, and Philamir returned toward the Castle.

Phanor and Altemira had just likewise had a most disagreeable conversation.
Altemira, notwithstanding her promises could not forbear to question Phanor;
and his answers had so surprised and angered her, that the Monarch and Queen
almost came to an open rupture, they were not on speaking terms, but in a very
bad humor.

The Princess seemed so reserved and distant that Philamir feared she had heard
of his adventure in the Orange-Grove. The supper was far from cheerful; the
unfortunate Aristeus durst not make his appearance, and Zoram and Chrisel
showed not the least eagerness to make their court. Palmis, overwhelmed with
grief, was sorrowful and silent; the Queen and the Genius were plunged in a
profound reverie; and Philamir, devoured by inquietude, trembled as he spoke to
the Princess, who would scarcely give him an answer.

The day following, the Prince who had passed the night in reflecting on his
situation, determined to demand an explanation from the Princess. He went
therefore in search of her, and as soon as he found himself alone with her and
Palmis, he threw himself at her feet, and said, Oh! pardon me Zeolide; I see
you know every thing. I will therefore make a full confession.

What do I know, said the Princess?

The adventure I have had with Azema.

I never heard of it, but must now have the particulars.

The Prince now sincerely repented his indiscretion, but could not retract; he
was obliged to satisfy the jealous curiosity of the Princess; was forced to own
that Azema might for a moment have misled him had not her base heart appeared.

So then, said the Princess, had you not been in this Castle, and could this
woman have concealed the atrocity of her mind, and the corruptness of her
morals, she might have seduced you.

Forget, cried the Prince, this momentary crime; my repentance is most sincere;
you I love, and you only.

She haughtily answered, and I renounce you for ever, unworthy man.

With these words she run to her chamber where she shut herself up with Palmis.

The Princess upon this gave free vent to her tears, and a thousand times
repeated Philamir was an ungrateful faithless man, who she would never see
more. Palmis long kept silence, but at last was obliged to answer. Alas! madam,
said she, what shall I say? were I not here, I might pretend to feel as you do
till you would attend, and by degrees become reasonable.

Do you think me unreasonable?

I do, madam.

You have little susceptibility.

I have at least experience.

My regard for you is much diminished by your notions.

I vex and provoke you; I foresaw I should; you are under the dominion of
passion, and I cannot use these arguments you need.

I cannot bear this -- But let me hear you attempt his excuse.

I would not be successful at present, allow me to decline.

I insist on knowing your opinion.

If you are determined, I think that in this affair you have not common sense.
Philamir is only twenty; a very pardonable curiosity, and not an intention to
deceive you, led him to the rendezvous; that coquette is charming; he for a
moment forgot himself, was wrong, felt he was, and repented. This is the only
error love can reproach him with; he now knows coquettes, despises them most
sincerely, has a sincere love for you, and deserves to be forgiven.

He never shall.

And do you expect perfect fidelity?

I do indeed -- Love never can exist if not reciprocal and sincere.

You are right; and therefore is the duration of love so short, it is not
possible for a man to have as much delicacy as an affectionate and virtuous
woman; and the most tender Lover must soon be discarded, if his mistress has
neither credulity nor patience.

You think me whimsical, then?

To an extreme.

Have you not then pity for me?

I feel for you; but when I compare your situation to mine, my compassion is
not great.

The lover of a coxcomb must expect no other.

And those who love a youth under twenty, should lay their account with greater
vexations than you have yet known.

What a hard hearted speech!

'Twas you led me on.

I expressed my thoughts without intending to vex you.

And you have done so very much, which I shall remember hereafter.

I shall never forget your indifference.

You have no justice nor reason in your arguments.

You go too far, interrupted Zeolide; leave me; I expected consolation, and you
aggravate my pains; be gone.

Palmis vexed, retired without speaking.

Zeolide then melting into tears, Philamir has betrayed me, and Palmis loves me
no longer. I have lost them both at once -- But my mother remains.

The Princess composed herself, and went to the Queen's apartment. -- Altemira
was the best and tenderest of mothers; Zeolide told her of all her sorrows, and
the Queen partook of her griefs, and even her resentment. How guilty did
Philamir especially appear! He had forgot Zeolide for a moment; but such, said
she, are men. Alas! did you know* my daughter, what confessions I have torn
from your father's bosom. -- But Philamir is to me a thousand times still more
inexcusable; yes, my child, the greatest wrong that can be done me is to
afflict thee; thy pangs are the only ones I cannot support with courage; they
distract me.

Dear mother, cried Zeolide, in you I find all the tenderness I experienced
before we entered this Castle, you are the only one whose kindness remains.

No, my daughter, there are no allusions mingled with the affections of nature;
a good mother cannot speak more than she feels, nor paint tenderness more
passionate than her heart really feels.

Overcome with gratitude, the Princess clasped her mother's neck, whilst the
tears of filial affection gladdened her maternal bosom, and mitigated one
another's sorrows.

The Queen and her daughter spent several days in the company of each other; at
last they consented to receive the sage and virtuous Gelanor. The Philosopher
incited a spirit of indulgence; the Queen admitted Phanor; Zeolide went herself
in search of Palmis, and the two friends tenderly embraced each other.
Explanations, however, in the Castle of Truth, could not dissipate all the
clouds that had risen. Gelanor conducted Philamir to the feet of Zeolide. The
Princess wished to assure Philamir she had forgotten the past; but was forced
to tell him her love was sometimes lessened, and that she secretly preserved a
little resentment and suspicion. The Prince was grieved, and was obliged to own
too he was somewhat vexed; and had it not been for the remonstrances and advice
of Gelanor, the two lovers would have fallen out again; but they preserved
appearances although it was impossible to bring them again to their former
happiness.

Phanor having questioned Aristeus circumstantially, learned, that if he had
not been scrupulously virtuous* he had estimable qualities; at least, that he
possessed probity and real patriotic sentiments. -- In Chrisel he discovered a
flattering and ambitious Courtier, but a faithful subject; and as for Zoram,
his foible was not wickedness, but folly.

Be conducted by my advice, said Gelanor to the Genius; treat these courtiers
with indulgence, but grant them no more a blind confidence; let them henceforth
find the only means to obtain your favor is by rectitude and virtue, and they
will become new men. When Monarchs have arrived at an age of maturity, and
toward the end of their reign, they are then the real formers of Courtiers,
and they are either good or bad as the monarch trains them.

The Genius took his advice, and recalled his three Courtiers, who had been
shut up in a corner of the Castle; but society was no longer agreeable; no
person durst open his lips, lest he should say something impertinent; and when
forced to break this obstinate silence, trembled as he spoke, and seldom
uttered a word which was not either ill-timed or offensive. All execrated the
Castle, and the only pleasure they could find in it was, to entertain
themselves with the many strangers they saw.

One night the Prince, more discontented with Zeolide, and sorrowful than
ordinary, went to seek Gelanor, and relate his new cause with grief. He had
never been in the apartment of this venerable old man, but was conducted
thither by an attendant. As soon as he came to the door, he opened it, entered,
and saw a young beautiful lady, in long mourning robes, sitting by the
Philosopher's side, holding a book, and reading aloud. Gelanor appeared
embarrassed at the sight of the Prince; Philamir surprised, advanced toward
the handsome lady, enquiring if she was lately come.

It is six weeks, my Lord, since I came.

Impossible! six weeks! and no body yet mentioned your name; you have no doubt,
lived concealed; it is not else possible you could have been secret.

Society I am forced to shun, and I am fond of solitude: I see no person here
but Gelanor, to whom I listen, by whom I am instructed, and these are all my
enjoyments.

Mirza, said Gelanor, the Prince wishes to speak to me.

I am in no hurry, said Philamir.

But I do not wish to lose him; please leave us, Mirza.

She immediately, laying the book on the table, modestly curtsied, and retired.

A charming lady, indeed! said the Prince, grace and modesty -- Why is she in
weeds?

She is a widow.

How long?

Only about a month; her husband was very distressed when he came.

I doubt not beauty is not her only qualification. --

Why do you not speak?

Why do you enquire?

Nothing but curiosity.

Be careful of curiosity; you are young, and know not whither it may lead you.

My curiosity is harmless -- But say, as to her mental Qualifications --

She has many.

Every perfection?

Was it to talk of her you came hither?

Any thing else I had to say was of no consequence -- A repetition of old
griefs. I am discontented; Zeolide is no longer the same; her temper is quite
altered, vexed, irritated at nothing -- Her reproaches are eternal -- I I am
tired of all this -- Mirza has an air of such mildness, such modesty -- Is she
cheerful at times.

What is the cause of that question? -- Let us speak of the Princess; for never
since I have inhabited the Castle of Truth, have I read a heart more noble,
more pure, more loving than hers.

Was she very fond of her husband?

Husband! -- Of whom do ye speak?

Mirza.

Indeed, Philamir, you are unworthy of the heart of the most charming Princess
on earth. -- What a difference there is between your sentiments and those of
Zeolide! Among all the men here assembled, and many of them are amiable,
Zeolide sees only you; all eyes are fixed on her, and I know two or three
Princes who love her to distraction; Zeolide only is ignorant of their regard,
or pays no attention to it.

Sure, replied the Prince, I love none but Zeolide; and as I should certainly
excite her jealousy, were I to see Mirza again, I engage to come hither again
no more

The Philosopher much commended this intention, which the Prince kept
punctually.

Philamir left Gelanor, and visited Palmis, for whom he had conceived a great
friendship. Palmis had not the delicacy of Zeolide, consequently could not
always in her heart approve her manner of thinking. Being obliged to speak as
she thought, when Philamir complained of Zeolide, Palmis, though with regret,
could not avoid owning Zeolide was rather strict.

While they were thus converting together, Zeolide unexpectedly entered. The
Prince and Palmis blushed -- And I disturb you it seems, said the Princess.

You do, said Palmis.

Tell me of whom were you speaking?

Philamir was complaining of your unreasonable conduct.

And what said you?

I agreed.

And thus you endeavor to increase his ill opinion of me? -- Were I really
capricious and unreasonable, ought my friend to speak thus? and that to --

Remember, madam, we are in the Castle of Truth; could I speak as I wish, my
first care should be to persuade the Prince he is always wrong when he thinks
any way to your disadvantage.

The Princess could make no answer, but was vexed and silent. Philamir and
Palmis durst not venture a word. At last, the Princess, heaving a deep sigh,
said, you are really both of you very agreeable company! -- Of whom are you
meditating, Philamir?

Of the beautiful Mirza.

Who is she?

A beautiful widow, I saw with Gelanor today.

And you are doubtless in love with her.

It is Zeolide alone I love.

You are desirous to see the widow again?

I am not: to my love I sacrifice my inclination to enjoy her conversation.

You suppose me jealous, then!

Certainly.

Is there no way of concealing my failings? Must you know alt my weakness?

Here she burst into tears -- Thus, cried the Prince, I never meet with any
thing but complainings and tears from you.

No sooner had he thus said, ere he felt the effect they must necessarily
produce in the heart of Zeolide, and fell at her feet. Zeolide rejected him
with anger; your want of feeling, said she, is shocking. -- No, you love me
not; or, at least you are incapable of love like mine -- Are you not --

I wish I could.

You then confess you do not love.

Do not oppress me, I have not your refined feelings, but as I can I love.

So, so -- you only esteem --

I do not use the word Love, because you have forbidden me.

Yes, before we entered this Castle.

On pronouncing these words Zeolide blushed and turned away her head, to hide
her confusion. Philamir smiled, and seized the hand of the Princess, which he
tenderly clasped between his own. Zeolide drew back her hand; pray tell me,
said she, how it is possible, having only seen this very beautiful lady once,
you are so very anxious to see her once more.

Say not very anxious.

You said, that to me you sacrificed this happiness.

Though I did, yet had I the liberty of choosing expressions I would have
chosen another.

Thus not seeing her is a sacrifice.

Surely; she is amiable* witty, and her company would have given me pleasure; I
regret it, and your jealousy I easily observe.

Say you, my jealousy, cried Zeolide, with extreme vexation, what expressions!
what language! -- Yet, alas! it is too true; I have been rediculously jealous,
I condemn myself for it, and were we not in this fatal Castle, you had not
known it.

A few days after this conversation, as Philamir was walking, according to his
custom, in the Alley of Palm Trees, he perceived, at a distance, the beautiful
Mirza, greatly agitated. She approached the Prince, and with a disturbed and
timid air, exclaimed, Pardon me, my Lord -- I am in great distress -- I have
been seeking a pocketbook, which I have lost above this hour; did you see it?

I regret I did not, replied Philamir, as you are so much concerned for its
loss.

My secret is in it.

Your secret, madam!

I have been foolish enough to write down my feelings in that book -- But I
must say no more -- Adieu, my Lord, and if by chance you should find my
pocketbook, deign to promise you will restore it to me, and, above all, open
it not.

I certainly will not, but should I find it, where shall I see you?

In this place at this hour tomorrow.

With these words she left him, and as she went, twice turned her head to look
at the Prince, who followed her with his eyes, and when he lost sight of her he
sighed.

In vain the Prince endeavored to find the pocketbook; he searched the
gardens round and round, but unsuccessfully. As, about noon, he was returning
toward the Castle, he met the three Courtiers Aristeus, Chrisel, and Zoram,
all in conversation. Surprised to see them so intimate, he approached and
complimented them on the occasion. Ah! my Lord, cried Chrisel, we are united by
our mutual apprehensions.

How, pray?

Treason against the state would not have more infallibly ruined us -- we
cannot escape.

What do you mean?

The Genius has this night desired us to attend the recital of a Play he has
written.

Perhaps it is a good piece.

Alas, it is execrable. It is six months since we heard it, and made him
believe it a chef-d'oeuvre.

I understand your difficulty; Phanor has desired you to hear it again, to
judge of your sincerity.

No, no; he is perfectly secure, and that is the worst part of the affair; he
believes we have flattered him on every possible subject, but only this.

Wherefore then read it again to you?

On account of alterations; there are likewise two celebrated Authors just
arrived, whom he intends to astonish and confound, by showing them his work.

He will be engaged with them.

True, but it is necessary to cry and laugh at this infernal piece; which is
impossible here, for it would be immediately seen whether the tears were
fictitious or not.

An Author might be deceived perhaps? Is there, in fact, a charm sufficiently
strong to prevent an Author from being a dupe? Let us only be confident, my
friends, and I hope Phanor will not be able to judge by our countenances.

And besides, added Philamir, his attention will be wholly directed toward
these newly arrived Authors, who will speak without apprehension, not knowing
the charms of this Castle.

My lord, you say well; and in order to keep them in ignorance on this subject
till the reading is over, they have been taken to an apartment and separate
from the company.

Came they together?

They did not; and as they detest one another, they are kept in separate
apartments.

Phanor appeared and the subject was changed. -- You spoke of my Play, did you
not, said Phanor?

We did, said Zoram, trembling.

I know well you were not speaking against it; for never shall I forget, how
you were affected when you heard it first. Today you will be still more
delighted, for I have made such additions! so sublime! our Authors will be
somewhat surprised, and as they do not know the virtues of this Castle, I am
certain they will testify as much jealousy as astonishment. Will they not?

Your wit will incite no jealousy.

You think so, because of my high station! I assure you that is no impediment.
About a year ago I read this very piece to a man of real wit, but who is
himself a writer; well, Sir, he could not hide his jealousy, his praise was so
cold, so awkward, his perplexity so great, and his sufferings so cruel, he
really excited my compassion. The vanity of an author is absolutely
unaccountable. As for me, I am just, and do not deceive myself. Often in the
course of my existence, I have been deceived, but never on that subject; never
was flattered there -- And the reason is, it is impossible.

The Genius's assurance and conversation made the Courtiers hearts shrink
within them. After dinner, the Genius sent to inform Learchus and Tarsis he was
ready to receive them; and the former arriving first, Phanor interrogated him
concerning Tarsis. I hate him, replied Learchus, though the principle of my
hatred obliges me to dissemble; I wish to seem equitable; secretly I
calumniate, publicly I praise him, but in an artful manner; it is only to
convince the world, not to do him justice.

Notice that! said the Genius, whispering Chrisel, with a smile of penetration:
such is the envy of which I just now spoke, and hence you may imagine how much
I know of the human heart.

Immediately Tarsis entered, and, after a moment's conversation, Phanor
unfolded his manuscript; the two authors placed themselves opposite; Phanor
thus proceeded.

This play I must tell you, Gentlemen, is Capital.

That information, replied Learchus, is customary; a reading has seldom begun,
till something like this has first been said; but you need not fear, my Lord,
we shall none of us speak a word of what we think, the highest praises will be
showered on you.

Tarsis was astonished to hear him: he could not conceive it possible to carry
truth and indiscretion so far.

The Genius smiled -- Yes, said he, I can depend upon your sincerity, and am
well assured you will be obliged to praise what you shall hear. Know then,
Gentlemen, you will melt into tears during the first and second act, laugh at
every speech in the third and fourth, and be astonished to find the fifth so
sublime. The style is elegant and pure, the characters natural and well
sustained, the plot is artfully conducted, and the denoument inimitable.

Honest indeed, cried Tarsis. Authors usually say as much, but it is in a
far-fetched and ambiguous manner. For my part, my Lord, I like your proud plain
way better; it is at least more comic, and may bring modesty into fashion.

I acknowledge, replied the Genius, when I am at home, I cannot help speaking
thus undisguisedly; my language may astonish, but you will soon see, however,
there is nothing really ridiculous in all I have mentioned.

Phanor then began to read, and, as it was necessary to weep during the two
first acts, the Courtiers took out their handkerchiefs and hid their faces. The
Genius stopped almost at every line: observe, said he, how profound is that
reflection! how original that thought! how philosophic this! and spoke so
continually, during these interruptions, and between the acts, and praised
himself so much, that his auditors had absolutely no room to say any thing. The
two authors seemed very attentive, and finding the device of the handkerchiefs
a very happy one, they made use of the same expedient and hid their faces.
Phanor triumphed when he beheld all their handkerchiefs in motion at the end of
the second act. Come, come, Gentlemen, said he, the serious part is over,
laughter now comes on.

He then set the example, when he thought it was necessary to laugh. How
humorous this is, how full of wit is that, cried he every instant; there are a
few free strokes, and some double entendres, but these are the taste of the
age, and we cannot make folks laugh without them; to unite decency and wit is
too hard a task; and, for my part, I only wish to please, therefore, do not
perplex myself about morality and good manners, but sacrifice them without
scruple, whenever I am induced either by a witty stroke or inviting description.

That is nothing uncommon at all, replied Learchus, we do the same; it is
necessary, however, for form's sake, though a work may be ever so licentious,
to scatter a certain quantity of sentiments through it, and moral phrases;
after the most free and indecent traits, one is charmed to see an eulogium on
virtue; such a thing is not expected in such a place, but on that account the
surprise strikes the more.

Doubtless, replied the Genius, and you will find I understood this finesse;
for my play ends with four verses, which tell the spectators it has a moral
purpose; though I can assure you, without seeking to raise myself in your
esteem, I had no other purpose but that of displaying my superior abilities.
Now for the fourth act.

Must we continue to laugh, said Tarsis?

So, so, I understand you, Phanor replied; keep silence and attend.

While he read the three last scenes of this act, Learchus and Tarsis several
times endeavored to burst into a laugh; and the Genius, reclining toward
Zoram, said, softly, do you not observe? envy will not let them laugh, only
from the teeth outward; how the hag gnaws their hearts; this is much more
flattering to me, than all the praises they could possibly give, for my pride
is equally delicate and penetrating.

When he finished, the Genius rose, rubbed his hands, and smiling, said, these
gentlemen will now explain themselves, and we shall then know what ye think.

My Lord, I am perplexed.

Indeed, so am I.

I doubt it not, replied the Genius, in a rage.

It is not easy, my Lord, to praise.

For want of expressions, no doubt -- this is the highest praise.

How extravagant and wild is this?

My third and fourth act are out of the common road; thus you see I did not
exaggerate, when I told you you would find humor absolutely run wild. It must
be owned, Chrisel, added the Genius, it is charming to hear all this said in
the Castle of Truth. -- What think you, Tarsis? Why this silence?

However envious, my Lord --

Well now! cried Phanor, transported with joy; there Zoram, did not I predict?
You hear he is devoured with envy. -- But why should I longer abuse the
necessity these poor people are under of speaking what they think? I ought to
be satisfied, and not seek to humble men too much to depress them.

The Genius then sent the authors away, conversed some time longer with the
Courtiers. He asked no questions for he had no doubts; he spoke only of his own
fame, and the vast success his piece must have. So the Courtiers got off for a
little terror.

Whenever they got by themselves, was I wrong, said Aristeus, to conceive hopes
of escaping the danger? Every illusion vanishes here, except vanity, and that
is more mighty than all the Magicians. Love itself is not so blind as an author
hoodwinked by self-conceit and vanity.

The day following the Prince went to the Alley of Palm Trees, where he did not
at first find Mirza, but walked about expecting her arrival. After he had
walked some time, he saw a sheet of written paper on the grass in a woman's
hand; he read, and was amazed to find charming verses, in which Mirza expressed
for Philamir a most violent passion -- Oh! unhappy and amiable Mirza, cried the
Prince, this no doubt is one of the pages of that pocketbook which thou did
search for with such anxiety. The wind during the night has blown it hither. --
Alas! is this then the secret Mirza would hide from me? this is a distressing
discovery indeed!

She immediately came in view, Philamir flew to meet her. Oh! my Lord, said
Mirza, I have just found my pocketbook, but there is a leaf gone. -- Heavens!
what do I see, that very leaf in your hands -- And have you read it? --
Unfortunate Mirza! now is thy distress at its height.

When Mirza had thus said, she fell on the lawn, and seemed ready to faint; the
Prince, quite beside himself, kneeled to assist her. Oh Mirza! cried he, with a
broken voice, into what a dreadful distress have thou plunged me? Is it
possible, I am indeed beloved by Mirza.

Harsh Philamar, cried Mirza, since you have read that writing, the silence I
had imposed upon my lips is useless; it cannot now conceal my weakness. -- Yes,
I adore you. Alas! you alone have taught me to know the most violent, the most
imperious of all the passions; never shall I banish it my bosom. No, I feel it
will follow, or rather precipitate me into the grave. Yours I cannot be, your
faith is plighted, death is my only refuge.

Death! say you! Heavens! cried Philamir, and shall I be the cause of your
death? -- Rather let -- Oh Mirza! conceive the horror of my situation -- my
engagement is sacred.

Too well I know that, cried she; and were you willing to break it, I never
would consent. Zeolide is worthy to participate your happiness. Love shall
never make me unjust. Often has Gelanor spoken to me or the Princess, and
interested me in her behalf; not daring to speak in your praise, I listened
with pleasure, to the eulogiums of a lady so dear to your heart. No, Zeolide, I
cannot hate thee, for Philamir thou sincerely love.

Glorious sentiments; and do you not hate her!

You could not be happy without her, therefore could my life save here is, I
would give it.

Mirza, Mirza! how you fill me with astonishment!

Farewell, Philamir, my heart! you know I cannot forbear repeating, and
remember, I speak it in the Castle of Truth, I shall love you to the last
breath of life. In this bosom you will ever reign, and over a heart as virtuous
and pure as it is noble and affectionate. Incapable of ambition and of
jealousy, I might have made you happy if -- Farewell* dearest Prince, Farewell.

Alas! cried the Prince, this I cannot support -- Oh, adorable Mirza! do you
then mean to quit the Castle? I know your three months are expired, but three
weeks I am doomed to remain.

Instantly would I leave this Castle, replied Mirza, were not Gelanor ill; but
to him my attendance is necessary, and I must stay. I insist, however, that you
come not to his apartment; and I conjure you never to confide to any one, the
secret you thus have learnt by surprise. You cannot utter a falsehood, but you
can be silent. -- Again, Prince, farewell for ever.

With these words, Mirza ran with extreme precipitation; the Prince would have
held her, but Mirza, with a commanding and majestic air, forbade him to follow,
and Philamir was forced to obey. The charms of Mirza's person and mind, and the
admiration and compassion she inspired, did but too powerfully combat the
fidelity he owed to Zeolide; his vanity too was most potently flattered: to
inspire love in the breast of a lady so heroically virtuous, was a triumph
which Philamir could not help feeling. Love must rob the beauteous and sublime
Mirza of life; the Prince could not doubt it: Zeolide might find consolation.
This was a reflection Philamir often made, yet he continued to love Zeolide. He
thought the Princess much inferior to her Rival, but at the same time he found
an unknown charm about Zeolide, which Mirza did not possess. Zeolide attracted,
insinuated, and was deeply engraven in his heart. Mirza dazzled and inflamed
the imagination; but she was far above him; she did not enrapture but amaze.

Afraid to discover the secret of Mirza, Philamir avoided Zeolide as much as
possible; and perceiving how mortally he dreaded to be alone with her, reason
and pride equally bade the Princess not seek a flying Lover. After so much
vexation, so many inquietudes, torments and struggles, Zeolide began to suffer
less; she had seen the vanity of her ideas, and love was nearly extinguished.

At length the three weeks were at an end, and the day came, when Philamir was
to quit the Castle of Truth. Before the Princess was awake, Philamir went to
the alley of Palm Trees. He had a strong desire yet again to see Mirza, and had
written to conjure her once more to come, yet durst not hope that severe Mirza
would consent to receive his last farewell. How great was his joy, when he saw
her suddenly appear. Mirza testified the utmost surprise at perceiving the
Prince. She would have fled, but was withheld by Philamir. Ah, my Lord! said
she, I thought you had already quitted the Castle, and I came again to see this
place so dear to me.

You got my line then?

I did not, my lord; what line?

The Prince was vexed to think he owed the happiness of seeing her again to
chance alone. Every thing that gratitude or tenderness could inspire the Prince
uttered. Mirza wept, and discovered sentiments so heroic, and at the same time
so passionate, that the Prince fell enraptured on his knees, and could only
express his admiration by his tears. The Prince just at this moment hearing the
leaves rustle, turned his head, but what was his astonishment and distress when
Zeolide appeared?

Zeolide, struck dumb with amazement, stood silent; the confused Philamir durst
not speak. At length Mirza, addressing herself to the Princess, related her
whole story. You see, madam, added she, I have nothing to reproach myself with.
I do not fear, that even my Rival should read my most secret thoughts; and I
not only do not hate you, but have a lively sensation of what your feelings
must this moment be. I suffer as much from your woes as from my own. Philamir
regrets me, this cannot be denied; but it is you he loves, and were he to
attempt to break his engagement to you, I would oppose his intentions. I am
about to quit, and never see him more. The effort will cost me my life, but to
my love duty is superior.

Can it be, cried Zeolide, that a passion which reason cannot approve, may
become thus violent in a heart like yours? -- Adieu, Philamir, continued the
Princess, I restore you your freedom, and at length regain my own; but
renouncing you, I renounce the married state. -- Be happy, and farewell.

Stay, Princess, cried the distracted Philamir.

Begone, my Lord, said Mirza, with languishing voice, go recover your mistress
and abandon the wretched Mirza! She no longer loves, I adore -- O! that with my
heart I could restore you her, since without her life is a burden.

How exalted a soul! Yes, Mirza, you deserve happiness! Yet Zeolide! -- I
cannot determine my own feelings.

Cruel Prince! do you doubt between a woman who abandons you, and the
unfortunate affectionate Mirza. -- Should you, now hope has entered my heart,
should you now abandon me, you will behold me expire. -- Yet what do I say?
Heavens! I am distracted! -- Alas! I cannot in this place hide my transports.

Let me away, you shall not leave me, nor shall the best of her sex be by me
devoted to death.

What is this I hear! cried Mirza. Is life yet in view? -- And will you love me?

Philamir could not answer for his tears -- away then, dear Prince, stop not a
moment. Fly from this Castle.

Thus saying, she transported, pulled the Prince along with her, who shed a
torrent of tears. They approached the fatal gates of the Castle, when they were
suddenly met by the venerable Gelanor: Mirza shuddered -- Fly, Prince, fly this
old man, said she; hear him not!

Stop, cried Gelanor; you cannot fly -- The gates are shut.

Mirza, at these terrible words, turned pale, her trembling legs scarcely could
support her -- Gelanor approached, and seizing her by the arm -- Perfidious
woman, said he, return the Talisman, or I will instantly deliver you to the
vengeance of Phanor! Mirza did not hesitate a moment, but taking the box of
crystal from her pocket gave it to Gelanor, who, turning toward Philamir,
said, Now listen to that woman, for whom you have sacrificed Zeolide; speak,
Mirza, speak, I enjoin you, cried Gelanor.

If it must be so, said Mirza, I had but the mask of virtue; ambition and
vanity alone, inspired me with a desire to seduce this credulous and silly
Prince.

Begone, said the Philosopher, you have said enough.

She immediately withdrew* and the Prince, raising his eyes and hands to
Heaven, exclaimed, Wretch that I am! What have I done? Oh Zeolide? -- Yet how
could I conceive such sentiments and so seemingly sincere a passion.

Do you know how that happened? -- Pride -- With a little less vanity you would
have thought, however dangerous love may be, it is not a disease of which
people die; you would have known, that not even compassion should obliterate a
promise so sacred.

O my Gelanor! What shall I do! become my Mentor and Protector.

You are not yet hopeless; the Genius is informed of every thing, and is this
instant endeavoring to prevail on the Princess to grant you a generous pardon;
he will come to seek you, when your appearance will be proper.

In the mean time, said the Prince, tell me how this Talisman, which Phanor
gave to the beauteous Agelia, could come into the artful Mirza's possession.

It was shortly thus, replied Gelanor -- When Agelia quitted the Castle, as she
came to the gate, she took this precious box from Nadir, and gave it me.
Gelanor, said she, I give you this Talisman, on condition you never return it
to Phanor; and that you lend it to women, as often as by this means you can
preserve them from any great peril. Be you, henceforth the protector of the
weaker sex, in this dangerous Castle; and though you must despise the guilty,
yet grant them your pity and assistance.

The amiable Agelia thus spoke, I received the Talisman, and, conformable to
her benevolent intentions, have, for these eighteen years, preserved many wives
from the wrath and resentment of their husbands. I sent them the Talisman, and
they had too much interest to keep the secret, for me to fear the least
indiscretion on their parts; each woman, with whom the box has been deposited,
returned it at departing; and to this day the secret has never been discovered.

It is about four months ago, as I was walking in the gardens, I perceived a
beautiful lady weeping. This lady was Mirza; who told me she had arrived that
morning, and learnt, by chance, the virtue of the Castle. I have a husband,
added she, in a consumption; he has but a short time to live; I have made him
happy but have deceived him; should he interrogate me, his last moments will
become dreadfully miserable, e're he dies he may take some method to be
revenged.

Mirza got the Talisman from me, and calmed her fears; and her husband, about a
month afterward expired in her arms, blessing heaven for having given him the
most virtuous of women for a wife. Mirza, become a widow, conjured me to leave
the Talisman in her hands till she departed, that she might preserve her
reputation, which an indiscreet question in the Castle might deprive her of,
when this precious Talisman was taken from her.

She appeared fond of me; she was amiable and witty, and her company was not
without its charms. I felt, however, how dangerous she might be to others,
since with so much wit and beauty, she alone had the power of dissimulation. I
therefore required she should live in retirement; and when you arrived, I
ordered her to avoid you. Her secret was in my keeping, and she found it
necessary to submit.

I became distressed, and she, under pretext of nursing me, prolonged her stay. I
saw yesterday she was agitated, and had my suspicions, but said nothing. The
Physician had ordered me to keep my room a few days longer, which Mirza knew;
but this morning I wished to see the Princess before she went, who related to
me the heroic scene which just had passed, I instantly sought for Phanor; he
ordered the gates of the Castle to be shut; and as the Princess was ignorant of
Mirza's perfidy, we agreed not to mention the Talisman to her; that you, my
Lord, if so you please, may avail yourself of its virtues to re-establish
yourself in the love of Zeolide.

Gelanor then gave Philamir the crystal box; and at the same moment a slave
came from Phanor to seek Philamir, who, full of trouble and distress, ran to
the chamber of the Princess.

Whenever he saw her, he ran, flung himself at her feet, discovered the deceit
of Mirza, and showed her the Talisman which he had laid upon the table; by
hiding this story, and keeping that Talisman, said he, I might have persuaded
you I did not go with Mirza, and had resisted all her seductions; but though I
cannot lose you without the loss of happiness, I would prefer even that to
deceit. Yes, Zeolide, I was seduced, inveigled; I no longer have the same blind
and impetuous passion, which I felt before our arrival in this fatal Castle;
but I love you, as I shall for ever love you; without you I cannot be happy,
and it is from you alone, of all the ladies in the universe, I expect happiness.

When he had thus said, his lovely Princess gave the Prince her hand, which he
received with transport. The sentiments you discover, said she, are worthy, and
all I wish; and did this Castle destroy no other allusions than those which
nourish love, I should not repent my having inhabited it; but the air we here
breathe, is fatal even to friendship. Let us then away, Philamir, from this
vile Castle.

Immediately she arose, and went along with the Genius, her mother and lover,
to take their chariots.

Just as they were about to leave the gloomy Castle of Truth, they saw, with
inexpressible surprise, the crystal walls take another color, lose their
transparency, become opaque, and suddenly transform themselves into porphyry
and marble of a radical white.

The sovereign of the Genii appeared; and addressed the lovers thus:

The Charm of this Castle is at an end; and a new Palace fitted for your
reception; in which the illusions necessary for happiness are to be found. May
the Castle of Truth imprint on your memory, the fatal effects of jealousy, and
teach you to suppress the first suggestion of foolish curiosity; may you ever
remember, that the soft ties by which hearts are united, are Mutual Confidence
and Mild Concessions.

FINIS.

