A CALCULATION ON THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MILLENNIUM, AND A SHORT REPLY TO DR.
HORNE's PAMPHLET ENTITLED "Sound Argument, dictated by Common Sense."

TOGETHER WITH CURSORY OBSERVATIONS ON THE "AGE OF CREDULITY."

By Nathaniel Brassey Hashed, M. P.

TO WHICH IS ADDED AN ORIGINAL LETTER FROM MR. BROTHERS, TO PHILIP STEPHENS,
ESQUIRE WITH HIS ANSWER.

A PAPER IS SUBJOINED, POINTING OUT THOSE PARTS OF MR. BROTHERS'S PROPHECIES
That have been already fulfilled.

"EYES YE HAVE AND SEE NOT." PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, No. 40,
SOUTH SECOND STREET.

1795.

THE MILLENNIUM.
THOUGH there has been no age of the Church in which the Millenium was not
admitted by individual divines of the first eminence, it is yet evident, from
the writings of Eusebius, Irenaeus, Origin, and others among the ancients, as
well as from the histories of Dupin, Mosheim, and all the moderns, that it was
never adopted by the whole church, or made an article of the established creed
in any nation.

About the middle of the fourth century the Millinarians held the following
tenets:

1st. That the city of Jerusalem should be rebuilt, and that the land of Judea
should be the habitation of those who are to reign on earth one thousand years.

2d. That the first resurrection was not to be confined to the martyrs, but
that after the fall of Antichrist all the just were to rise, and all that were
on the earth were to continue for that space of time.

3d. That Christ shall then come down from Heaven, and be seen on earth, and
reign there with his servants.

4th. That the saints, during this period, shall enjoy all the delights of a
terrestial paradise.

These opinions were founded upon several passages of Scripture, which the
Millenarians, among the fathers, understood in no other than a literal sense;
but which the moderns, who hold that opinion, consider as partly literal and
partly metaphorical. Of these passages, that upon which the greatest stress has
been laid is the following: "And I saw an angel come down from Heaven, having
the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold
on the dragon, that old servant, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set
a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more till the thousand
years shall be fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed a little season. And
I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them, and I
saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not
again till the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.
Romans xx. 1 -- 6.

This passage all the ancient Millenarians took in a sense grossly literal, and
taught, that during the Millennium, the saints on earth were to enjoy every
bodily delight. The moderns, on the other hand, consider the power and pleasure
of this kingdom as wholly spiritual, and they represent them as not to commence
till after the conflagration of the present earth. But that this last
supposition is a mistake the very next verse but one evinces; for it is there
said, that "when the thousand years are expired Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison, and shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four
quarters of the earth;" and there is no reason to believe that he will have
such power or such liberty in "the new heavens and the new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness."

A CALCULATION ON THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MILLENNIUM.
MR Brothers has taken much pains to adjust and ascertain the Bible chronology.
He gives it in detail at the opening of his first book and alludes to it in
several parts of the second, as holding out to men an evident proof that the
time for the completion of ancient prophecies, and the recorded period for the
execution of God's Judgments is really arrived. But the connection between the
age of the world, viz. 5913 years, in A. D. 1794, and this predetermined
resolution of the Almighty, is by no means apparent at first fight, or to a
cursory observer. Something more is certainly necessary to develope the
mystery, and the following is an attempt to elucidate it by computation.

Allusions to the Millennium are to be found in all parts of Scripture; and the
doctrine generally received is, that the Mosaic account of the creation of the
world is a prophetical type of its duration: taking (according to St. Peter, 2d
Ephesians. chap. iii. ver. 8.) one thousand years for one day. So that we are to
understand the world to have been destined to last 6000 years under the yoke of
labor and tribulation, (metaphorically signified by the labors of God in the
six days of creation) and one thousand years under that dispensation which is
typified by God's resting on the Sabbath Day, and which is called Christ's
Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Heaven, or the dominion of the Saints, etc. etc.
when it is expressly said, that the Saints should enter into the rest of God,
and e converso of the wicked, it is said, "unto whom I swear in my wrath that
they should not enter into my rest.

Now, if we suppose the 5913 years, abovementioned by Mr. Brothers, to be
common years of solar time, we find 87 years still wanting to arrive at the
close of the six symbolical days of labor, and consequently we are too remote
from the period of the Millennium to have any thing either to hope or fear
personally from its approach. But if we advert to that mode of calculation
universally adopted, both by Daniel and St. John in their prophecies; where not
only a day is taken for a year, but a month invariably made to contain 30 such
days, and 42 months to comprehend 1260 such days, and these 1260 days to form
exactly three years and a half, and therefore every such year to consist of 360
such days. We may very well adopt this method of computation in our endeavors
to explain any prophetical chronology, and may very fairly call those Divine
years, by which, as Mr. Brothers expresses it, "God fulfils his recorded
judgments." Now admitting the common solar year to consist of 365 days, 5
hours, 48 minutes, 54 seconds, and multiplying 5913 years into quarters of
seconds, we shall find, on dividing this quotient by 360, a produce amounting
to 5999 such divine years and a fraction; which fraction, deducted from the sum
total of one year, leaves a deficiency, at the end of the year of our Lord
1794, equal to 322 days 6 hours 40 minutes 23 seconds, being so much wanting,
at the opening of the present year, to the full completion of 6000 divine or
prophetical years: and showing that the Millenium will commence, on the 19th of
November next, at or about sunrise, in the latitude of Jerusalem.

If this calculation be true, it follows that the time during which "the Saints
shall live and reign with Christ," which according to St. John, in Rev. chap.
xx. ver. 4, is one thousand years, must be in fact 360,000 years. So that the
Millennium will bear the same analogical proportion to the previous duration of
the world as that very previous duration itself holds to the six original days
of the creation.

NATHANIEL BRASSEY HALHED.
Pall Mall, March 22, 1795.
A SHORT REPLY TO SOME OF THE ASSERTIONS IN DR. HORNE's PAMPHLET, ENTITLED,
"SOUND ARGUMENT, DICTATED BY COMMON SENSE."
I HAVE endeavored to peruse, without prejudice, every thing that has been
written in answer to, or rather against my book: and if I had in any of the
publications met with a single paragraph worthy of an answer, it should have
been answered. The self-sufficient and abusive Dr. Horn of Oxford, has not one
word of truth, or argument, or common sense, in his whole pamphlet; nor would
it have misbecome a Doctor of Divinity who, by his own pen, confesses he can
neither understand Greek, nor read the Gospel in English -- to have endeavored
at least to give his jargon something, if possible, of the Gentleman. That he
does not understand Greek, is clear from his doubting whether the Holy Ghost
appeared in shape of a dove, when St. Luke expressly says, (...): and that he
cannot read, or has not read, even the first chapter of St. Matthew, must be
evident to those who perceive him denying that Christ had Brothers; and who
shall, at the same time, have observed that the Evangelist, writing after
Christ's death and resurrection, calls him, in the last verse of his first
chapter, his mother's firstborn son, ergo, she must have had a second at
least. If the old miserable exposition of Daniel's four beasts, which I knew
before he took up his pen about as well as Dr. Horn, can by any reasonable
person (after mature deliberation) be deemed better than that furnished by Mr.
Brothers -- be it so -- opinion is free -- but I decline being of the party.
And as for the phrase of selling my soul, which seems to have given such alarm,
and furnished so much matter for false wit, I now think that every man who
enters into Parliament with any personal view whatever, and not wholly and
exclusively for the service of his country, must be deemed bona fide to have
sold his soul -- let him be of what party he will; and also that every man who
joins any party to vote on all occasions for the purpose of promoting or
supporting that party at all events, is perpetually guilty of the same act of
selling his soul. I deny having ever sold my soul in any other manner than
this: -- and if any one think or say otherwise, on him be the onus probandi.

I take this opportunity of renewing my expressions of perfect conviction in
the prophesies and mission of Mr. Brothers, and my increasing reliance (founded
on hourly experience) on the completion of every one of his predictions.

NATHANIEL BRASSEY HALHED.
Pall Mall, March 11, 1795.
CURSORY REMARKS ON THE PAMPHLET ENTITLED, "THE AGE OF CREDULITY."
THE anonymous Author of a pamphlet, entitled, "The Age of Credulity," was so
obliging as to send the book yesterday to me; with an opinion, I presume, that
I should find its arguments incontrovertible, and the positions I have assumed
in my own publication totally untenable. I should be sorry to interrupt the
gentleman's triumph by any unseasonable severity, and I am utterly averse to
all argument for argument's sake.

I shall, therefore, only beg him to take in good part the few hints which I
here hastily throw out for his consideration.

If he had turned to Cruden's Concordance, article "Wing," he would have found
(4th signification "it is put for the sails of a ship," Isaiah xviii. 1. "Woe
to the land shadowing with wings;" meaning Egypt, which abounded with ships,
"whose sails were like wings that shadow the sea."

So much for his pithy objection in the 15th page. The grand cheval de
battaille of all my doughty opponents has been Daniel's vision, as explained by
certain former clear-sighted expositors, to mean four successive monarchies;
viz. Babylonian, Mede-Persian, Grecian, and Roman. -- I have been so bartered
and annoyed with this ridiculous phantom, that I shall here demolish it
altogether, at once, for the peace of the public, as well as my own.

Daniel saw this vision after Nebuchadnezzer was dead, as is evident from the
first verse of the seventh chapter. After this, what does my anonymous author
think of the supposition mentioned in his 14th page? The four beasts meant
monarchs, and not monarchies. See the 12th verse. "As concerning the rest of
the beasts, they had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged
for a season and time." The life of a dominion I can conceive to be a poetical
phrase, and admit its propriety; but to take away the dominion from a dominion,
and yet prolong the life of that dominion, is too much even for me, with all my
credulity, to comprehend.

Daniel saw this vision in the first year of the reign of Belshazzar, the very
last king of Babylon, who lost his life at the same moment with his dominion,
and therefore his life certainly was not prolonged for a season nor a time. And
in the 17th verse of this same seventh chapter, the angel tells Daniel, "These
great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the
earth," -- shall arise -- in the future tense; not, one of whom is already
risen, -- and kings, not kingdoms. From this verse nothing can be more
undubitable, than that the king or kingdom of Babylon is totally out of the
question; and therefore the other three monarchies, in the common
interpretation, all necessarily fall to the ground as vesting on this base. I
hope I shall never here them mentioned again. My author hampers himself again
in his 21st page, on the similitude and dissimilitude between the fourth beast
of Daniel and the eagle of Esdras. If he will cavil at nothing, or every thing,
let him. But if he choose to read and think ingenuously for himself, he might
find, that Daniel omits in his fourth beast, as in the other three, to make any
mention of the rise or splendor, or even existence of monarchies: His beasts
are mere personages, and his fourth the Emperor of Germany; substitute for, and
standing avowedly and ostentatiously in the place of the ancient emperors of
Rome. Esdras delineates the monarchy or kingdom itself, of which he expressly
says, in the 12th chapter and 12th verse of the second book, that the Lord told
him this kingdom "was not expounded unto his brother Daniel," and therefore it
was now explained to him. Esdras saw the whole history in detail, and even what
would come to pass after the death of the present Emperor of Germany, the
present Pope, and present King of Prussia, the three heads of his eagle:
whereas Daniel only beheld the present Emperor and electors of the Germanic
body, without a glimpse of the Antichrist or of the pope.

By the sale of souls, pages 24 and 25, (for I am not writing a regular answer
to a pamphlet) which is too insignificant to deserve one; but hastily running
over a few of its capital errors, is meant a conscious sale of an article known
to be in one's own possession. Those who purchase pardons and indulgences of
popes, are not in this predicament.

Of Mr. Brothers's presumption, ignorance and artifice, of which he is accused
in the 27th, and subsequent pages, I shall take no notice: my author may
compare his own pamphlet with the few remarks I have here thrown together, and
set in judgment on himself, on the same articles.

But I shall boldly and authoritatively, retort the charges of falsehood, in
every one of the particulars by him enumerated, pages 33 and 34.

The first is, "the defeat of the Emperor's army in the Netherlands." It is
scandalous to term a prediction false, because it is not yet fulfilled. I say
also, the Emperor's army will be defeated in the Netherlands: and if there were
no other predisposing cause for this defeat, an attempt to raise the siege of
Luxembourg, now seriously invested, would suffice for the purpose: and I add,
therefore, that he will acknowledge the French republic, and will make peace
with it.

Secondly, The Dutch have acknowledged the French Republic, and are making a
hasty peace with it. Mr. Brothers never said it would happen without a
conquest, or that they would treat on equal terms. For the completion of his
prophecy, it is enough that they should have acted as they are acting.

Mr. Brothers never said, our army would be disbanded and sent home, by the
twenty-fifth of March: our author, therefore, should not have incurred the risk
of the retort discourteous, until our army was out of the possibility of being
so treated at all. Nor did he ever assert that the Duke of York would be
detained: he expressly says, "the general" of the English forces. That is now
Count Walmoden: tomorrow it may be somebody else; but to do away all chance of
verification, the ar-should be proved to have no general at all.

In these three little articles, wherein our anonymous author has attempted to
fix an imputation of falsehood on Mr. Brothers, he has convicted himself of
"presumption, -- ignorance -- artifice -- and falsehood; and here I leave him.

NATHANIEL BRASSEY HALHED.
Pall Mall, March 25, 1795.
LETTER, etc. That Mr. BROTHERS in the year 1790 possessed (and it is thought
by many that his faculties at present are as perfect as ever) the powers of
reasoning correctly logical, and of expressing his thoughts in an easy and
elegant diction, the following letter will unequivocally evince.
THURSDAY, Sept. 9, 1790.
TO PHILIP STEPHENS, ESQUIRE Admiralty-Office.
SIR,
TO avoid the imputation of appearing troublesome, I waited a considerable time
after the half-pay was advertised, that a very just application, though I believe
unprecedented, should not displease the Admiralty. Government is in my debt to
a much greater amount than twelve months; and although I have not enjoyed any
emolument, perquisite, or profit, from any business or employment whatever, the
only reason advanced for detaining my property, is the want of being qualified
every six months, by swearing the contents of a certificate as the result of my
own pleasure and inclination, when an order of council commands me, and
absolutely prohibits the payment until I do.

A voluntary act is an avowed freedom of choice, and under that denomination
cannot, to swear justly, admit the influence of a compulsory order; but I am
not allowed any choice, swear I must, and swear the oath I take is not enforced
by order, compulsion, or necessity, but a voluntary act of my own, received
with equal freedom as the air I breathe as an indemnification for imposing an
improper oath, I am obliged by the same rule to leave my signature duly
attested by a magistrate as a record, certainly not of superior wisdom. To
swear, then, agreeably to the prescribed form laid down by the privy council,
is obvious to the plainest capacity a surreptitious oath, concealing its
deformity under that mild appellation: for I hope no man is so far lost to all
sense of virtue, as to prefer taking an idle oath of this kind, or any other
description, when permitted an option, by the very word voluntarily, to decline
it.

Instructed from my infancy to guard against falsehood, as the most poisonous
evil that can possibly invade the human mind, and to court truth as the most
beautiful of all moral virtues, I view an oath as the most awful and solemn
appeal which a man can possibly make: the present judges say it should be
administered with caution, and never repeated except when pressing necessity
requires! for this reason, an oath before them is a public bond of true
evidence; tear away the solemnity by habitual practice, the sacred barrier
falls to the ground, and every man enters wild and lawless on the common of
perjury.

It was the language of Mr. Pit, in the House of Commons, (I ask pardon for
the introduction of his name) when a clause was offered for a certain bill late
in the last session, recommending an annual oath, or thereabouts, as necessary
for the better payment of that part of the revenue it went to describe, his
answer was, such a multiplication of oaths tended to destroy every public
principle, promote fraud and perjury, more than any immediate benefit to the
Exchequer could possibly compensate to society. I lament, sentiments equally
discerning and honorable do not adorn the heart of every man.

Having served under three commanders, not less amiable in private life than
eminently conspicuous on the list of professional merit, their parental
precepts, their example of rectitude and manners, remain still as an
admonishing lesson of advice never to be departed from. To drink from a foul
stream, in preference to a clear fountain, for no other reason than a multitude
being constantly led by official persuasion to do so, without once deigning to
examine the contaminated resource it flowed from, or, as a gentleman in the
commission of the peace observed to me with evident marks of displeasure, what
business have you to object against it, when others do it? would be treating
every faculty with ingratitude, and manifest an open indifference for the good
of knowledge.

I can pass by the oath; it is frequently done; the terms are low, safe, and
practical easy; for it is inconsistent with common sense to take a voluntary
oath as an act of necessity; it is a bad doctrine that goes to obliterate the
terror of iniquity by habitual repetition, and actually libels the propriety of
justice; but to be forced in any manner, and swear to the contrary! or if the
fraud was discovered, I believe it would torture the invention of the most
learned disquisitor to frame a prosecution for counterfeiting a forced, unjust,
nominal, voluntary oath. To me, the evasion would be dishonorable, and amount
to a crime of equal magnitude as embracing the evil I complain of.

Profane swearing, or any other description of idle oaths, as a passport to
receive those wages the law, reason, and equity, does not allow the detention
of, under any pretense, in the most uncivilized countries, is forcing a man
privately by the most cruel of all tortures, to the commission of iniquity,
without being able to advance even a plausible reason in its defense; for I
observe, it is not for the prevention of fraud to the revenue, or to prevent
that kind of emolument in future, which it goes back to discover, neither is it
to prohibit an officer from wandering abroad, when liable to be called for at
home, but for a purpose which may be guessed at -- delicacy will not allow me
to mention.

At any rate, as men of more liberal and independent characters now fill the
departments of State, than at the period which gave birth to this curious
order, the intention it was introduced for is now done away, consequently a
continuance of it is entirely unnecessary: notwithstanding the remote period of
its formation, those who advised it, were in some degree sensible that a public
oath could not be imposed on any part of the community beyond the walls of the
council chamber, unless specifically introduced and authorized by act of
Parliament, or so great a people would never attempt to conceal the imbecility
of a measure, and fritter away their own power, by retiring behind the specious
form of 'this deponent voluntarily makes oath,' when an absolute order was in
force to carry it into execution, or stop the payment of wages until it was
obeyed.

If I am to be precluded from all use of my property, because I do not
implicitly swear to error and contradiction, under the vain idea of compulsion
being an ample shield against the disgrace of swearing improperly, and that the
enormity would revert on those who imposed it, such language is beneath any man
that had understanding to perceive, though not fortitude to oppose; clothed
with the benign hand of providence with health and strength, necessity shall
never compel me to look for it by any way dishonorable to myself, or repugnant
to the nicest laws of equity.

If it is true virtue animates the hero, and emulation is meritorious in the
youth, if vice is ugly, and falsehood a deformity; as a senator, and a man of
sense, the good of the Navy, the benefit of your country, call on you to
attempt the extirpation of a custom dishonorable to God, and reproachable to
man.

I am, Sir, with great respect, Your very humble servant, R. BROTHERS.

No. 5, Beaufort-Buildings, Strand.
Westminster, To Wit. This deponent, A. B. Lieutenant in his Majesty's navy,
voluntarily makes oath, That he has not received the benefit of any public
employment, either at sea or on shore, between the 1st of July, 1789, and the
31st of December, 1790.

(Signed) A. B.
Sworn this day of 17 before O. P. Justice.
Admiralty Office, July 10, 1790. SIR,
IN return to your three letters, dated 25th of May, 29th June, and the 8th
instant 21st of April, 4th of May, omitted to acknowledge
, on the subject of the oath required to be taken for the payment of your
half-pay, and requesting for the reasons mentioned in your said letters, to be
relieved therefrom, I am commanded, by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
to acquaint you that the order of counsel for establishing half-pay requires
that oath to be taken, and that their Lordships are not authorized to dispense
with your not taking it.

I am, Sir, Your very humble Servant, PHILIP STEPHENS.

The following Paper comes from a Gentleman well known for his strenuous
support of Mr. Brothers' Principles, and who is particularly mentioned by the
Prophet in his Books in the warmest Terms of Gratitude and Esteem.
THE Prophesies and revealed knowledge communicated to the world by Richard
Brothers, having generally attracted public notice, I think it my duty to state
some of them as they have been already fulfilled, and let the world judge of
them according to their own knowledge and belief. The truth of them ought to be
carefully examined. That such a man will come there can be no doubt of, and is
expressly mentioned, Jerem. xxviii. 9. "The Prophet which prophesies of PEACE;
when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be
known, that the Lord has truly sent him."

Richard Brothers prophesies of universal peace, that shortly will be restored
to all kingdoms upon earth.

Book II. page 21. Richard Brothers says, "Are you William Pit, to whom I
wrote in May and June, 1792, informing you of the consequences of this war to
your country, p. 13. when the war was not intended, and of the death of Louis
the 16th, which was impossible to prevent, it was recorded and could not be
avoided.

p. 13. By the same example, if the French army was to be defeated, even again
and again, it should recover and conquer likewise.

p. 41. At the time of my writing to the king of England, relative to the king
of Prussia, I informed him; as I was commanded, of the certain failure of the
combined armies of Prussia and Austria.

Page 17. The king of Prussia will acknowledge the French republic, and also
make peace with it.

18. Russia will also quarrel with the Poles, and devour great numbers of them;
Warsaw will be set on fire, and the government entirely changed.

The above has been too fully and too fatally fulfilled surely for any one to
deny. Prussia was not able to conquer the Poles, but Russia, the (...) power,
(...) them.

19. The Spanish monarchy will cease by this war, and the Stadtholdership of
Holland will be cut off close to the ground, according to the visions of God to
me in 1792, and which I communicated at that time, by his sacred commands, to
the King and Queen of England.

On the 27th of June, 1792, I wrote to the French ambassador, then in London,
by command of the Lord God, acquainting him with the (...) loss of the French
Islands, and likewise the (...) of the English.

Page 70. After this I was (...) of January, 1792, and was carried away by the
Spirit of God to Sweden, etc. The King of Sweden is delivered over for death,
and that is the very man that will shoot him.

71. And when you write hereafter of other things in this country you will be
called an impostor, a fool, and a liar.

When I see this it will make me angry; I Will then begin to kill the people, and
I shall surely destroy this city.

Page 92. October 26, 1794, the Lord God commands me to say to you, William
Bryan, that you are appointed and will be commanded by him, to testify publicly
to the world who I now am, and what my future designation is. The Lord God will
influence and command numbers of his people, both men and women, to give the
same public testimonies.

102. Oct. 26, 1794. He informed the English (...) judges, etc. that the
prisoners now in confinement, and on trial for their lives, etc. are innocent.

The war ensued. On the 21st of January, 1793, the king of France was beheaded.
This prophecy has been fulfilled.

On the 1st Oct. 1792, the Duke of Brunswick retreated, after he had been
expected at Paris in two or three days, but ever since the allied armies have
retreated, and been beaten beyond any example in the annals of history; and few
will now, I believe, assert that they can ever repenetrate France, and restore
monarchy.

It is reported he has already made peace; if he has not, in all probability he
soon will.

In the Leyden Gazette, Dec. 26, 1794, it says, in the accounts from Warsaw,
"That the attack began at five o'clock in the morning, at nine the enemy was in
possession of the place. Five thousand Poles were slain in the assault, the
remaining 5000 were taken prisoners or dispersed. After this was over, and
(...) had ceased, about nine o'clock at night, they set fire to the town, and
began to butcher the inhabitants. The sick and wounded perished in the flames;
the rest, old men, women, and children, fell by the sword. Nine thousand
persons of every age and of both sexes, are computed to have fallen in the
massacre, and the whole of the suburb, except a few scattered houses, was
reduced to ashes."

Holland is entirely conquered, and the Stadtholder is now in this country.

The French islands have been conquered by the English, according to the former
part of this prophecy. The latter part remains to be fulfilled.

The king of (...) March 10, and died March 29, 1792.

Richard Brothers was taken up by government, March 4, 1795; that he has been
reckoned an impostor by many, the world itself must allow.

Mr. Halhed published his testimony January 29, 1795.

Mr. Bryan published his testimony Feb. 10, 1795; wherein he acknowledges that
he was compelled by the Spirit to write, being against his natural will.
Several others have published and are publishing their testimonies. Many also
have given their testimonies by letter. John Wright published his testimony
Aug. 1, 1794.

The prisoners were all tried and acquitted.



These things having been already fulfilled, ought to be a caution to every
body how they deny Revelation and Prophecy, and it behooves every person to
examine into the revealed prophecies very carefully, and judge impartially.
Acts. v. 39. "But if these things be of God, ye cannot overthrow them."

Richard Brothers stands in the Court Calender as a naval officer, Jan. 3,
1783. Surely then his character and behavior during his continuance in the
navy are very easily to be enquired by those that doubt his sanity. Because he
quotes Scripture and believes in GOD, is too ridiculous, one would think, for
any person to set him down either as an impostor or a madman. If he has not
wrote those letters to government, as he asserts, then he is a false prophet,
and the onus probandi lays with the ministers, etc. If those letters are
established, I think his prophecies coming true, absolutely prove him a true
prophet. I have taken every step to detect him in imposition or madness, but
cannot in either.

CANDIDUS.
March 26 1795.
FINIS.

