THE SPIRIT OF DESPOTISM.

DIVITIAS COMITATUR LUXUS, et LUXUS exit in TYRANNIDEM. -- Riches are attended
with Luxury, and Luxury ends in Despotism.

ERASMUS. Ex regum immoderata libidine unjusta bella temere plerumque
suscipiuntur, scelerate geruntur, turpiter deponuntur. -- In consequence of the
Spirit of Despotism among Kings and Grandees, unjust wars are, for the most
part, rashly undertaken, wickedly conducted, and, after all, abandoned with
defeat and disgrace.

BUCHANAN. LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1795. PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY LANG
AND USTICK, FOR SELVES AND MATTHEW CAREY. NOV. 28, MDCCXCV.

PREFACE.
THE heart is deceitful above all things; who can know it? As far as I know my
own, it feels an anxious desire to serve my fellow creatures, during the short
period of my continuance among them, by stopping the effusion of human blood,
by diminishing or softening the miseries which man creates for himself, by
promoting peace and by endeavoring to secure and extend civil liberty.

I attribute war, and most of the artificial evils of life, to the Spirit of
Despotism, a rank poisonous weed, which grows and flourishes even in the soil
of liberty, when overrun with corruption. I have attempted to eradicate it,
that the salutary and pleasant plants may have room to strike root and expand
their foliage.

There is one circumstance which induces me to think that, in this instance, my
heart does not deceive me. I am certain, that in attempting to promote the
general happiness of man, without serving any party, or paying court to any
individual, I am not studying my own interest. On the contrary, I am well aware
that my very subject must give offense to those who are possessed of power and
patronage. I have no personal enmities, and therefore am truly concerned that I
could not treat the Spirit of Despotism, without advancing opinions that must
displease the nominal great. I certainly sacrifice all view of personal
advantage to what appears to me the public good; and flatter myself that this
alone evinces the purity of my motive.

Men of feeling and good minds, whose hearts, as the phrase is, lie in the
right place, will, I think, agree with me in most points; especially when a
little time, and the events, now taking place, shall have dissipated the mist
of passion and prejudice. Hard-hearted, proud worldlings, who love themselves
only, and know no good but money and pageantry, will scarcely agree with me in
any. They will be angry; but, consistently with their general haughtiness,
affect contempt to hide their choler.

I pretend not to aspire at the honor of martyrdom: yet some inconveniences I
am ready to bear patiently, in promoting a cause which deeply concerns the
whole of the present race, and ages yet unborn. I am ready to bear patiently
the proud man's contumely, the insult of rude ignorance, the sarcasm of malice,
the hired censure of the sycophantic critic, (whose preferment depends on the
prostitution both of knowledge and conscience,) and the virulence of the venal
newspaper. It would be a disgrace to an honest man not to incur the abuse of
those who have sold their integrity and abilities to the enemies of their
country and the human race. Strike, but hear, said a noble ancient. Truth will
ultimately prevail, even though he who uttered i^ should be destroyed. Columbus
was despised, rejected, persecuted; but America was discovered. Men very
inconsiderable in the eye of pride, have had the honor to discover, divulge,
and disseminate doctrines that have promoted the liberty and happiness of the
human race. All that was rich and great, in the common acceptance of that
epithet, combined against Luther; yet when pontiffs, kings, and lords had
displayed an impotent rage, and sunk into that oblivion which their personal
insignificance naturally led to, Luther prevailed, and his glory is immortal.
He broke the chain of superstition, and weakened the bonds of despotism.

I have frequently, and from the first commencement of our present unfortunate
and disgraceful hostilities, lifted up my voice -- a feeble one indeed --
against war, that great promoter of despotism; and while I have liberty to
write, I will write for liberty. I plead weakly, indeed, but sincerely, the
cause of mankind; and on them, under GOD, I rely for protection against that
merciless SPIRIT which I attempt to explode.

CONTENTS.
Sect. I. INTRODUCTORY. Page 1 Sect. II. Oriental Manners, and the Ideas
imbibed in Youth, both in the West and East Indies, favorable to the Spirit of
Despotism. Page 13 Sect. III. Certain Circumstances in Education which promote
the Spirit of Despotism. Page 21 Sect. IV. Corruption of Manners has a natural
Tendency to promote the Spirit of Despotism. Page 28 Sect. V. An Abhorrence of
Despotism, and an ardent love of Liberty, perfectly consistent with Order and
Tranquillity; and the natural consequence of well-informed Understandings and
benevolent Dispositions. Page 34 Sect. VI. On the Venality of the Press under
the Influence of the despotic Spirit, and its Effects in diffusing that Spirit.
Page 41 Sect. VII. The fashionable Invectives against Philosophy and Reason, a
Proof of the Spirit of Despotism. Page 48 Sect. VIII. Of Loyalty, and certain
mistaken Ideas of it. Page 55 Sect. IX. On taking Advantage of popular
Commotions, accidental Excesses, and foreign Revolutions, to extend Prerogative
and Power, and encroach on the Liberties of the People. Page 62 Sect. X. When
Human Life is held cheap, it is a symptom of a prevailing Spirit of Despotism.
Page 72 Sect. XI. Indifference of the Middle and Lower Classes of the People to
public Affairs, highly favorable to the Encroachments of the Tory Principle,
and therefore to the Spirit of Despotism. Page 79 Sect. XII. The despotic
Spirit is inclined to discourage Commerce, as unfavorable to its Purposes. Page
88 Sect. XIII. The Spirit of Despotism displaying itself in private Life, and
proceeding thence to avail itself of the Church and the Military. Page 96 Sect.
XIV. The Despotic Spirit inclined to avail itself of Spies, Informers, false
Witnesses, pretended Conspiracies, and self-interested Associations affecting
Patriotism. Page. 111 Sect. XV. The Manners of Tory Courtiers, and of those who
ape them, as People of Fashion, inconsistent with Manliness, Truth, and
Honesty; and their Prevalence injurious to a Free Constitution, and the
Happiness of Human Nature. Page. 119 Sect. XVI. The Spirit of Truth, Liberty,
and Virtue, public as well as private, chiefly to be found in the middle Ranks
of the People. Page. 131 Sect. XVII. On debauching the Minds of the rising
Generation and a whole People, by giving them military Notions in a free and
commercial Country. Page. 139 Sect. XVIII. Levity, Effeminacy, Ignorance, and
Want of Principle in private Life, inimical to all public Virtue, and favorable
to the Spirit of Despotism. Page. 146 Sect. XIX. Certain Passages in Dr.
Brown's "Estimate," which deserve the serious Consideration of all who oppose
the Subversion of a free Constitution by Corruption of Manners and Principles,
and by undue influence. Page. 154 Sect. XX. On several Subjects suggested by
Lord Melcombe's "Diary;" particularly the practice of bartering the Cure of
Souls for the Corruption of Parliament. Page. 162 Sect. XXI. On choosing rich
Men, with Parts, Spirit, or Liberality, as Representatives in the National
Council. Page. 170 Sect. XXII. Of the Despotic Influence of great Merchants
over their Subalterns, of Customers over their Tradesmen, and rich trading
Companies over their various Dependents, in compelling them to vote for court
Candidates for Seats in Parliament, merely to serve private interest, without
the smallest Regard for public Liberty and Happiness, or the Fitness or
Unfitness of the Candidate. Page. 177 Sect. XXIII. Of the Pageantry of Life;
that it originates in the Spirit of Despotism; and contributes to it, without
advancing private any more than public Felicity. Page. 185 Sect. XXIV.
Insolence of the higher Orders to the middle Ranks and the Poor; with their
affected Condescension, in certain Circumstances, to the lowest of the People.
Page. 193 Sect. XXV. Of a Natural Aristocracy. Page. 201 Sect. XXVI. The
excessive Love of Distinction and Power which prevails wherever the Spirit of
Despotism exists, deadens some of the finest Feelings of the Heart, and
counteracts the Laws of Nature. Page. 209 Sect. XXVII. On the Opinion that the
People are annihilated or absorbed in Parliament; that the Voice of the People
is no where to be heard but in Parliament; and on similar Doctrines, tending to
depreciate the People. Page. 216 Sect. XXVIII. The Fashionable Contempt thrown
on Mr. Lock, and his Writings in Favor of Liberty; and on other Authors and
Books espousing the same Cause. Page. 224 Sect. XXIX. Of the Despotism of
Influence; while the Forms of a free Constitution are preserved. Page. 232
Sect. XXX. The Spirit of Despotism delights in War or systematic Murder. Page.
240 Sect. XXXI. On the Idea that we have arrived at Perfection in Politics,
though all other Sciences are in a progressive State. Page. 249 Sect. XXXII. On
Political Ethics; their chief Object is to throw Power into the Hands of the
worst Part of Mankind, and to render Government an Institution calculated to
enrich and aggrandize a few, at the Expense of the Liberty, Property, and Lives
of the many. Page. 256 Sect. XXXIII. On trafficking with the Cure of Souls
(Cura Animarum) for the Purposes of political, i. e. moral Corruption. Page.
263 Sect. XXXIV. Of Mr. Hume's Idea, That absolute Menarchy is the easiest
Death, the true Euthanasia of the British Constitution. Page. 271 Sect. XXXV.
The Permission of Lawyers by Profession, aspiring at Honors in the Gift of the
Crown, to have the greatest Influence in the Legislature, a Circumstance
unsavorable to Liberty. Page. 278 Sect. XXXVI. Poverty, when not entreme,
favorable to all Virtue, public and private, and consequently to the Happiness
of Human Nature; and enormous Riches, without Virtue, the general Bane. Page.
285 Sect. XXXVII. On the natural Tendency of making Judges and Crown Lawyers,
Peers; of translating Bishops, and annexing Preferments to Bishoprics, in,
what is called, commendam. Page. 292 Sect. XXXVIII. That all Opposition to the
Spirit of Despotism should be conducted with the most serupulous Regard to the
existing Laws, and to the Preservation of public Peace and good Order. Page.
304 Sect. XXXIX. The Christian Religion favorable to Civil Liberty, and
likewise to Equality, rightly understood. Page. 311 Sect. XL. The Pride which
produces the Spirit of Despotism conspicuous even on the Tombstone. It might be
treated with total Neglect, if it did not tend to the Oppression of the Poor,
and to Bloodshed and Plunder. Page. 319 Sect. XLI. CONCLUSION.
THE Spirit of Despotism.
SECTION I. INTRODUCTORY.
MAN, in a state of simplicity, uncorrupted by the influence of bad education,
bad examples, and bad government, possesses a taste for all that is good and
beautiful. He is capable of a degree of moral and intellectual improvement,
which advances his nature to a participation with the divine. The world, in all
its magnificence, appears to him one vast theater, richly adorned and
illuminated, into which he is freely admitted, to enjoy the glorious spectacle.
Acknowledging no natural superior but the great architect of the whole fabric,
he partakes the delight with conscious dignity, and glows with gratitude.
Pleased with himself and all around him, his heart dilates with benevolence, as
well as piety; and he finds his joys augmented by communication. His
countenance cheerful, his mien erect, he rejoices in existence. Life is a
continual feast to him, highly seasoned by virtue, by liberty, by mutual
affection. God formed him to be happy, and he becomes so, thus fortunately
unmolested by false policy and oppression. Religion, reason, nature, are his
guides through the whole of his existence, and the whole is happy. VIRTUOUS
INDEPENDENCE, the sun, which irradiates the morning of his day, and warms its
noon, tinges the serene evening with every beautiful variety of color, and, on
the pillow of religious hope, he sinks to repose in the bosom of Providence.

But where is man to be found, thus noble, thus innocent, thus happy? Not,
indeed, in so many parts of the terraqueous globe as he ought to be; but still
he is to be found wherever the rights of nature and the virtues of simplicity
are not violated or banished by the false refinements, the base artifices of
corrupted government.

Unhappily for man, society has been almost universally corrupted, even by the
arts intended for its improvement; and human nature is gradually depraved in
its very progress to civilization. Metamorphosed by the tampering of unskilful
or dishonest politicians, and the craft of interested priests, cooperating
with politicians, MAN at present appears, in many countries, a diminutive and
distorted animal, compared with what he was in his primaeval state. He is
become the dwarf and the cripple of courts and cities instead of the
well-formed, beautiful, creature, who once bounded, in the glory of health and
strength, over the forest and the mountain, glowing with the warmth of virtue,
and breathing the spirit of independence.

Various are the causes which contribute to the factitious depravity of man.
Defective and erroneous education corrupts him; the prevalent examples of a
degenerate community corrupt him; but bad government corrupts him more than all
other causes combined. The grand adversary of human virtue and happiness is
DESPOTISM. Look over the surface of the whole earth, and behold man, the glory
and deputed lord of the creation, withering under the influence of despotism,
like the plant of temperate climes scorched by the sun of a torrid zone. The
leaf is sickly, the blossom dares not expand its beauty, and no fruit arrives
at its just size and maturity.

Turkey, Italy, Egypt! how changed from what ye were when inhabited by ancient
Greeks, Romans, Egyptians! Nature, indeed, still smiles upon them with
unaltered favor. The blue mantle of the skies is still spread over them in all
its luminous magnificence. There is no reason to suppose the earth less
fertile. The corn laughs in the valleys. The tree aspires to Heaven with all
its original verdure and majesty. But MAN decays; withered, shrunk, enervated;
a form without spirit, an animal less happy than the beasts of the field, and
more ignoble, inasmuch as degeneracy is baser than native, original, created
inferiority. Fallen with the columnar ruins of better times, over which, in
these countries, he often tramples, MAN himself appears little better than a
ruin, displaying all the deformity of the mouldering pile, with scarcely any
vestige of its former magnificence. It would equally contradict philosophy and
experience to attribute this moral degeneracy to the decay of nature's vigor.
There is no reason to conclude that the natural faculties of men who inhabit
countries once free, but now enslaved, are produced in a state of less
perfection at this hour, than in the days of their illustrious forefathers.
Anatomy discovers no defect in the fibers of the heart or the brain; yet the
degeneracy remains uncontested. In truth, government has counteracted the
beneficence of nature. The MEN are fallen; while the human figures, with their
internal and external organization, continue similar, or the same. They are
inactive and pufillanimous. They aspire at no extraordinary excellence or
achievements; but crouch beneath their despot, glad of the poor privilege
allowed them by a fellow creature, as weak and more wicked than themselves, to
eat, drink, sleep and die. Any pre-eminent degree of merit among them would
render the distinguished possessor of it fatally illustrious, the certain
object of a tyrant's vengeance; and they find their best security in their want
of virtue. By a voluntary submission to contempt, they retain and transmit the
privilege of breathing, and build the bulwark of their safety on their personal
insignificance.

FEAR must, of necessity, become the predominant passion in all countries
subject to the uncontrolled dominion of an individual and his ministers: but
fear chills the blood, and freezes the faculties. Under its icy influence there
can arise no generous emulation, no daring spirit of adventure. Enterprise is
considered as dangerous, not merely from the general casuality of all human
affairs, but because it excites notice, and alarms the jealousy of felfish
power. Under a despotic government, to steal through life unobserved, to creep,
with timid caution, through the vale of obscurity, is the first wisdom; and to
be suffered to die in old age, without the prison, the chain, the dagger, or
the poisoned bowl, the highest pitch of human felicity.

IGNORANCE of the grossest kind, ignorance of man's nature and rights,
ignorance of all that tends to make and keep us happy, disgraces and renders
wretched more tha^ half the earth, at this moment, in consequence of its
subjugation to despotic power. Ignorance, robed in imperial purple, with Pride
and Crucity by her side, sways an iron scepter over more than one hemisphere.
In the finest and largest regions of this planet which we inhabit, are no
liberal pursuits and professions, no contemplative delights, nothing of that
pure, intellectual employment which raises man from the mire of sensuality and
fordid care, to a degree of excellence and dignity, which we conceive to be
angelic and celestial. Without knowledge or the means of obtaining it, without
exercise or excitements, the mind falls into a state of infantine imbecility
and dotage; or acquires a low cunning, intent only on selfish and mean
pursuits, such as is visible in the more ignoble of the irrational creatures,
in foxes, apes, and monkies. Among nations so corrupted, the utmost effort of
genius is a court intrigue or a ministerial cabal.

A degradation of the understanding, like this, is usually accompanied with
depravity of heart. From an inability to find pleasure and honorable employment
in the energies of thought, in noble and virtuous action, in refined
conversation, in arts, in commerce in learning, arises a mischievous activity
in trifles, a perversion of nature, a wantonness of wickedness, productive of
flagitious habits, which render the partaker of reason the most despicable and
detestable animal in the whole circle of existence. Thus sunk under the
pressure of despotism, who can recognize, notwithstanding the human shape they
bear, the lineal descendants of Egyptian, Grecian, Roman worthies, the glory
of their times, the luminaries of their own country and the world, the
instructors and benefactors of human nature? Thus the image of the Deity,
stamped on man at his creation, is defiled or utterly effaced by government,
instituted and exercised by man over his fellow-man; and his kindred to Heaven
is known no more by the divine resemblance. A bad government is therefore the
curse of the earth, the scourge of man, the grand obstacle to the divine will,
the most copious source of all moral evil, and for that reason, of all misery;
but of bad governments, none are comparable, in their mischievous effects, to
the despotic.

But if despotism in its extreme produces consequences thus malignant, reason
will infer, and experience will justify the inference, that all the subordinate
degrees of despotism are proportionally destructive. However it may be
disguised by forms, it is ever seeking its own increase and aggrandizement, by
openly crushing, or secretly undermining, the fabric of liberty: it is ever
encroaching on the privileges and enjoyments of those who are subjected to it;
greedily, though foolishly, wishing to engross every good of every kind in this
sublunary state, except the good of virtue.

POWER, though limited by written laws, in the hands of mortal men, poorly
educated, and surrounded by sycophants and flatterers, who wish, by partaking
the power, to partake also of its profits and distinctions, and thus gratify at
once their pride and avarice, is always endeavoring to extend itself beyond the
limitations; and requires to be watched with the most jealous eye, by all who
are subject to it, and to be restrained within its bounds, by the manliest
efforts, and the most determined resolution of virtue. Every engine of artifice
and terror will be used to suppress such virtue: but the friend of man and of
his country will defy persecution, fines, imprisonment, and death, in
attempting, by every lawful and rational means, to push back the gigantic
strides of encroaching despotism, more destructive of happiness than an
earthquake or a pestilence. A country deserves no love, when it ceases to be a
country of liberty. Human beings constitute a country, not a soil in a certain
latitude; and an attachment to liberty is the truest loyalty.

It is therefore highly expedient, whenever a people, free by law and
constitution, appear in the smallest degree to remit their attention to the
preservation of freedom, to urge them, by the most serious admonition, to an
immediate resumption of their vigilance. While they slumber and sleep, lulled
by the Circean cup of corruption, the enemy is awake, and busily making his
insidious approaches to the citadel. Every inch of ground, they carelessly
relinquish, is eagerly seized by the covetous possessor of dominion; the love
of which, like the love of money, increases by accession. Nor are there ever
wanting numbers of artful men who stimulate a weak or a wicked prince in his
encroachments; sensible as they are, that their own power and privileges will
be augmented with those of the prince, whose exclusive favor they have gained
by sycophantic arts and by cooperation in the fallacious service of enlarging
his prerogative. The more the power of the prince is augmented, the greater
will be the emoluments, the more brilliant the distinctions of the courtier. A
star shines with higher luster, a ribband displays a brighter hue, a title
soothes the ear with sweeter music, when conferred by a mighty potentate far
exalted above vulgar control, and who holds his crown in contempt of his
people. If kings can be once elevated to the rank of Heaven's vicegerents, how
must admiring plebeians idolize their choice favors and their prime favorites?
There is always, therefore, a set of men (to whom pomp and vanity are the chief
good) who are continually endeavoring to add glory and greatness to the orb
from which they derive their own luster. Moons and satellites would shine
faintly indeed, unless the sun of the system glittered with intolerable
effulgence. If the sun were shorn of its beams, their native opaqueness would
pass without notice.

So many advantages do the professors of power enjoy for its extension, in all
countries where courts have influence, that the people, however great their
numbers, are scarcely a match for its subtle contrivances, its false alarms,
its bribes, its spies, its informers, its constructive treasons, its military
force, its superstitious terrors, invented and diffused by a policy, which
often laughs in secret at the religion which it enforces with solemn hypocrisy.
A court has an opportunity of gratifying, in a thousand different ways, both
secretly and openly, the most prevalent and violent passions of human nature.
When the mass of the people are artfully seduced to throw their weight into the
same scale with the court, liberty in the other must kick the beam. When the
aristocracy of rank and riches unite hand in hand, to seduce the people, the
delusion may for a time be successful, and advantages may be taken, during the
temporary delirium, to rifle the castle of liberty, to weaken its foundations,
to break down its battlements, or to lull its watchmen asleep with a powerful
opiate.

It has indeed been said in ancient times, and often repeated, that if the
people will be deceived, let them be deceived; but they have no choice, no
chance to escape deception, unless the truth be fairly and publicly exhibited
to them, and their minds duly enlightened. When dust is thrown into their eyes,
more especially gold dust, the political opthalmist must honestly endeavor to
clear away the obstruction. It becomes every lover of his country, especially a
country like England, where even the throne itself is fixed on liberty as on a
corner stone, to warn his countrymen of the danger, wherever he observes the
smallest encroachment on their rights, and the spirit of the times tending but
remotely to despotism.

If there be a time, in which the senate of a free country has declared that
the influence of the crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be
diminished; and if, instead of a consequent diminution, there be an evident
increase of that influence; if acts, like the habeas corpus, highly favorable
to liberty, be suspended without necessity; if unconstitutional benevolences be
encouraged; if places and pensions be multiplied; if juries be censured by
great men for honest verdicts in favor of freedom; if endeavors be made
restrain the press by sycophantic associations; if spies and informers be kept
in pay for the purpose of prosecuting innocent men who espouse the cause of
their country; if the press be hired to calumniate both liberty and the people;
if wars, neither just nor necessary, be undertaken to divert the public mind
from domestic reformation; if a party prevail by artifice, who hate the name of
liberty, who are continually employed in aggrandizing monarchy, aristocracy,
and in depreciating the people; in such a time, and in such a conjuncture, it
becomes every honest man, not yet drawn into the whirlpool of political
corruption, to warn his fellow-citizens against an encroaching spirit of
despotism.

In the following pages, I offer some suggestions on the subject. I have indeed
few qualifications for the task besides sincerity, an earnest desire to promote
public and private happiness, and an independence of spirit; but these I
certainly have, and profess to maintain. I wish the rising generation may be
awakened, and learn to place a due value on the liberty handed down to them by
their ancestors. I would inspire them with a generosity of mind, which should
scorn dissimulation; which should neither practice the arts of corruption, nor
become their dupe. I am desirous of discrediting the whole system of
corruption, and of rendering all civil government fair, just, open, and
honorable. All government, founded on insincerity and injustice, debases the
morals and injures the happiness, while it infringes on the civil rights of the
people. I wish to revive in the people a due sense of their native and
constitutional importance. I endeavor, in this book, to plead the cause of
man; firmly convinced that the cause of man is the cause of GOD.

SECTION II. Oriental Manners, and the Ideas imbibed in Youth, both in the West
and East Indies, favorable to the Spirit of Despotism.
THE foundations of the fair fabric of liberty in Europe were laid in ages when
there was but little intercourse, commercial or political, with the remote
countries of Asia and America. A hardy race, in ungenial climates, with nerves
^^rung by the northern (...) though little refined by knowledge, felt in an
early age, the sentiments of manly virtue, and spurned the baseness of slavery.
Luxury had not emasculated their minds; and they threw off, with native
elasticity, the burden of unjust dominion. While they submitted with graceful
acquiescence, to all lawful authority, established by their own consent, for
the general good; they preserved a noble consciousness of native dignity, and
maintained a personal grandeur, a proud independence, a greatness unindebted to
the morbid tumor of rank and riches.

In later times the facility of navigation and the improvements of science have
brought into close connection the extremes of the habitable globe. The asperity
of manners which sometimes disgraced the virtues of our forefathers, has indeed
been softened by various and constant intercourse; the manly spirit has
exchanged ferocity for gentleness, and rendered the energetic character
consistent with the amiable. It was a happy change; for why should manly virtue
assume a forbidding aspect, and lose the recommendation of engaging manners,
the happiness of loving and being loved, while it commands, by deserving,
cordial reverence?

But from the intercourse of England with the East and West Indies, it is to be
feared that something of a more servile spirit has been derived, than was known
among those who established the free constitutions of Europe, and tha^ would
have been adopted, or patiently borne, in ages of virtuous simplicity.

A very numerous part of our countrymen spend their most susceptible age, in
those countries, where despotic manners remarkably prevail. They are
themselves, when ^^^ested with office, treated by the natives with an
idolatrous degree of reverence, which teaches them to expect a similar
submission to their will, on their return to their own country. They have been
accustomed to look up to personages greatly their superiors in rank and riches,
with awe; and to look down on their inferiors in property, with supreme
contempt, as slaves of their will, and ministers of their luxury. Equal laws,
and equal liberty at home, appear to them saucy claims of the poor and vulgar,
which tend to divest riches of one of the greatest charms, overbearing dominion.

We do indeed import gorgeous silks and luscious sweets from the Indies, but we
import, at the same time, the spirit of despotism, which adds deformity to the
purple robe, and bitterness to the honied beverage.

The vassals of the feudal times, it is true, were abject slaves; but their
slavery was freedom compared to the slavery of the negro. They were not driven
by the whip to work in a torrid zone. They were not wanted to administer to
personal luxury; for personal luxury did not exist. But the negro is rendered a
two-legged beast of burden; and looks up to the infant son of his lord, as to a
superior being, whom he is bound to obey, however vicious, whimsical, or cruel
the command. Cradled in despotism, the young planter comes to England for
education, and brings with him the early impressions, which a few years
residence in the land of freedom can seldom obliterate. He returns; grows rich
by the labor of slaves, over whom, for the sake of personal safety, the most
arbitrary government is exercised, and then perhaps retires to England to spend
his age and acquirements in the capital, the seat of pleasure, the theater of
commercial splendour and courtly magnificence. He mixes much in society, and
inevitably communicates his ideas, which have now taken deep root, on the
necessity of keeping the vulgar in a state of depression, and strengthening the
hands of the rich and the powerful. In the virtuous struggles of the lower and
middle ranks for constitutional liberty, is it likely that he should join the
contest, on the side of the people? Is it not most probable, that he will throw
all his weight, which, considering the weight of money, is often great, in
opposition to the popul^^ side? A long succession of such men, personally
respectable, but, from peculiar circumstances, favoring the extension of power,
and disposed by habits and principles sucked in with the mother's milk, to
repel the claims of their inferiors, must contribute greatly to diffuse, in a
free country, the spirit of despotism.

That oriental manners are unfavorable to liberty, is, I believe, universally
conceded. The natives of the East Indies ^^ertain not the idea of independence.
They treat the Europeans, who go among them to (...) their riches, with a
respect similar to the abject submission which they pay to their native
despots. Young men, who in England scarcely possessed the rank of the gentry,
are waited upon in India, with more attentive servility than is paid or
required in many courts of Europe. Kings of England seldom assume the state
enjoyed by an East India governor, or even by subordinate officers.

Enriched at an early age, the adventurer returns to England. His property
admits him to the higher circles of fashionable life. He aims at rivalling or
exceeding all the old nobility in the splendour of his mansions, the finery of
his carriages, the number of his liveried train, the profusion of his table, in
every unmanly indulgence, which an empty vanity can covet, and a full purse,
procure. Such a man, when he looks from the window of his superb mansion, and
sees the people pass, cannot endure the idea, that they are of as much
consequence as himself, in the eye of the law; and that he dares not insult or
oppress the unfortunate being who rakes his kennel, or sweeps his chimney. He
must wish to increase the power of the rich and great, that the saucy vulgar
may be kept at a due distance, that they may know their station, and submit
their necks to the foot of pride.

The property of such a man will give him great weight in parliamentary
elections. He probably purchases a borough. He sides with the court party on
all questions; and is a great stickler for the extension of prerogative. In his
neighborhood, and as a voter for representatives, he uses all his interest in
supporting such men as are likely to promote his views of aggrandizing the
great, among whom he hopes to be associated, and in depressing the little, whom
he despises and shuns. Having money sufficient, his present object is a title.
This he knows can only come from the possessors of power, to whom, therefore,
he pays such a submission as he has seen paid to himself in India by oriental
slaves. His whole conduct tends to increase the influence of riches, from which
alone, he is conscious, he derives his own importance. What is his eloquence?
What his learning? What his beneficence to mankind? Little; perhaps none. But
his estate is large, his house large, his park large, his manors many, his
equipage, on a birthday, the most splendid in St. James's-street. Long-Acre
gives him a passport to court favor. With a feat in the house, and an
unrivalled equipage and mansion, he deems himself justly entitled to be made,
in due time, a baronet at least, if not an hereditary lawgiver of his country.

By a constantly successive influx of such men from the eastern climes,
furnished with the means of corruption, and inclined to promote arbitrary
principles of government, it cannot be doubted, that much is contributed to the
spirit of despotism. Who among them would not add to the mass of that power and
splendour, to possess a large share of which has been the first object of a life
spent in unceasing cares, at the risque of health, and in a torrid zone?

And what is left to oppose the spirit of despotism thus animated in its
progress by enormous opulence? Is it the virtue of the honest country
gentleman, who lives on his estate, possessing nothing and hoping nothing from
the favor of courts? Is it the independence of the middle and lower ranks, too
numerous to be bribed either by gifts or expectations? Both, it is to be
feared, will be too slow in their opposition to the gigantic monster, if not
too feeble. They will not often risque their repose in a dangerous contest with
opulence and power. They stand in awe of the sword and the law; which, in bad
times, have been equally used as instruments of injustice. Contented with the
enjoyment of plenty, or the amusements of rural sports, they sink into a state
of indifference to public affairs, and thus leave the field open to those who
have no right to occupy it at all, much less exclusively.

Thus the community becomes divided into two descriptions of men; the
corruptors and the indifferent; those who seek wealth and honors without
virtue, and those who seek only their own ease regardless of the public.

This indifference is scarcely less culpable than corruption. It must be laid
aside. The independent country gentleman, seconded by the people, is the
character, on whom liberty must rely, as on her firmest supporter, against the
incursion of oriental pride. Let him preserve his independence by frugality.
Let him beware of emulating either the oriental or occidental upstart, in
expenses which he cannot equal, without diminishing his patrimony and losing
his independence. Let him cultivate every social virtue, reside on his estate,
and become popular by exhibiting superior excellence both of heart and
understanding. He will then do right to offer himself a candidate in his
vicinity for a seat in the senate; because, as a senator, he will gain a power
to act with effect against the increasing weight of corrupt influence. The
truly WHIG PARTY, the lovers of liberty and the people, is not only the most
favorable to human happiness, but certainly most congenial to the constitution
of England, and ought to be strengthened by the junction of all independent
men, lovers of peace, liberty, and human nature.

The TORY AND JACOBITE SPIRIT, under other more plausible names, is still
alive, and has increased of late. All who have a just idea of the British
constitution, and of the value of liberty, will oppose it, by cultivating
manliness of spirit, by illuminating the minds of the people, and by inspiring
them with a regard to truth, justice, and independence, together with a love of
order and of peace, both internal and external.

SECTION III. Certain Circumstances in Education which promote the Spirit of
Despotism.
MANY who have arisen to high elevation of rank or fortune, seem to think that
their nature has undergone a real metamorphosis; that they are refined by a
kind of chemical process, sublimed by the sunshine of royal favor, and
separated from the faeces, the dross and the dregs of ordinary humanity; that
humanity, of which the mass of mankind partake, and which, imperfect as it is,
God created. They seem to themselves raised to a pinnacle; from which they
behold, with sentiments of indifference or contempt, all two-legged and
unfeathered beings of inferior order, placed in the vale, as ministers of their
pride, and slaves of their luxury, or else burdens of the earth, and
superfluous sharers of existence.

The great endeavor of their lives, never employed in the essential service of
society, is to keep the vulgar at a distance, lest their own purer nature
should be contaminated by the foul contagion. Their offspring must be taught,
in the first instance, to know and revere, not God, not man, but their own rank
in life. The infants are scarcely suffered to breath the common air, to feel
the common sun, or to walk upon the common earth. Immured in nurseries till the
time for instruction arrives, they are then surrounded by a variety of domestic
tutors. And what is the first object in their education? Is it the improvement
of their minds, the acquisition of manly sentiment, useful knowledge, expanded
ideas, piety, philanthropy? No; it is the embellishment of their persons, an
accurate attention to dress, to their teeth, to grace in dancing, attitude in
standing, uprightness, not the uprightness of the heart, but the formal and
unnatural perpendicularity of a soldier drilled on the parade. If a master of
learned languages and philosophy be admitted at all, he feels himself in less
estimation with the family than the dancing master; and if possessed of the
spirit, which the nature of his studies has a tendency to inspire, he will soon
depart from a house, where he is considered in the light of an upper servant,
paid less wages, and subjected to the caprice of the child, whom he ought to
control with the natural authority of superior wisdom. To assume over his pupil
the rights of that natural superiority, would be to oppose the favorite ideas
of the family, that all real pre-eminence is founded on birth, fortune, and
court favor. The first object with the pupil, and the last, the lesson to be
got by heart, and to be repeated by night and by day, is an adequate conception
of his own native consequence, a disposition to extend the influence of rank
and riches, and to depress and discourage the natural tendency of personal
merit to rise to distinction by its own elastic force.

If the boy be allowed to go to any school at all, which is not always deemed
prudent, because schools in general have a few plebeians who raise themselves
there, to some degree of superiority, by merit only, it is only to schools
which fashion recommends, which abound with titled persons, and where the
expenses are so great, as to keep ingenious poverty, or even mediocrity of
fortune, at a respectful distance. Here he is instructed to form connexions
with his superiors. The principle point is to acquire the haughty air of
nobility. Learning and virtue may be added, if peradventure they come easily;
but the formation of connexions, and the assumption of insolence, is
indispensable. To promote this purpose, pocket-money is bestowed on the pupil
with a lavish hand by his parents, and all his cousins who court his favor. He
must show his consequence, and be outdone by no lord of them all, in the
profusion of his expenses, in the variety of his pleasures, and, if his great
companions should happen to be vicious, in the enormity of his vice. Insults
and injuries may be shown to poor people who attend the school, or live near
it, as marks of present spirit and future heroism. A little money makes a full
compensation, and the glorious actions, on one side, and the pusillanimous
acquiescence under it, on the other, evinces the great doctrine, that the poor
are by nature creatures of other mold, earth-born perhaps, and made for the
pastime of those who have had the good fortune to be born to opulence or title.
The masters themselves are to be kept in due order by the illustrious pupils,
or a rebellion may ensue. Such an event indeed is sometimes devoutly wished, as
it affords opportunities for embryo heroes to show their prowess and their
noble pride. Every ebullition of spirits, as it is heartily called, displaying
itself in insolence or ill-usage of the inferior ranks, defenseless old men or
women, and the poor in general, is remembered and cherished with care, as a
flattering prognostic of future eminence in the cabinet, the senate, at the
bar, or in the field. Justice, generosity, humility, are words indeed in the
dictionary, and may adorn a declamation; but insolence, extravagance, and
pride, must mark the conduct of those who are sent, rather to support the
dignity of native grandeur by the spirit of arrogance, than to seek wisdom and
virtue with the docility of modest and ingenuous disciples. Practical
oppression of inferiors is one of the first elements of aristocratical
education; and the order of Faggs (as they are called) contributes much to
familiarize the exercise of future despotism. Mean submissions prepare the
mind, in its turn, to tyrannize.

Let us now suppose the stripling grown too tall for school, and entered at an
university. The English universities are admirably well adapted to flatter the
pride of wealth and title. There is a dress for the distinction of the higher
orders extremely pleasing to aristocratical vanity. In the world at large the
dress of all gentlemen is so similar, that nothing is left to point out those
who think themselves of a superior order; unless indeed they ride in their
coaches, and exhibit their splendid liveries behind, and armorial ensigns on
the sides; but at Oxford, they never walk the streets, on the commonest
occasions, without displaying their proud pre-eminence by gowns of silk and
tufts of gold.

As noblemen, or gentlemen commoners, they not only enjoy the privilege of
splendid vestments, but of neglecting, if they please, both learning and
religion. They are not required, like vulgar scholars, to attend regularly to
the instruction, or to the discipline of the colleges; and they are allowed a
frequent absence from daily prayer. They are thus taught to believe, that a
silken gown and a velvet cap are substitutes for knowledge; and that the rank
of gentlemen commoners dispenses with the necessity of that devotion which
others are compelled to profess in the college chapels. High privileges these!
and they usually fill those who enjoy them with that attachment to rank, which
leads directly to the spirit of despotism. They are flattered in the seats of
wisdom, where science and liberality are supposed to dwell, with an idea of
some inherent virtue in mere rank, independently of merit; and after having
learned a lesson so pleasing to self-love and idleness, they go out into the
world with confidence, fully resolved to practice the proud theories they have
imbibed, and to demand respect without endeavoring to deserve it.

Without public or private virtue, and without even the desire of it; without
knowledge, and without even a thirst for it; many of them, on leaving college,
enlist under the banners of the minister for the time being, or in a
self-interested opposition to him, and boldly stand forth candidates to
represent boroughs and counties, on the strength of aristocratical influence.
Though they appear to ask favors of the people, they pay no respect to the
people, but rely on rank, riches, and powerful connections. Ever inclined to
favor and promote the old principles of jacobitism, toryism, and unlimited
prerogative, they hope to be rewarded by places, pensions, titles; and then to
trample on the wretches by whose venal votes they rose to eminence.

The ideas acquired and cherished at school and at the university, are
confirmed in the world by association with persons of a similar turn, with
Oriental adventurers, with perisioners and courtiers, with all who, sunk in the
frivolity of a dissipated, vain, and useless life, are glad to find a
succedaneum for every real virtue, in the privileges of titular honor, in
splendid equipage, in luxurious tables, in magnificent houses, in all that
gives distinction without merit, and notoriety without excellence. Their number
and their influence increase by an union of similar views and principles; and a
formidable phalanx is formed against those liberties, for which the most
virtuous part of mankind have lived and died. Under the auspices of multitudes,
thus corrupted and united, it is not to be wondered, that the spirit of
despotism should increase. Despotism is indeed an Asiatic plant; but brought
over by those who have long lived in Asia, and nursed in a hot-house with
indefatigable care, it is found to vegetate, bloom, and bear fruit, even in our
cold, ungenial climate.

It might then be worthy a wise legislator to reform the modes of education, to
explode the effeminacy of private and supersicial nurture, to promote an
equality of rank in schools and universities, and to suffer, in the immature
age, no other distinctions than those, which may be adjudged by grave and
virtuous instructors, to distinguished improvement, exemplary conduct, goodness
of heart, and a regard to the happiness of inferiors.

The constitution of England is founded on liberty, and the people are warmly
attached to liberty; then why is it ever in danger, and why is a constant
struggle necessary to preserve it uninfringed? Many causes combine, and perhaps
none is more operative than a corrupt education, in which pride is nourished at
the tenderest period, and the possession or expectation of wealth and civil
honors is tacitly represented, even in the schools of virtue, as superseding
the necessity of personal excellence.

SECTION IV. Corruption of Manners has a natural Tendency to promote the Spirit
of Despotism.
WHEN man ceases to venerate virtue in himself, he soon loses all sense of
moral beauty in the human species. His taste becomes gross; and he learns to
consider all that is good and great, as the illusion of simple minds, the
unsubstantial phantom of a young imagination. Extreme selfishness is his ruling
principle, and he is far from scrupulous in following its dictates. Luxury,
vanity, avarice, are his characteristics. Ambition indeed takes its turn; yet,
not that noble ambition, which seeks praise and honors by deserving them, but
the low spirit of intrigue and cunning, which teaches to secure high
appointments, titular distinctions, or whatever else can flatter avarice and
pride, by petty stratagem, unmanly compliance, the violation of truth and
consistency, and at last the sacrifice of a country's interest and safety.

In nations enriched by commerce, and among families loaded with opulence by
the avarice of their forefarthers, the mere wantonness of unbounded plenty will
occasion a corruption of manners, dangerous to all that renders society happy,
but favorable to the despotic principle. Pleasure of the meanest kind will be
the first and the last pursuit. Splendour, external show, the ostentation of
riches, will be deemed objects of prime consequence. A COURT will be the place
of exhibition; not of great merits, but of fine garments, graceful attitudes,
and guady equipages, every frivolous distinction, which boldly claims the
notice due to virtue, and assumes the dignity which public services ought
solely to appropriate.

The mind of man, still wanting in the midst of external abundance, an object
in futurity; and satiated, even to lothing, with the continual banquet of
plenty, longs to add titular honors, or official importance, to the possession
of superfluous property. But these, if they mean any thing, are naturally the
rewards of virtuous and useful exertion; and such exertion is incompatible with
the habitual indolence, the ignorance, the dissipation, the vice of exorbitant
wealth, gained only by mean avarice, and expended in enjoyments that degrade,
while they enervate. Men, distinguished by riches only, possess not, amidst all
their acquirements, the proper price that should purchase civil distinctions,
if they were disposed of only to merit. There they are bankrupts. They have no
claims on society; for their purposes have been selfish, and their conduct
injurious: yet the distinctions must be obtained, or they sicken in the midst
of health, and starve, though surrounded with plenty. How then shall they be
obtained? They must be bought with money; but how bought? Not directly, not in
the marketplace, not at public sale. But is there a borough hitherto
anti-ministerial, and to convert which from the error of its ways, a very
expensive election must be engaged in? The ambitious aspirant at honors is
ready with his purse. By money he triumphs over opposition, and adds the weight
of his wealth to ministerial preponderance. He assists others in the same noble
and generous services of his country. Though covetous, he perseveres,
regardless of expense, and at last richly merits, from his patron, the
glittering bauble which hung on high, and led him patiently through those dark
and dirty paths which terminate in the temple of prostituted honor. His
brilliant success excites others to tread in his steps with eager emulation;
and though many fail of the glorious prize, yet all contribute, in the selfish
pursuit, to increase and to diffuse the spirit of despotism.

Men destitute of personal merit, and unrecommended by the plea of public
services, can never obtain illustrious honors, where the people possess a due
share of power, where liberty flourishes, unblighted by corruption; and
therefore such men will ever be opposed to the people, and determined enemies
to liberty. The atmosphere of liberty is too pure and defecated for their lungs
to inhale. Gentles and other vermin can exist only in filth and putrefaction.
Such animals, if they possessed reason, would therefore endeavor to contaminate
every healthy climate, to destroy the vital salubrity of the liberal air, and
diffuse corruption with systematic industry. Are there not political
phenomenon, which would almost justify a belief in the existence of such
animals in the human form; and is not mankind interested, as they value their
health, in impeding the progress of infectious pollution?

Corruption does not operate, in the increase of the despotic spirit, on the
highest orders only, and the aspirants at political distinction and
consequence, but also on the crowded ranks of commercial life. In a great and
rich nation, an immense quantity and variety of articles is ever wanted to
supply the army and the navy. No customers are so valuable as the public. The
pay is sure and liberal, the demand enormous, and a very scrupulous vigilance
against fraud and extortion seldom maintained with rigid uniformity. Happy the
mercantile men who can procure a contract! The hope of it will cause an
obsequious acquiescence in the measures of the ruling minister. But it happens
that such acquiescence, in such men, is peculiarly dangerous, in a commercial
country, to the cause of freedom. The mercantile orders constitute corporate
bodies, rich, powerful, influential; they therefore have great weight in
elections. Juries are chiefly chosen from mercantile life. (...) state trials,
ministers are anxious to obtain verdicts favorable to their retention of
emolument and place. If the hope of contracts and other doncours should ever
overcome the sanctity of oaths, in an age when religion has lost much of its
influence, then will the firmest pillar of freedom be undermined, and courts of
justice become mere registers of ministerial edicts. Th^^ both senatorial and
judicial proceedings will be vitiated by the same means: and LIBERTY left to
deplore a declining cause, while CORRUPTION laughs from a Lord Mayor's coach,
as she rides in triumph to Court, to present, on her knees, the address of
sycophancy.

When the public mind is so debauched as to consider titles and money as the
chief good of man, weighed with which honesty and conscience are but as dust in
the balance, can it be supposed that a due reverence will be paid to the
obsolete parclaments of a magna char^a, to bills of rights, or to revolutions
which banished the principles of the Stuarts, together with their families,
which broke their despotism in pieces together with their sceptres, and
trampled their pride under foot with their crowns and robes of purple? The
prevalence of corruption can call back to life the race of jacobites and
^ories, and place on the throne of liberty, an imaginatory Stuart. It was not
the person, but the principles which rendered the old family detestable to a
people who deserved liberty, because they dared to claim it. The revival of
those principles might render a successor, ^^ough crowned by Liberty herself,
equally detestable.

To avoid such principles, the corruption that infallibly leads to them must be
repelle^. The people should be tinctured with philosophy and religion; and
learn, under their divine instruction, not to consider titular distinction and
enormous riches as the chief good, and indispensably requisite to the happiness
of life. A noble spirit of personal virtue should be encouraged in the rising
race. They should be taught to seek and find resources in themselves, in an
honest independence, in the possession of knowledge, in conscious integrity, in
manliness of sentiment, in contemplation and study, in every thing which adds
vigor to the nerves of the mind, and teaches it to deem all honors disgraceful,
and all profits vile, which accrue, as the reward of base compliance, and of a
dastardly desertion from the upright standard of truth, the unspotted banner of
justice.

SECTION V. An Abhorrence of Despotism and an ardent Love of Liberty perfectly
consistent with Order and Tranquillity; and the natural Consequence of
well-informed Understandings and benevolent Dispositions.
THOSE who are possessed of exorbitant power, who pant for its extension, and
tremble at the apprehension of losing it, are always sufficiently artful to
dwell with emphasis, on the evils of licentiousness; under which opprobrious
name, they wish to stigmatize liberty. They describe the horrors of anarchy and
confusion, in the blackest colors; and boldly affirm, that they are the
necessary consequences of entrusting the people with power. Indeed, they hardly
condescend to recognize the idea of a PEOPLE; but whenever they speak of the
mass of the community, denominate them the mob, the rabble, or the swinish
multitude. Language is at a loss for appellatives, significant of their
contempt for those, who are undistinguished by wealth or titles, and is obliged
to content itself with such words as reptiles, scum, dregs, or the many-headed
monster.

Man, that noble animal, formed with powers capable of the sublimest virtues,
possessed of reason, and tremulously alive to every finer feeling, is degraded
by his fellow man, when dressed in a little brief authority, to a rank below that
of the beasts of the field; for the beasts of the field are not treated with
epithets of contumely, but regarded with a degree of esteem. The proud grandee
views the horses in his stable and the dogs in his kennel with affection,
pampers them with food, lodges them in habitations, not only commodious, but
luxurious; and, at the same time, despises his fellow creatures, scarcely fed,
wretchedly clothed, and barely sheltered in the neighboring cottage. And if
this fellow creature dares to remonstrate, his complaint is contumacy and
sedition, and his endeavor to meliorate his own state and that of his peers, by
the most lawful means, downright treason and rebellion.

Villainous oppression on one hand, and on the other, contemptible submission!
If such acquiescence, under the most iniquitous inequality; such wretchedness,
without the privilege of complaint, is the peace, the order, and the
tranquillity of despotism; then peace, order, and tranquillity change their
nature, and become the curse and bane of human nature. Welcome, in comparison,
all the feuds, animosities, and revolutions attributed to a state of freedom;
for they are symptoms of life and robust health, while the repose of despotism
is the deadness of a palsy. Life, active, enterprising life, with all its
tumult, disaster, and disappointment, is to be preferred to the silence of
death, the stillness of desolation.

But I deny that a love of liberty, or a state of liberty, is of necessity
productive of injurious or fatal disorder. I presuppose that the minds of the
people, even the lowest of the people, are duly enlightened; that the
savageness of gross ignorance is mitigated by culture; by that culture, which
all well-regulated states are solicitous to bestow on every partaker of the
rational faculty.

In a state of liberty, every man learns to value himself as man; to consider
himself as of importance in the system which himself has approved and
contributed to establish; and therefore resolves to regulate his own behavior
consistently with its safety and preservation. He feels as a proprietor, not as
a tenant. He loves the state because he participates in it. His obedience is
not the cold reluctant result of terror; but the lively, cheerful, and
spontaneous effect of love. The violation of laws, formed on the pure principle
of general beneficence, and to which he has given his full assent, by a just
and perfect representation, he considers as a crime of the deepest die. He will
think freely, and speak freely, of the constitution. He will incessantly
endeavor to improve it; and enter seriously into all political debate. In the
collision of agitated minds, sparks will sometimes be emitted; but they will
only give a favorable light and a genial warmth. They will never produce an
injurious conflagration.

What employment, in the busy scene in which man engages from the cradle to the
tomb, is more worthy of him than political discussion? It affords a field for
intellectual energy, and all the finest feelings of benevolence. It exercises
and strengthens every faculty. It calls forth latent virtues, which else had
slept in the bosom, like the diamond in the mine. And is this employment, thus
useful and honorable, to be confined to a few among the race of mortals? Is
there to be a monopoly of political action and speculation? Why then did Heaven
bestow reason and speech, powers of activity, and a spirit of enterprise, in as
great perfection on the lowest among the people, as on those who, by no merit
of their own, inherit wealth and high station? Heaven has declared its will by
its acts. Man contravenes it; but time, and the progressive improvement of the
understanding, will reduce the anomaly to its natural rectitude. And if a few
irregularities should sometimes arise in the process, they are of no importance
when weighed with the happy result; the return of distorted systems to truth,
to reason, and the will of God. Occasional ferments, with all their
inconveniences, are infinitely preferable to the putrescence of stagnation.
They are symptoms of health and vigor; and though they may be attended with
transient pain, yet while they continue to appear at intervals, there is no
danger of mortification. Good hearts, accompanied with good understandings,
seldom produce, even where mistaken, lasting evil. They repair and compensate.

But I repent that the people should be enlightened, in every rank, the highest
as well as the lowest, to render them capable of perfect liberty, without
danger of those evils which its enemies are always asserting to be its
unavoidable consequences. The vulgar must be instructed not merely in the arts
which tend to the acquisition, increase and preservation of money, but in a
generous philosophy. They must be liberalized. They must early learn to view
human life and society in their just light; to consider themselves as essential
parts of a whole, the integrity of which is desirable to every component
member. Their taste will improve with their understanding; and they will see
the beauty of order, while they are convinced of its utility. Thus principled
by virtue, and illuminated with knowledge, they will eagerly return, after
every deviation, which even a warmth of virtue may cause, to regular obedience,
and to all the functions of citizens; valuing the public peace and prosperity,
because they understand clearly that the public happiness is intimately
combined with their own. They may infringe laws, from the imperfection of their
nature; but they will return to their obedience without force; having been
convinced that no laws are made, but such as are necessary to their well-being
in society. They will consider laws, not as chains and fetters, but as helmets
and shields for their protection. The light of the understanding will correct
the eccentricities of the heart; and all deviations, however rapid at their
commencement, will be short in extent and transitory in duration.

Such would be the effect of enlightening the people with political knowledge,
and enlarging their minds by pure philosophy. But what say the despots? Like
the tyrannical son of Philip, when he reprimanded Aristotle for publishing his
Discoveries, they whisper to their myrmidons, "Let us diffuse darkness round
the land (...), darken your doctrines, said the despot Alexander, to the great
philosopher.
. Let the people be kept in a brutal state. Let their conduct, when assembled,
be riotous and irrational as ignorance and our SPIES can make it, that they may
be brought into discredit, and deemed unfit for the management of their own
affairs. Let power be rendered dangerous in their hands, that it may continue
unmolested in our own. Let them not taste the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
lest they become as we are, and learn to know good and evil."

That such are the sentiments of the men who wish for the extension of royalism
and the depression of the people, is evident from the uneasiness they have
shown at all benevolent attempts to diffuse knowledge among the poor. They have
expressed, in terms of anger and mortification, their dislike of Sunday
schools. The very newspapers which they have engaged in the service of
falsehood and toryism, have endeavored to discountenance, by malignant
paragraphs, the progress of those patriotic institutions. Scribblers of books
and pamphlets, in the same vile cause, have intimated their apprehensions that
the poor may learn to read political books in learning to read their Bible; and
that the reading of political books must unavoidably produce discontent. A
wretched compliment to the cause which they mean to defend! It is impossible
not to infer from their apprehensions, that as men increase in understanding
and knowledge, they must see reason to disapprove the systems established.
These men breathe the very spirit of despotism, and wish to communicate it. But
their conduct, in this instance, is an argument against the spirit which they
endeavor to diffuse. Their conduct seems to say, The spirit of despotism is so
unreasonable, that it can never be approved by the mass of the people, when
their reason is suffered to receive its proper cultivation. Their conduct seems
to say, Let there be light, and the deformity of despotism will create
abhorrence.

Be the consequence what it may, let the light of knowledge be diffused among
all who partake of reason; and let us remember that it was THE LORD GOD
ALMIGHTY who first said: LET THERE BE LIGHT.

SECTION VI. On the Venality of the Press under the Influence of the despotic
Spirit, and its Effects in diffusing that Spirit.
THE most successful, as well as the most insidious mode of abolishing an
institution which favors liberty, and, for that reason, alarms the jealousy of
encroaching power, is to leave the form untouched, and gradually to annihilate
the essence. The voracious worm eats out the kernel completely, while the husk
continues fair to the eye, and apparently entire. The gardener would crush the
insect, if it commenced the attack on the external tegument; but it carries on
the work of destruction with efficacy and safety, while it corrodes the unseen
fruit, and spares the outside shell.

The liberty of the press in England is not openly infringed. It is our
happiness and our glory. No man or set of men, whatever be their power or their
wishes, dares to violate this sacred privilege. But in the heathen mythology we
learn, that when Jupiter himself could not force certain obstacles by his
thunderbolt he found an easy admission, in the shape of a golden shower.

In times when the jacobitical, tory, selfish, and despotic principles rear
their heads, and think opportunities favor their efforts for revival, the press
is bought up as a powerful engine of oppression. The people must be deceived,
or the despots have no chance to prevail in the dissemination of doctrines,
unnatural, nonsensical, and injurious to the rights human nature. The only
channel, through which the knowledge of what it most imports them to know, next
to morality and religion, devolves upon the mass of the community, is a
newspaper. This channel must therefore be secured. The people's money must be
employed to pollute the waters of truth, to divert their course, and, if
occasion requires, to stop them with dams, looks, and floodgates. The press,
that grand battery, erected by the people to defend the citadel of liberty,
must be turned against it. Pamphlets are transient, and confined in their
operation. Nothing will satisfy the zeal of the assailant, but the diurnal
papers of intelligence. They keep up a daily attack, and reach every part of
the assaulted edifice.

Newspapers, thus bought with the people's money, for the purpose of deceiving
the people, are, in the next place, circulated with all the industry of zealous
partisans, and all the success, that must attend the full exertion of
ministerial influence. Public houses in great towns, are frequently the
property of overgrown traders, who supply them with the commodities they vend;
and who dictate the choice of the papers, which they shall purchase for the
perusal of their customers. Whoever frequents such houses, ruled as they are by
petty despots, must swallow the false politics, together with the adulterated
beverage, of the lordly manufacturer. A distress for rent, or an arrest for
debt, might follow the rash choice of a paper favorable to truth, justice, and
humanity. If any conversation should arise among the customers, friendly to
liberty, in consequence of perusing an interdicted print of this kind, the
license of the house might be in danger, and an honest tradesman with his
family turned out of doors to starve. Spies are sent to his house to mix with
the guests, that in the moment of convivial exhilaration, when prudence sleeps,
some incautious comment on the newspaper may be seized and carried to the agent
of despotism, who, like the tiger, thirsting for human blood, lies watching for
his prey in the covert of obscurity. The host, therefore, for the sake of
safety, gladly rejects all papers of intelligence, which are free to speak the
truth, and becomes a useful instrument, in the hands of selfish placemen, in
the dissemination of doctrines subversive of liberty, and therefore of the
constitution which is founded upon it as a corner stone.

So far as such venal papers are diffused, under influence thus arbitrary, the
liberty of the press is, in effect, destroyed. It is made to serve the purposes
of slavery, by propagating principles unfavorable to the people's rights, by
palliating public abuses, varnishing ministerial misconduct, and concealing
facts in which the people are most deeply interested. Perhaps there is nothing
which contributes so much to diffuse the spirit of despotism as venal
newspapers, hired by the possessors of power, for the purpose of defending and
prolonging their possession. The more ignorant classes have a wonderful
propensity to be credulous in all that they see in print, and will obstinately
continue to believe a newspaper, to which they have been accustomed, even when
notorious facts give it the lie. They know little of history, nothing of
philosophy, and adopt their political ideas from the daily lectures of a paper
established solely to gain their favor to one party, the party possessed of
present power; zealous for its extension and prolongation, and naturally
desirous of preventing all scrupulous enquiry into its abuse. Such means, so
used, certainly serve the cause of persons in office, and gratify avarice and
pride; but it is a service which, while it promotes the fordid views of a few
individuals, militates against the spirit of constitutional freedom. It is a
vile cause, which cannot be maintained to the security and satisfaction of
those who wish to maintain it, without recourse to daily falsehood, and the
cowardly concealment of conscious malversation. Honest purposes love the light
of truth, and court scrutiny; because the more they are known, the more they
must be honored. The friends of liberty and man are justly alarmed, whenever
they see the press pre-occupied by power, and every artifice used to poison the
sources of public intelligence.

In every free country, the people, who pay all expenses, claim a right to know
the true state of public affairs. The only means of acquiring that knowledge,
within reach of the multitude, is the press; and it ought to supply them with
all important information, which may be divulged without betraying intended
measures, the accomplishment of which would be frustrated by communication to a
public enemy. The very papers themselves, which communicate intelligence, pay a
tax above the intrinsic value of the work and materials, to the support of the
government: and the stamp, which vouches for the payment, ought, at the same
time, if any regard were paid to justice and honor, to be an authentic
testimony that government uses no arts of deception in the intelligence
afforded.

But let any one review, if it be not too nauseous an employment, the prints
which of late years have been notoriously in the pay of ministerial agency.
There he will see the grossest attempts to impose on the public credulity. He
will see the existence of known facts, when they militate against the credit of
a ministry, doubted or denied; doubtful victories extolled beyond all
resemblance to truth; and defeats, in the highest degree disgraceful and
injurious, artfully extenuated. All who have had apportunities of receiving
true intelligence, after some great and unfortunate action, have been
astonished at the effrontery which has diminished the number of lives lost to a
sum so small, as contradicts the evident conclusions of common sense, and
betrays the features of falsehood at the first appearance. All who have been
able to judge of the privileges of Englishmen, and the rights of human nature,
have seen with abhorrence, doctrines boldly broached and sophistically
defended, which strike at once at the English constitution, and the happiness
of man in society. They have seen this done by those who pretended an almost
exclusive regard to law, order, and religion; themselves grossly violating all
of them, while they are reviling others for the supposed violation, in the
bitterest language which rancour, stimulated by pride and avarice, can utter.

When great ministers, possessed of a thousand means of patronizing and
rewarding obsequious instruments of their ambition, are willing to corrupt,
there will never be wanting needy, unprincipled, and aspiring persons to
receive the infection. But can men be really great, really honorable -- can
they be patriots and philanthropists -- can they be zealous and sincere friends
to law, order, and religion, who thus besitate not to break down all the fences
of honor, truth, and integrity; and render their administration of affairs more
similar to the juggling tricks of confederate sharpers, than to the grave,
ingenuous conduct of statesmen, renowned for their wisdom and revered for their
virtue? Do men thus exalted, whose conduct is a model, and whose opinion is
oracular, mean to teach a great nation that conscience is but a name, and honor
a phantom? No books of those innovators, whom they persecute, contribute to
discredit the system, which these men support, so much as their own sinister
measures of self-defence.

There is little hope of preventing the corruption of the diurnal papers by any
remonstrance addressed to men, who, entrenched behind wealth and power, scorn
to yield at the summons of reason. There may be more hope in appealing to the
readers and encouragers of such papers. Do they wish to be deceived? is it
pleasant to be misled by partial, mutilated, and distorted narratives? Is it
manly to become voluntary dupes? Or is it honorable, is it honest, to
cooperate with any men, for any purposes, in duping others? No; let the press,
however it may be perverted by private persons, to the injury of society, be
preserved by the public, by men high in office, the guardians of every valuable
institution, as an instrument of good to the community, as the support of
truth, as the lamp of knowledge.

Though the liberty of the press should be preserved, yet let it be remembered,
that the corruption of the press, by high and overbearing influence, will be
almost as pernicious to a free country as its destruction. An imprimatur on the
press would spread an alarm which would immediately remove the restraint; but
the corruption of the press may insinuate itself unperceived, till the spirit
of despotism, promoted by it, shall at last connive at, or even consent to, its
total abolition.

SECTION VII. The fashionable Invectives against Philosophy and Reason, a Proof
of the Spirit of Despotism.
PERSONS who owe all their preeminence to the merit of their forefathers, or
casual events, which constitute good fortune, are usually desirous of fixing a
standard of dignity, very different from real worth, and spare no pains to
depreciate personal excellence; all such excellence as is, in fact, the most
honorable, because it cannot exist without talents or virtues. Birth and
riches, fashion and rank, are in their estimation infinitely more honorable and
valauble, than all the penetrating sagacity and wonderful science of a Newton.
Such persons value Newton more as a knight than as a philosopher; more for the
title bestowed upon him by Queen Anne, than the endowment given him by God, and
improved by his own meritorious exertion.

Upon this principle, many men in our times, who wish to extend and aggrandize
that POWER, from whose arbitrary bounty they derive all the honor they are
capable of acquiring, endeavor to throw contempt on PHILOSOPHY. It may indeed
be doubted whether they all know the meaning of the word; but they know it
implies a merit not derived from princes, and therefore they wish to degrade
it. Their fountain of honor, they conceive, has no resemblance, in its nature
or efficacy, to the famed fountains of Parnassus: it conveys no inspiration,
except that which displays itself in the (...) of ^ide.

The present age has heard upstart noblemen give to philosoph^^^ (whose genius
and discoveries entitle them to rank, (...) Reason's table of precedence, above
every ^^bleman in the red book) the opprobrious appeilation of wretches and
miscreants. Philosophy and philosophers have been mentioned by men, whose
seize would only qualify them for distinction in a ball-room, with
expressions of hatred and contempt due only to thieves, murderers, the very
outcasts and refuse of human nature.

The mind is naturally led to investigate the cause of such virulence, and to
ask how has Philosophy merited this usage from the tongue of factitious
grandeur. The resentment expressed against Philosophy is expressed with a
peevishness and acrimony that proves it to proceed from the sense of a sore
place. How has pride been so severely hurt by philosophy? It has been exposed,
laid open to the eye of mankind in all its nakedness. Philosophy has held the
scales, and rejected the coin that wanted weight. Philosophy has applied the
touchstone, and thrown away the counterfeit. Hence the spirit of despotism is
incensed against Philosophy; and if proclamations or cannonballs could destroy
her, her perdition would be inevitable and eternal. Folly exclaims aloud, "Let
there be no light to detect my paint and tinsel." But happily, the command of
Folly, however imperial her tone, is not the fiat of Omnipotence. Philosophy
therefore will survive the anathema; and, standing on the rock of truth, laugh
at the artillery of confederated despots.

When she deserts truth, she no longer deserves to be called Philosophy: and it
must be owned, that when she has attacked religion, she has justly lost her
reputation. But here it is well worthy of remark, that those who now most
bitterly revile her, gave themselves little concern about her, till she
descended to polities. She might have continued to argue against religion; and
many of her present opposers would have joined in her cry with alacrity: but
the moment she entered on the holy ground of polities, the ignorant grandees
shuddered at the profanation, and 'Avaunt, Philosophy,' was the word of alarm.

Philosophy, so far from deserving contempt, is the glory of human nature. Man
approaches by contemplation to what we conceive of celestial purity and
excellence. Without the aid of philosophy, the mass of mankind, all over the
^erraqueous globe, would have sunk in slavery and superstition, the natural
consequences of gross ignorance. Men at the very bottom of society, have been
enabled by the natural talents they possessed, seconded by favorable
opportunities, to reach the highest improvements in philosophy; and have thus
lifted up a torch in the valley, which has exposed the weakness and deformity
of the castle on the mountain, from which the oppressors sallied, in the night
of darkness, and spread desolation with impunity. Despots, the meanest, the
basest, the most brutal and ignorant of the human race, would have trampled on
the rights and the happiness of men unresisted, if philosophy had not opened
the eyes of the sufferers, shown them their own power and dignity, and taught
them to despise those giants of power, as they appeared through the mists of
ignorance, who ruled a vassal world with a mace of iron. Liberty is the
daughter of Philosophy; and they who detest the offspring, do all that they can
to vilify and discountenance the mother.

But let us calmly consider what is the object of this philosophy, so
formidable in the eyes of those who are bigoted to ancient abuses, who hate
every improvement, and who wish to subject the many to the control of an
arbitrary few. Philosophy is ever employed in finding out whatever is GOOD, and
whatever TRUE. She darts her eagle eye over all the busy world, detects error
and mischief, and points out modes of improvement. In the multiform state of
human affairs, ever obnoxious to decay and abuse, it is here is to meditate on
the means of melioration. She wishes to demolish nothing but what is a
nuisance. To build, to repair, to strengthen, and to polish, these are the
works which she delights to plan; and, in concerting the best methods of
directing their accomplishment, she consumes the midnight oil. How can she
disturb human affairs, since she dwells in contemplation, and descends not to
action? neither does she impel others to action by the arts of delusive
eloquence. She applies to reason alone; and if reason is not convinced, all
that she has done, is swept away, like the web of Arach^^.

But it is modern philosophy, and French philosophy, which gives such umbrage
to the lovers of old errors, and the favorers of absolute power; just as if
philosophy were mutable by time or place. Philosophy, by which I mean the
investigation of the good and true, on all subjects, is the same, like the sun,
whether it shines in China or Peru. Truth and good are eternal and immutable;
and therefore philosophy, which is solely attached to these, is still one and
the same, whether ancient or modern, in England or in France.

It is sophistry, and not philosophy, which is justly reprobated; and there has
at all times been more sophistry displayed by the sycophant defenders of
despotism, than by the friends to liberty. England has ever abounded with
sophists, wh^^ the high prerogative notions, Toryism, and ^^cobitism, and the
servile principles which flow from them, have required the support of
eloquence; either written or oral. Besides our modern Filmers, we have had an
army of ten thousand mercenary speakers and writers, whose names are as little
remembered as their venal productions. Such men, contending against the light
of nature, and common sense, have been obliged to seek succor of sophistry.
Theirs is the philosophy, falsely so called, which deserves reprobation. They
have had recourse to VERBOSITY, to puzzle and perplex the plainest points; they
have seduced the reader from the direct road of common sense, to delude his
imagination in the fairy land of metaphor; they have fine-spun their arguments
to a degree of tenuity neither tangible nor visible, that they might excite the
awe which is always felt for the incomprehensible by the ignorant; and, at the
same time, elude the refutation of the learned and the wise: they have acquired
a lubricity, which, like the eel, enables them to slip from the grasp of the
captor, whom they could not have escaped, by the fair exertion of muscular
vigor. Animated with the hope of reward from that POWER which they labor to
extend, they have, like good servants to their masters, bestowed art and labor
in proportion to the weakness of their cause: they have assumed an air of
wisdom to impose on the multitude, and uttered the language of knavery and
folly with the grave confidence of an oracle. It is not necessary to cross the
Channel in order to find Sophistry, decking herself, like the ass in the skin
of the lion, with the venerable name of Philosophy.

As we value a free press, or wish to preserve a due esteem for genius and
science, let us ever be on our guard, when we hear GREAT MEN, possessing
neither genius nor science, rail against philosophy. Let us remember, that it
was a Roman tyrant, in the decline of all human excellence, (when Providence
permitted such monsters to show the world the deformity of despotism), who
wished to extinguish the light of learning by abolishing the finest productions
of genius. There are men, in recent times, who display all the propensities of
a Caligula; be it the PEOPLE's care, that they never possess his power.

SECTION VIII. Of Loyalty, and certain mistaken Ideas of it.
THE mass of the community, on whom the arts of delusion are chiefly practiced
by politicians, are seldom accurate in the use of words: and among others which
they misunderstand, and are led, by the satellites of despotism, to misapply,
is the term, Loyalty.

Loyalty means, in its true sense, a firm and faithful adherence to the law and
constitution, of the community of which we are members. If monarchy be a part
of that constitution, it certainly means a firm and faithful attachment to the
person of the monarch, as well as to the monarchical form, and all the other
branches of the system. It is nearly synonymous with fidelity; but as fidelity
may be actuated solely by principles of duty, loyalty seems, in its common
acceptance, to include in it also a sentiment of affection. It is the
obedience of love, and anticipates compulsion. It is a sentiment, which all
good men will feel, when they live under a good government honestly
administered.

But mark the disingenuity of men impelled by high-church, high tory, or
jacobitical principles. They would limit this liberal comprehensive principle,
which takes in the whole of the constitution, and therefore tends to the
conservation of it all, in its full integrity; they would limit it to the
person of the monarch, to that part of the whole, which favors, in their
opinion, their own purposes, and the extension of power and prerogative, the
largesses of which they hope to share in reward for their sycophantic zeal,
their slavish, selfish, perfidious adulation.

They represent this confined loyalty as a religious duty, partaking the nature
of divine worship. They set up an idol, and command all men, upon their duty,
to adore it. The people are not entitled even to attention by the propagators
of this inhuman, antichristian idolatry.

Let us consider a moment the mischief this artifice has in former times
occasioned to our country. It attached great numbers to the family of the
Stuarts, after they had forfeited all right to the crown; to the persons of the
Stuarts, and for a long period, harassed the lawful king and the people of this
nation with wars, alarms, seditions, and treasons. Tory zealots shed their
blood freely, on the impulse of this unreasonable loyalty, which disregarded
the ruling powers of their country established by law; and, in promoting the
interest of a dispossessed individual, considered a whole people, either as a
nonentity, or as worthy to be sacrificed for ONE MAN. Such men, acting in
consistency with their principles of false loyalty, would have drenched their
country in blood to restore an exiled Nero, of the true-bred, royal family.

Narrow loyalty, like this, which is but another name for bigotry, must ever be
inimical to a monarch limited by laws, wishing to govern by them, and owing his
seat on his throne to a revolution, to the expulsion of a pre-occupant, and the
refusal of a pretender's claim. It must ever keep alive a doubt of his title.
If it assumes the appearance of affection for him, it may be suspected as the
kiss of Judas. If it should seduce him to extend his power beyond the
constitutional limits, it would lead him to destruction; and involve a people
in all the misery of revolutionary disorder. Is then such loyalty a public
virtue? In cunning men it is but mean servility endeavoring to ingratiate
itself with the prince, for honors and emoluments. In the simple ones, it is
silly superstition. In both, it is injurious to the king of a free country and
to the constitution. It confines that attention to one branch, which ought duly
to be distributed among ALL, and to comprehend, in its attachment, that main
root and stock, from which all the branches grow, the PEOPLE AT LARGE.

Nevertheless, such is the subtle policy of those who are actuated by the
principles of Tories, Jacobites, royalists, despots, (call them by which name
you please,) that they continue to represent every spirited effort in favor of
the people's rights, as originating in disloyalty. The best friends to the
constitution in its purity, and therefore the best friends to the limited
monarch, are held out, both to public and to royal detestation, as disaffected
to the person of the prince. Every stratagem is used to delude the common and
unthinking part of the people into a belief, that their only way of displaying
loyalty is, to display a most servile obsequiousness to the throne, and to
oppose every popular measure. The procurers of addresses, couch them in the
most unmanly language of submission, and approach with a degree of prostration
of sentiment, worthier to be received by the great mogul or the Chinese
emperor, than the chief magistrate of a free people. The composers and
presenters of such testimonies of loyalty, hoping for knighthood at least, if
not some more splendid or substantial effect of royal gratitude, exhaust the
language of all its synonymous terms, to express their abject servility. Yet,
after all, of such a nature is their loyalty, that, if a Stuart or a
Robespierre were the possessor of power, their mean and hollow professions of
attachment would be equally ardent and importunate. The powers that be are the
powers which they worship. The proffer of their lives and fortunes is the
common sacrifice. But to distinguish their loyalty, they would go farther than
the addressers of the foolish and unfortunate James, and present their souls to
be disposed of by their earthly Deity; knowing it to be a safe oblation.

As great respect is due to the office of the supreme magistrate, so also is
great affection due to his person, while he conducts himself with propriety,
and consults the happiness of the people. The most decorous language should be
used to him, the most respectful behavior preserved toward him; every mode
adopted of showing him proofs of love and honor, on this side idolatry. Arduous
is his task, though honorable. It should be sweetened by every mode which true
and sincere loyalty can devise. I would rather exceed, than fall short of the
deference due to the office and the man. But I will not pay a limited monarch,
at the head of a free people, so ill a compliment, as to treat him as if he
were a despot, ruling over a land of slaves. I cannot adopt the spirit of
despotism in a land of liberty; and I must reprobate that false, selfish,
adulatory loyalty, which, seeking nothing but its own base ends of avarice or
ambition, and feeling no real attachment either to the person or the office of
the king, contributes nevertheless to diffuse by its example, a servile, abject
temper, highly promotive of the despotic spirit.

But the ministers of state have sometimes presumed so far on present
possession of power, as to attempt to make the people believe, that a loyalty
is due to them; that an opposition to their will is a proof of defective
loyalty; a remonstrance against their measures, a mark of disaffection. They
have not been unsuccessful. The servile herds who come forward into public
life, solely to be bought up, when marketable, are, for the most part, more
inclined to worship the minister than the monarch. While it is the priest who
divides among the sacrificers the flesh of the victim, many attend with
devotion at the sacrifice; who are more desirous of propitiating the priest
than the Deity. There are many who, if they had it in their power, would make
it constructive treason to censure any minister, whose continuance in place is
necessary to realize their prospects of riches and titular distinction. Such
men wander up and down society as spies, and mark those who blame the minister,
as persons to be suspected of disloyalty. They usually six on them some
nickname, in order to depreciate their characters in the eyes of the people,
and prevent them from ever rising to such a degree of public esteem, as might
render them competitors for ministerial douceurs. Associations are formed by
such men, under pretense of patriotism and loyalty, but with no other real
design, than that of keeping the minister in place, whom they hope to find a
bountiful play master of their services, at the public expense.

True loyalty has no connection with all this meanness and selfishness. True
loyalty is manly, while obedient, and respects itself, while it pays a
voluntary and cheerful deference to authority and the persons invested with it.
It throws sordid considerations aside, and having nothing in view but the
general good, bears an affection, and shows that affection, to the whole of a
system established for the preservation of order and liberty. It is not
misguided by pompous names, nor blinded by the glitter of external parade; but
values offices and officers in the state, for the good they actually promote,
for the important functions they perform, for the efficient place they fill, in
the finely constituted machine of a well-regulated community.

Such loyalty, I believe, does abound in England, notwithstanding the calumnies
of interested men, who would misrepresent and cry down all real patriotism,
that their own counterfeit may obtain currency. Men who possess such loyalty,
will be found the best friends to kings; if ever those times should return,
which are said to afford the truest test of friendship, the times of adversity.

May those times never come! but yet let us cherish the true loyalty and
explode the false; because the true is the best security to limited monarchy
and constitutional liberty: while the false, by diffusing a spirit of
despotism, equally inimical to the constitution and to human happiness, is
destroying the legal limitations, undermining the established systems, and
introducing manners and principles at once degrading to human nature, and
pregnant with misery to nations.

SECTION IX. On taking Advantage of popular Commotions, accidental Excesses,
and foreign Revolutions, to extend Prerogative and Power, and encroach on the
Liberties of the People.
THE riots in London, which, to the disgrace of magistracy, and the boasted
vigilance of ministers, (richly paid as they are, to guard the public safety),
arrived from contemptible beginnings to a formidable magnitude in the year
1780, have been considered by courtiers, and those who are continually laboring
to exalt prerogative at the expense of liberty, as extremely favorable to their
purpose. They caused an universal panic. The cowardice, folly, and perhaps
wickedness of certain public functionaries, were the true cause of the
extensive mischief; but the excesses of a few most wretched rioters, who
scarcely knew what they were doing; children, women, and drunken persons, were
attributed to the PEOPLE. Argument were drawn from the event against popular
characters, popular books, popular assemblies, and in favor of military
coercion. Military associations in the capital were encouraged, and the bank of
England became a (...). Liberty has few votaries in comparison with Property.
The alarm was artfully increased, and the spirit of despotism. grew under its
operation. The Tory and Jacobite party exulted over the ruins, and would have
rejoiced in building a Bastille with the dilapidations. "See," said they, as
they triumphed over the scene, "the effects of power in the hands of the
PEOPLE!"

But the truth is, the people, the grand mass of the community, were not at all
concerned in effecting the mischief; for I cannot call a fortuitous assemblage
of boys, beggars, women, and drunkards, the people. The first irregularities
might have been suppressed by the slightest exertions of manly spirit. But
those who were possessed of efficient places and their emoluments, enjoying the
sweets of office without suffering a sense of its duties to embitter them,
displayed no spirit, and left it to be fairly inferred that they had it not.
The people at large were not to be blamed for these unfortunate events; the
whole of the culpability belonged to the appointed ministers of the law, in
whom the people trusted and were deceived. The blame, however, was laid on the
people; and those who, from their arbitrary principles, wished to discre^^* all
popular i^terference in government, ^^joiced at the calamity, as an auspicious
event, confirming all their theories, and justifying their practice.

The artful encroachers on liberty were not deceived in calculating the effects
resulting from this total dereliction of duty on the part of the civil
magistrate. Almost immediately a a damp was cast on the generous ardor, which,
under a Wyvil, a Richmond, a Portland, and a Pit, was seeking the salvation of
the country, in a well-timed and deliberate reform of the house of commons. A
sew, indeed, remained equally zealous in the vir^^ous cause; but the minds of
the many were palsied by the panic, and seemed ready to acquie^ce under every
corruption attended with tranquillity, rather than risk a reform, which, they
were taught to believe, could not be effected without popular commotion.
Toryism saw the change with delight, and employed all its influence in
augmenting and continuing the political torpor.

In a few years the public mind seemed to have relinquished its intentions of
effecting a speedy reform. It seemed to adopt the physician's maxim, Malum been
Though this evil is malum male positum.
positum ne moveto; and hesitated to undertake the removal of a local pain,
left it should throw the morbid matter over the whole habit. The fear of
exciting a general inflammation prevented men from probing and cleaning the
inveterate ulcer. In the mean time, the sore is growing worse, and if not
stopped in its progress, must terminate in a mortification.

Thus important and extensive were the consequences of a popular tumult,
dangerous indeed and terrible in itself, but artfully exaggerated and abused by
interested courtiers, for the prevention of parliamentary reform, and the
discredit of all popular proceedings. When any appeal to the people was in
agitation, on any business whatever, it was sufficient to say, "Remember the
riots," and the intended measure was immediately relinquished. A glorious
opportunity for the growth of despotic opinions! The high-church, and
highgovernment bigots rejoiced as if they had gained a complete victory. They
already sang Te Deum.

But in the midst of their triumphs, as human affairs are seldom long
stationary, the French revolution commenced. Every honest and enlightened mind
exulred at it; but the news was like a death-bell to the ears of the
sycophants. So large, so powerful a part of Europe emancipated from the fangs
of despotism, blasted all the budding hopes of those who are rather meditating
the establishment than the demolition of absolute rule. Aristocratical pride
was mortified. Every sullen sentiment, every angry passion, rose in the
disappointed bosom of that ambition, which seeks its own elevation on the
depression of the people. But liberty and humanity sympathized in the joy of
millions, restored to the rights which God and Nature gave them; and which had
been gradually stolen from them by the spirit of despotism, acting, for mutual
aid, in alliance with superstition.

But the morning which rose so beautifully in the political horizon of France
was soon overclouded. The passions of leaders, jealous of each other, menaced
from within and from without, hunted by surrounding enemies till they were
driven to phrenzy, burst forth in tremendous fury. Cruelties, which even
despots might shudder to perpetrate, were the effects of a situation rendered
dangerous in the extreme, and almost desperate, by the general attack of all
neighboring nations. The friends of liberty and humanity wept; but the factors
of despotism triumphed once more. "Here," said they, "we have another instance
of the unfitness of the people for the possession of power, and the mischievous
effects of excessive liberty." Every art which ingenuity can practice, and
influence assist in its operation, was exerted to abuse and villify the French
revolution. Associations were formed to disseminate childish books, favoring
the spirit of despotism, addressed to the meanest of the people, who yet had
too much sense to be seduced by sentiments, doctrines, and language calculated
only for the meridian of the nursery. Prosecutions and persecutions abounded;
and it become sedition to hint the propriety of parliamentary reformation. The
alarmists, as they were called, were so successful in prop^gating the old tory
tenets, under the favorable influence of the panic of real danger, and the
detestation which French executions had justly occasioned, that some of the
staunchest friends of the people, men brought into the country at the
revolution, owing all their honors and emoluments to it, and hitherto
professed and zealous whigs, deserted the standard of liberty, and took
distinguished posts under the banners of the enemy.

The spirit of despotism now went forth with greater confidence than it had
ever assumed since the expulsion of the Stuarts. Its advocates no longer
sculked; no longer walked in masquerade. They boasted of their principles, and
pretended that they alone were friends to law, order, and religion They talked
of the laws of England not being severe enoug^ for the punishment of sedition,
and boldly expressed a wish that the laws of Scotland might be adopted in their
place. Active promoters of parliamentary reform were now accused of treasonable
intentions by the very persons who were once loudest in their invectives
against the corruption of the house of commons. Newspapers were hired to
calumniate the best friends of freedom. Writers appeared in various modes,
commending the old government of France; and pouring the most virulent abuse on
all who promoted or defended its abolition. Priests who panted for preferment
preached despotism in their pulpits, and garretteers who hungered after places
or pensions, racked their invention to propagate its spirit by their pamphlets.
Fear in the wellmeaning, self-interest in the knavish, and systematic subtilty
in the great party of tories, caused a general uproar in favor of principles
and practices hostile to constitutional liberty.

It is, however, the nature of all violent paroxysms to be of transient
duration. The friends of man may therefore hope that panic fears, servile
sycophantism, and artful bigotry, will not long prevail over cool reason and
liberal philanthropy. The drunken delirium will pass off; and sober sense will
soon see and acknowledge, that the accidental evils which have arisen in a
neighboring nation, during a singular struggle for liberty, can be no arguments
in favor of despotism, which is a constant evil of the most destructive nature.
The body in high and robust health is most subject to the heat of an
inflammatory fever; but no man in his senses will therefore cease to wish for
high and robust health.

Sensible men, and true friends to the constitution, and therefore to the king,
who forms so considerable a part of it, will be on their guard against false
alarms excited by courtiers; lest in the fear of some future evil, from popular
commotion, they lay aside that everwaking vigilance which is necessary to guard
the good in possession, their constitutional liberty, from the secret
depredation of the artful spoiler, who is always on the watch to encroach on
popular rights and privileges.

Riots, tumults, and popular commotions, are indeed truly dreadful, and to be
avoided with the utmost care by the lovers of liberty. Peace, good order, and
security to all ranks, are the natural fruits of a free constitution. True
patriots will be careful to discourage every thing which tends to destroy them;
not only because whatever tends to destroy them tends to destroy all human
happiness, but also because even an accidental outrage in popular assemblies
and proceedings, is used by the artful to discredit the cause of liberty. By
the utmost attention to preserving the public peace, true patriots will defeat
the malicious designs of servile courtiers; but, whatever may happen, they will
not desert the cause of human nature. Through a dread of licentiousness, they
will not forsake the standard of liberty. It is the part of fools to fall upon
Scylla in striving to avoid Charybdis. Who but a fool would wish to restore the
perpetual despotism of the old French government, through a dread of the
transient outrages of a Parisian tumult? Both are despotic while they last. But
the former is a torrent that flows for ever; the latter only a land flood, that
covers the meadows today, and disappears on the morrow.

Dr. Price has a passage so applicable to the present subject, that I shall beg
leave to close this section by the citation of it: and on the mention of his
name, I must pay a trifling tribute to his memory, which is the more necessary,
as his character has been scandalously aspersed by those who are ever busy in
discrediting the people and their friends, and who, pretending a love of
goodness and religion, blacken with their foulest calumny those who are
singularly remarkable for both, for no other reason than that, under the
influence of goodness and religion, such persons espouse the cause of freedom,
and prefer the happiness of millions to the pomp and pride of a few aspirants
at unlimited dominion. Meek, gentle, and humane; acute, eloquent, and
profoundly skilled in politics and philosophy; take him for all and all, the
qualities of his heart, with the abilities of his head, and you may rank PRICE
among the first ornaments of his age. Let his enemies produce from all their
boasted despots and despotical Satraps, any one of his contemporaries whom, in
the manner of Plutarch, they may place by his side as a parallel. Posterity
will do him the justice of which the proud have robbed him, and snatch him from
the calumniators, to place him in the temple of personal honor, high among the
benefactors to the human race.

But I return from the digression, into which I was led by an honest
indignation against the vilest of calumnies against the best of men. These are
the words of Dr. Price:

Licentiousness and despotism are more nearly allied than is commonly imagined.
They are both alike inconsistent with liberty, and the true end of government;
nor is there any other difference between them, than that one is the
licentiousness of GREAT MEN, and the other the licentiousness of little men; or
that by one, the persons and property of a people are subject to outrage and
invasion from a king, or a lawless body of grandees; and that by the other,
they are subject to the like outrage from a lawless mob. In avoiding one of
these evils, mankind have often run into the other. But all well-constituted
governments guard equally against both. Indeed, of the two, the last is, on
several accounts, the least to be dreaded, and has done the least mischief. It
may truly be said, if licentiousness has destroyed its thousands, despotism has
destroyed its millions. The former having little power, AND NO SYSTEM TO
SUPPORT IT, necessarily finds its own remedy; and a people soon get out of the
tumult and anarchy attending it. But a despotism, wearing a form of government,
and being armed with its force, is an evil not to be conquered without dreadful
struggles. It goes on from age to age, debasing the human faculties, levelling
all distinctions, and preying on the rights and blessings of society. It
deserves to be added, that in a state disturbed by licentiousness, there is an
ANIMATION which is favorable to the human mind, and puts it upon exerting its
powers; but in a state habituated to despotism, all is still and torpid. A dark
and savage tyranny stifles every effort of genius, and the mind loses all its
spirit and dignity.

Heaven grant, that in guarding against a fever, we fall not into a palsy!

SECTION X. When Human Life is held cheap, it is a Symptom of a prevailing
Spirit of Despotism.
THERE is nothing which I can so relactantly pardon in the GREAT ONES of this
world, as the little value they entertain for the life of a man. Property, if
seized or lost, may be restored; and without property, man may enjoy a thousand
delightful pleasures of existence. The sun shines as warmly on the poor as on
the rich; and the gale of health breathes its balsam into the cottage casement
on the heath, no less sweetly and salubriously than into the portals of the
palace. But can the lords of this world, who are so lavish of the lives of
their inferiors, with all their boasted power, give the cold heart to beat
again, or relume the light of the eye once dimmed by the shades of death?
Accursed despots, show me your authority for taking away that which ye never
gave, and cannot give; for undoing the work of God, and extinguishing the lamp
of life which was illuminated with a ray from heaven. Where is your charter to
privilege murder? You do the work of Satan, who was a destroyer; and your
right, if you possess any, must have originated from the father of mischief and
misery.

There is nothing so precious as the life of a man. A philosopher of antiquity,
who possessed not the religion of philanthropy, who knew not that man came from
heaven, and is to return thither; who never heard the doctrine authenticated,
that man is favored with a communication of the divine nature by the Holy
Spirit of God; yet, under all these disadvantages, maintained that HOMO EST RES
SACRA, that every HUMAN CREATURE is CONSECRATED to God, and therefore
inviolable by his fellow man, without profanation. All the gold of Ophir, all
the geins of Golconda, cannot buy a single life, nor pay for its loss. It is
above all price.

Yet take a vie^^ of the world, and you will immediately be led to conclude,
that scarcely any thing is viler than human life. Crimes which have very little
moral evil, if any, and which therefore cannot incur the vengeance of a just
and merciful Deity, are punished with death at a human tribunal. I mean state
crimes; such actions, conduct, speeches, as are made crimes by despots, but are
not recognized as such in the decalogue; such as may proceed from the purest
and most virtuous principle, from the most enlarged benevolence, from wisdom
and unaffected patriotism; such as may proceed from mere warmth of temper,
neither intending nor accomplishing any mischief; the mere effects of error, as
innocent too in its consequences as its origin. But the despot is offended or
frightened; for guilt trembles at the least alarm, and nothing but the blood of
the accused can expiate the offense.

Yet numerous as are the innocent victims of the tribunal, where to offend the
state is the greatest abomination that man can commit, they are lost and
disappear when compared to the myriads sacrificed to the demon of wa^ Despotism
delights in war. It is its element. As the bull knows, by instinct, that his
strength is in his horns, and the eagle trusts in his talons; so the despot
feels his puissance most, when surrounded by his soldiery arrayed for battle.
With the sword in his hand, and his artillery around him, he rejoices in his
might, and glories in his greatness. Blood must mark his path; and his triumph
is incomplete, till death and destruction stalk over the land, the harbingers
of his triumphant cavalcade.

We hear much of necessary wars; but it is certainly true, that a real,
absolute, unavoidable necessity for war, such as alone can render it just, has
seldom occurred in the history of man. The pride, the wanton cruelty of
absolute princes, caring nothing for human life, have in all ages, without the
least necessity, involved the world in war; and therefore it is the common
cause of all mankind to abolish absolute power; and to discourage, by every
lawful means, the spirit that leads to any degree of it. No individual, however
good, is fit to be trusted with so dangerous a deposit. His goodness may be
corrupted by the magnitude of the trust; and it is the nature of power,
uncontrolled by fear or law, to vitiate the best dispositions. He who would
have shuddered to spill a drop of blood, in a hostile contest, as a private
man, shall deluge whole provinces, as an absolute prince, and laugh over the
subjugated plains which he has fertilized with human gore.

What are the chief considerations with such men, previously to going to war,
and at its conclusion? Evidently the expense of MONEY. Little is said or
thought of the lives lost, or devoted to be lost, except as matters of
pecuniary value. Humanity, indeed, weeps in silence and solitude, in the
sequestered shade of private life; but is a single tear shed in courts, and
camps, and cabinets? When men high in command, men of fortune and family, fall,
their deeds are blazoned, and they figure in history; but who, save the poor
widow and the orphan, enquire after the very names of the rank and file? There
they lie, a mass of human flesh, not so much regretted by the despots as the
horses they rode, or the arms they bore. While ships often go down to the
bottom, struck by the iron thunderbolts of war, and not a life is saved; the
national loss is estimated by the despot, according to the weight of metal
wasted, and the magnitude and expense of the wooden castle.

Ploratur lachtymis amissa pecunia veris! God, we read, made man in his own
image; and our Savior taught us that he was the heir of immortality. God made
no distinction of persons; but behold a being, born to a scepter, though a
poor, puny, shivering mortal like the rest, presumes to fell, and let out for
hire, these images of God, to do the work of butchers, in any cause, and for
any paymaster, on any number of unoffending fellow creatures, who are standing
up in defense of their hearths, their altars, their wives, their children, and
their liberty. Great numbers of men, trained to the trade of human butchery,
are constantly ready to be let to hire, to carry on the work of despotism, and
to support, by the money they earn in this hellish employment, the luxurious
vices of the wretch who calls them his property. Can that state of human
affairs be right and proper, which permits a miscreant, scarcely worthy the
name of a man, sunk in effeminacy, the slave of vice, often the most abominable
kind of vice, ignorant and illiterate, debilitated with disease, weak in body
as in mind, to have such dominion of hundreds of thousands, his superiors by
nature, as to let them out for pay, to murder the mnocent stranger in cold
blood?

Though, in free countries and limited mo^^rch^es, such attrocious villainy is
never permitted, yet it becomes the friends of liberty and humanity to be on
their guard against the prevalence of any opinions and practices which
depreciate man, as man, and vilify human life. None can tell to what enormous
depravity small concessions may lead; when the horror of crimes is gradually
softened by the wicked arts of proud intriguers, idolizing grandeur and
trampling on poverty.

What shall we think of the practice of what is called CRIMPING? Is it to be
allowed in a free country? Are not men bought, inveigled, or forced by it, as
if they were cattle, beasts of the field or the forest, and capable of becoming
the property of the purchaser or the captor? If a nation should behold with
patience such a practice increasing and encouraged by the great, would there
not be reason to suspect, that it had lost the spirit of freedom, and was
preparing to submit its neck to the yoke of despotism? Is not an impressed
sailor or a kidnapped soldier one of the images of God? Is he not entitled to
all the rights of nature, and the society of which he is a member? Does poverty
disfranchize a man, rob him of his rights, and render his life a commodity to
be bought and sold, or thrown away, at the will of a rich man, who is enabled
to take advantage of his want, and add to the misfortune of indigence the curse
of slavery? Are a few pieces of silver to be allowed, by connivance, if not by
legal permission, as the price of blood, when poverty, but not the will,
consents to the sale?

Even if BOXING were ever to become a spectacle patronized by princes, and
encouraged by a people, there would be reason to fear lest MAN, AS MAN, had
lost his value; lest life were estimated of little price: and lest the spirit
of despotism were gradually insinuating itself into the community. There would
be reason to fear lest times, like those of the latter Roman emperors, were
returning, and that men might be kept like wild beasts, to be brought on the
stage and fight for public diversion, and to be murdered for the evening's
amusement of fashionable lords and ladies, at an opera-house.

The dignity of human nature, in despotical countries, is treated as a
burlesque. A man is less dignified than a pampered horse, and his life
infinitely less valued. But in a land of liberty, like ours, every man should
learn to venerate himself and his neighbor, as a noble creature, dependent only
on God, on reason, on law. Life, under such circumstances, is a pearl of great
price. Every human being, under such circumstances, is of equal value in the
sight of God. They, therefore, who, in consequence of civil elevation, hold any
man's life cheap and vile, unless he has forfeited his rights by enormous
crimes, are guilty of rebellion against God, and ought to be hunted out of
society; as the wolf, once the native of England's forests, was exterminated
from the island.

SECTION XI. Indifference of the middle and lower Classes of the People to
public Affairs, highly favorable to the encroachments of the Tory Principle,
and therefore to the Spirit of Despotism.
THE opinion, that the majority of the PEOPLE have no concern in political
disquisitions, is at once insulting and injurious. They who maintain it,
evidently mean to make a separation in the minds of men, between the government
and the nation. It is insulting to the nation, as it insinuates that they are
either incapable or unworthy of interfering; and it is injurious to the
government and the whole community, as it renders that power, which ought to be
an object of love, an object of terror and jealousy.

Such an opinion is fit only for a country subject to absolute power, and in
which the people, considered only as conquered slaves, hold their lives and all
their enjoyments at the will of the conqueror. As it originates in despotic
principles, so it tends to produce and diffuse them.

As to the intellectual abilities of the people, it is certain that some of the
ablest statesmen, lawgivers, and men of business, have ^riginated from that
order which is called plebeian. There is a singular vigor of mind, as well as
of body, in men who have been placed out of the reach of luxury and corruption
by their poor or obscure condition; and when this vigor of mind has been
improved by a competent education, and subsequent opportunities of experience
and observation, it has led to very high degrees of mental excellence.
Plebeians have arrived at the very first rank in all arts and sciences; and
there is nothing in politics so peculiarly abstruse or recondite, as to be
incomprehensible by intellects that have penetrated into the profoundest depths
of philosophy.

As to the right of the people to think, let him who denies it, deny, at the
same time, their right to breathe. They can no more avoid thinking than
breathing. God formed them to do both; and though statesmen often act as if
they wished to oppose the will of the Deity, yet happily they want the power.
And since men must think, is it possible to prevent them from thinking of the
government? upon the right conduct of which depend their liberty, their
property, and their lives. It is their duty to watch over the possessors of
power, lest they should be prevented, by the encroaching nature of power, from
leaving to their posterity that freedom which they inherited; a natural right,
preserved from the oppressor's infringement by the blood of their virtuous
ancestors.

But such is the effect of political artifice, under the management of court
sycophants, that the middle ranks of people are taught to believe, that they
ought not to trouble themselves with affairs of state. They are taught to think
that a certain set of men come into the world like demigods, possessed of
right, power, and intellectual abilities, to rule the earth, as God rules the
universe, without control. They are taught to believe, that free inquiry and
manly remonstrance are the sin of sedition. They are taught to believe, that
they are to labor by the sweat of their brow to get money for the taxes; and
when they have paid them, to go to work again for more, to pay the next demand
without a murmur. Their children may starve: they may be obliged to shut out
the light of heaven, and the common air which the beasts on the waste enjoy;
they may be disabled from procuring a draught of wholesome and refreshing
beverege after the day's labor which has raised the money to pay the tax; they
may not be able to buy the materials for cleanliness of their persons, when
defiled by the same labor; yet they must acquiesce in total silence. They must
read no obnoxious papers or pamphlets, and they must not utter a complaint, at
the house where they are compelled to go for refreshment, which the tax
prevents them from enjoying at home with their little ones. Yet they have
nothing to do with public affairs; and if they show the least tendency to
inquiry or opposition, they suffer a double punishment, first, from their
lordly landlord and employer, and secondly, from prosecution for turbulence and
sedition.

The legal punishments attending the expression of discontent, by any
overt act, are so severe, and the ill-grounded terrors of them so artfully
disseminated, that rather than incur the least danger, they submit in silence
to the hardest oppression.

Even the middle ranks are terrified into a ^ame and silent acquiescence. They
learn to consider politics as a dangerous subject, not to be touched without
hazard of liberty or life. They shrink therefore from the subject. They will
neither read nor converse upon it. They pay their contribution to a war, and
take a minister's word that it is just and necessary. Better part with a little
money patiently, since part with it we must, say they, than by daring to
investigate the causes or conduct of public meafures, risk a prison or a gibbet.

Great and opulent landholders often exercise a desporism in their petty
dominions, which sti^es the voice of truth, and blinds the eye of inquiry. If
tenants utter a sentiment in public, adverse to the courtly opinions of the
great man, who is looking up to a minister for a douceur for himself, his sons,
his natural sons, or his nephews, or consins, the beneficial lease will not be
renewed at its expiration. What has such a fellow to do with politics? Fine
times, indeed, when rustics dare to have an opinion on the possibility of
avoiding a war, which a minister has declared unavoidable! A thousand modes of
harrassing and embarrassing the subordinate neighbor, who dares think for
himself, are practiced by the slavish rich man, who, possessing enough to
maintain a thousand poor families, is yet greedily grasping at a place or a
pension; or, if he be too opulent to think of such addition, which is seldom
the case, still views with eager eye and panting heart, at least a baronetage,
and perhaps a coronet, glittering on high with irresistible brilliancy.

Gross ignorance, unmanly fear of punishment, and obsequiousness to overgrown
aristocrats, at once servile and tyrannic, operate in conjunction to prevent
the middle and lower ranks from attending to the concerns of the community, of
which they are very important members; contributing to its support by their
personal exertions, their consumption of taxed commodities, and the payment of
imposts.

There is also an habitual indolence which prevents many from concerning
themselves with any thing but that which immediately affects their pec^^^^ary
interest. Such persons would be content to live under the Grand Seignor, so
long as they might eat, drink, and sleep in peace. But such must never be the
prevailing sentiment of a people, whose ancestors have left them the
inheritance of liberty, as an estate unalienable, and of more value than the
mines of Peru. Such indolence is treachery to posterity; it is a base and
cowardly dereliction of a trust, which they who consided it are prevented by
death from guarding or withdrawing.

The middle and lower ranks, too numerous to be bribed by a minister, and
almost out of the reach of court corruption, constitute the best bulwarks of
liberty. They are a natural and most efficacious check on the strides of power.
They ought therefore to know their consequence, and to preserve it with
unwinking vigilance. They have a stake, as it is called, a most important
stake, in the country. Let not the overgrown rich only pretend to have a stake
in the country, and claim from it an exclusive privilege to regard its
concerns. The middle ranks have their native freedom to preserve; their
birthright to protect from the dangerous attacks of enormous and overbearing
affluence. Inasmuch as liberty and security are more conducive to happiness
than excessive riches, it must be allowed, that the poor man's stake in the
country is as great as the rich man's. If he should lose this stake, his
poverty, which was consoled by the consciousness of his liberty and security,
becomes an evil infinitely aggravated. He has nothing left to defend him from
the oppressor's wrong and the proud man's contumely. He may soon degenerate to
a beast of burden; for the mind sinks with the slavery of the condition. But
while a man feels that he is free, and fills a respectable rank, as a freeman,
in the community, he walks with upright port, conscious, even in rags, of
comparative dignity.

While the middle and lower ranks acquaint themselves with their rights, they
should also impress on their minds a sense of their duties, and return
obedience and allegiance for protection.

To perform the part of good members of the community, their understandings
must be duly enlightened, and they must be encouraged, rather than forbidden,
to give a close attention to all public transactions. Disagreements in private
life are often justly called misunderstandings. It is through want of clear
conceptions that feuds and animosities frequently happen in public. The many
are not so mad as they are represented. They act honestly and zealously
according to their knowledge. Give them fair and full information, and they
will do the thing that is right, in consequence of it. But nothing more
generally and justly offends them, than an attempt to conceal or distort facts
which concern them; an attempt to render them the dupes of interested ambition,
planning its own elevation on the ruins of their independence.

I wish, as a friend to peace, and an enemy to all tumultuary and riotous
proceedings, that the mass of the people should understand the constitution,
and know, that redress of grievances is to be sought and obtained by appeals to
the law; by appeals to reason; without appealing, except in cases of the very
last necessity, which seldom occur, to the arm of violence. I advise them
patiently to bear, while there is but a hope of melioration, even flagrant
abuses, if no other mode of redress appears, for the present, but convulsion. I
would exhort them, not to fly from the despotism of an administration, to the
despotism of an enraged populace. I would have them value the life, the
tranquillity, the property, of the rich and great, as well as those of the poor
and obscure. I would wish them to labor at promoting human happiness in all
ranks, and be assured, that happiness, like health, is not to be enjoyed in a
fever.

To accomplish these ends, I think too much pains cannot be bestowed in
teaching them to understand the true nature of civil liberty; and in
demonstrating to them, that it is injured by all excesses, whether the excesses
originate in courts or cottages.

And surely those men are neither friends to their country nor to human nature,
who, for the sake of keeping down the lower orders, would object to teaching
the people the value of a pure representation, free suffrage, a free press, and
trial by jury. These are the things that are most likely to endear the
constitution to them, to render them truly loyal, cheerfully obedient, and
zealously peaceable.

It is not the delusive publications of interested and sycophantic associators
which can produce this valuable purpose. Writings so evidently partial,
persuade none but those that are already persuaded; and deceive none but those
that are willing to be decived. Truth only, will have weight with the great
body of the people, who have nothing to hope from ministerial favor, or to
fear, while the constitution is unimpaired, from ministerial displeasure.

Let the people, then, be at liberty, uninterrupted by persons actuated by tory
and high prerogative principles, to study politics, to read pamphlets, and to
debate, if they choose it, in societies. The more they know of a good
constitution and a good administration, the better they will behave. Ministry
need not hire newspapers, or employ spies. Let them build their considence in
truth and justice, and the enlightened people will constitute its firmest
buttress. Let it never be said, that the people have nothing to do with
politics, lest it should be inferred, that such politics have no regard to the
people.

SECTION XII. The despotic Spirit is inclined to discourage Commerce, as
unfavorable to its Purposes.
IS man a reasonable creature? Is he then most perfect and happy, when his
conduct is regulated by reason? If so, then the boasted age of CHIVALRY was an
age of folly, madness, and misery. It was an age in which a romantic
imagination triumphed by force over the plainest and strongest decisions of
common sense. It was an age in which pride and wanton insolence trampled on the
rights and happiness of human nature. To express my idea of it in a word, it
was an age of QUIXOTISM, in which Europe appeared as one vast country of
bedlamites. Yet, wonderful to relate, men have lately arisen, pretending to
extraordinary degrees of the distinctive faculty of man, professing the most
unbounded philanthropy, but at the same time regretting that the age of
chivalry is no more.

The truth is, the spirit of chivalry was highly favorable to the spirit of
despotism, Every feudal baron was a petty tyrant, little differing from the
chieftain of a banditti. They were absolute soevereigns over their vassals.
Their castles were fortified palaces, from which they issued, regardless of
government or law, like lions or tigers from their d^^^, to deform the land
with blood and devastation. What was the situation of the PEOPLE, the million,
in those days of mischievous folly? It was scarcely better than that of the
negroes in the islands of America. And are these times to be regretted in the
present day? Yes, certainly, by those who pine at seeing the condition of the
multitude meliorated, and who consider the unfortunate part of their
fellow creatures as a herd of swine.

At this period of English history, slaves, natives of England, were bought and
sold on English ground, just in the same manner as the negroes in Africa. One
of the chief articles of export from England, in the time of the Anglo-Saxons,
was the SLAVE. Slaves were always appendant to manors, like the stock of cattle
on a farm. They were attached to the soil, and were conveyed or descended with
the estate, under the name of villains regardant, gleboe adscriptitii. They
were never considered as citizens; they had no vote, no rights; and were in
every respect, in the eye of the great men who possessed them, like goods,
chattels, and beasts of burden.

As honest labor was considered as SLAVISH, so also was every kind of TRADE.
The only class esteemed, was that which we should now call GENTLEMEN or
ESQUIRES. And what was their employment? Destruction of their fellow creatures.
They neither toiled nor spun; but they wielded the sword, and shed blood under
the banners of their chief, whenever he thought proper to wage war with an
unoffending neighbor. They were, however, honorable men; all, all honorable
men. But honor will not fill the belly, nor cloathe the back; and pride was
obliged to stoop for food, raiment, dwellings, and all the comforts and
accommodations of life, to the villain and vassal; who were exactly in the rank
occupied by modern tradesmen, mechanics, and artisans. The gentleman of those
days availed himself of their labor and ingenuity, and then despised them. The
GENTLEMEN of modern days, who admire the age of chivalry, and who adopt tory
and arbitrary principles, would be glad to consider this useful and ingenious
class of citizens in the same light. Perish our commerce, live our
constitution. Perish the loom, the plough, the hammer, the axe; but flourish
the sword. Sink the merchant ship, but let the man of war ride on the waves in
all her glory.

Such sentiments resemble those of the feudal barons, the most despotic
GENTLEMEN that ever disgraced human nature. The old feudal barons, ^owever,
could not always find employment for the sword at home; and Peter the monk told
them they would be rewarded in heaven by waging war on Palestine. They embarked
with the blessings of the pope on their banners. It was a fortunate event for
the despised vassals who were left at home. Both commerce and liberty are
greatly indebted to the crusades for their subsequent flourishing state. In the
absence of the tyrants, the tradesmen and artisans exercised their art and
industry on their own account, and gradually acquired a degree of independence.
Many of the barons never returned to oppress them. Many returned, greatly
injured in strength, spirit, and property. Consequently they lost their power.
Charters were now sold or granted, and Commerce lifted up her front in defiance
of Pride, that, looking down from her castle on the ship and manufacturer,
despised her lowly occupation, while she envied her opulence. The country was
enriched by arts which the nobles deemed vile. The mass of the people acquired
property, and with it, power and independence. The tyranny of the feudal
system, and the nonsense of chivalry, which endeavored to create a fantastic
merit, independent of virtue and utility, soon vanished when the human mind was
at liberty to think for itself; and men were emboldened to act freely by a
consciousness of possessing skill and property.

But while the human heart is subject to pride, and fond of power, the spirit
of tyranny, which actuated the old barons in feudal times, will manifest
itself, in some mode or degree, whenever opportunities occur. Commerce was
despised under the late monarchy in France; and commerce, we have reason to
think, is looked upon with a jealous eye in England, by those who are violently
attached to senseless grandeur.

Men of this description are averse to commerce, not only from pride, but from
policy. They see commerce enriching and exalting plebeians to a rank in society
equal to their own; and often furnishing the means of luxurious enjoyment and
splendour, which they themselves, with all the pride of birth and the
presumption of office, cannot support. Though a war may injure trade, and ruin
manufacturing towns, yet it is eagerly engaged in, if it gratifies the revenge
of courts, and the pride of nobles. Its ill effects on commerce may be a
recommendation of it to those who exclaim, "Perish commerce, live our
constitution." It reduces that aspiring greatness of the merchant, which treads
on the heels of the grandee, and overtops him. It bleeds the body which appears
in the eyes of the great to show symptoms of plethora. It clips the wings which
seem ready to emulate the flight of the eagle. It lops the tree which gives
umbrage by its shadow. The favorers of absolute power would have a nation of
gentlemen soldiers, of courtiers, and of titled noblemen; and they view with
pain, a nation of gentlemen merchants, of men independent both in spirit and
fortune, enlightened by education, improved by experience, enriched by virtues
and useful exertion, possessing principles of honor founded on honesty, and
therefore quite as scrupulous and nice as if they had been bred in idleness,
bloated with the pride of ancestry, tyrannically imperious over the active
classes, and at the same time abject slaves to courtly fashion.

But, as in a commercial nation, it is impossible to prevent men of this
description from sometimes acquiring princely fortunes, it becomes a very
desirable object, among the politicians attached to arbitrary power, to corrupt
the principal commercial houses, by raising in them the spirit of vanity and
ambition. They have already acquired money more than sufficient for all the
purposes of aggrandizement. The next object is honor; that is, a title. A
baronetage is a charming lure to the whole family. Any favor indeed from the
court is a feather. A title is now and then judiciously bestowed. This operates
on the rising race, and teaches them to undervalue their independence in
competition with the smile of a minister. The minister, indeed, has means of
gratifying the avarice as well as the vanity of the commercial order. Contracts
are delicious douceurs to the aspiring trader: they not only enrich, but lead
to a connection with the powers that be, and pave with gold the road of
ambition.

But the sun of tory favor which irradiates the tops of the mountain, seldom
reaches the vale. The millions of humbler adventurers in commerce and
manufacture, who are enriching their country, and accommodating human life, in
ten thousand modes that require both virtue and skill, are viewed by the
promoters of arbitrary power with sovereign contempt. The truth is, that most
of these, notwithstanding the disdain with which they are treated, are some of
the most independent members of the community. They constitute a very large
portion of the middle rank. They are a firm phalanx, and commonly enlisted on
the side of liberty. They can scarcely be otherwise; for they have little to
hope or fear from those who call themselves their superiors. They perform a
work, or vend a commodity, equivalent to the compensation they receive; and owe
no obligation beyond that which civility or benevolence, toward those with
whom they negociate, imposes. The customer applies to them for his own
convenience. If they be fair traders, they vend their wares at the market
price; and if one will not accede to it, they wait patiently for another offer.
They do not think themselves bound to make any unmanly submissions to those who
deal with them for their own advantage.

A numerous body of men like these, possessing, in the aggregate, a vast
property, and consequently, if they could act in concert, a vast power also,
cannot but be an object of uneasiness to the copartners in a proud
aristocracy, wishing to engross to themselves the whole world, with all its
pleasures, honors, emoluments, and rights. As they cannot destroy this body,
their next endeavor is to vilify it, to render it insignificant, to discourage
its attention to public affairs, to lessen its profits, and to embarrass its
operations by taxes on its most vendible productions. They would gladly render
a tradesman as contemptible in England, as it was in France before the
revolution. In France, we all know, under its despotic kings, no virtue, no
merit, no services to the public or mankind, could wipe off the filthy stain
fixed on the character by merchandise. The poorest, most villainous and vicious
idiot, who partook of noblesse, would have been esteemed, in that unhappy
period, infinitely superior to a Gresham, a Barnard, or a Skinner.

My purpose in these remarks is to exhort the mercantile order to preserve
their independence, by preserving a just sense of their own dignity. I see with
pain and alarm the first men in a great city, the metropolis of the world,
whose merchants are princes, crouding with slavish submission to the minister
of the day, seconding all his artful purposes in a corporation, calling out the
military on the slightest occasion, at once to overawe the multitude, and at
the same time to annihilate their own civil and constitutional authority. If
they would but preserve their independence, and retain a due attachment to the
people, and the rights of their fellow-citizens, their power and consequence
would be infinitely augmented, and the very minister who buys or cajoles them,
would hold them in high estimation. Ultimately, perhaps, their present sordid
views might be accomplished with greater success; as they certainly would be,
if accomplished at all, with more honor and satisfaction.

Instead of separating their interests, I would say, let our commerce and our
constitution ever flourish together. Certain I am, that a flourishing commerce,
by giving power and consequence to the middle and lower ranks of the people,
tends more than all the military associations to preserve the genuine spirit of
the constitution.

SECTION XII. The Spirit of Despotism displaying itself in private Life, and
proceeding thence to avail itself of the Church and the Military.
MANY who enjoy the great advantages of distinguished rank and enormous wealth,
either hereditary or acquired, not contented with those advantages, seem, by
their behavior, to envy the less fortunate of their species the little
happiness they retain in their humble sphere. Unsatisfied with the elevation
which their birth or fortune has given them, they wish to trample on their
inferiors, and to force them still lower in society. Base pride! fordid
greediness of wretches, who, notwithstanding they are gratified with all
external splendour, and pampered even to loathing with plenty of all good
things, yet insult those who minister to their luxuries, and who (however
deserving by virtue all that the others possess by chance) sit down with a bare
competence, and often in want of real necessaries, food, raiment, and
habitation.

The insolence of many among the great, who possess neither knowledge nor
virtue, nor any quality useful to mankind, and the contempt with which they
look down upon men, whom, though both virtuous and useful, they call their
inferiors, excites the honest indignation of all who can think and feel, and
who are remote from the sphere of corrupting influence. The natural sensations
of an honest heart revolt against it. It is not only most highly culpable in a
moral view, but extremely dangerous in a political. It arises from the genuine
spirit of despotism, and if not checked by the people, must lead to its
universal prevalence. Such a spirit would allow no rights to the poor, but
those which cannot be taken away, such as the swine possess; the rights of mere
animal nature. Such a spirit hates the people, and would gladly annihilate all
of them, but those who administer to pride and luxury, either as menial
servants, dependent tradesmen or mechanics, or common soldiers, ready to shed
their own and others blood for a morsel of bread.

Even the beasts are held in higher honor by many aristocrats, than the poor
people in their vicinage. Dogs and horses are fed, lodged, nay, the horses
sometimes clothed sumptuously; while the poor laborers in the cot on the side
of the common, are starved, scarcely sheltered by their roofs, and almost
naked. As you ride by the splendid palace and extensive park of some inheritor
of overgrown opulence, some fortunate adventurer, some favored contractor,
pensioner, or placeman, you behold stables and dog-kennels erected in a style
of magnificence; externally grand and internally commodious. The dogs and
horses are waited on by MEN appointed for the purpose, and more amply paid than
the laborer, who rises early, and late takes rest in the work of agriculture or
manufacture. After viewing the magnificent stables, proceed a little farther,
and you see, on the road-side, and in the village, wretched houses, without
glass in the windows; the poor laborer, his wife, and children in rags;
scarcely able to procure the smallest fire in the coldest weather, threatened
with prosecution if they pick up sticks in the park; and, if they refuse to
endure extreme cold and hunger, in danger of being hanged, and certain of
imprisonment. The great man, who spends much of his time in the stable and
kennel, and who caresses the horses and dogs, condescends not to enter the
cottages. He receives the lowly obeisance of the inhabitants without returning
it. Look at yonder corner of his park, and you see a board with an inscription,
threatening all who enter with MAN traps and spring guns. If, tempted by
hunger, the poor man should venture to catch a hare or patridge, the horse-whip
is threatened, and perhaps inflicted in the first instance: and on a repetition
of the atrocious crime, he and his whole family are turned out of their
cottage; happy if himself be not imprisoned, though the bread of the helpless
depends on his liberty and labor.

This petty tyrant of a village domain shall nevertheless think himself
entitled to represent the next borough in Parliament. What can be expected from
such a wretch, but that he should be as servilely mean and obsequious to a
minister, as he is cruel and unfeeling in his behavior to the poor of his
vicinity? He has shown already the dispositions of a Nero and Domitian in
miniature; and if he could obtain a throne, his scepter would be a rod of iron.
He would be inclined to consider all the people as a tribe of POACHERS.

If no considerable district of a country be without such overbearing despots;
if they are viewed without abhorrence, and considered as assuming only the
common privileges of country gentlemen; if such men, availing themselves of a
corrupt state of representation, often procure a share in the legislature; is
not that country, if there be such an one, in danger of being overrun with the
spirit of despotism? Are not the YEOMANRY, who are usually tenants of these
lordly Nimrods, likely to be influenced by them, through fear of losing their
farms, in their votes, and in all their sentiments and conduct? And will not
Liberty lose some of her ablest, as they were probably among her sincerest and
manliest, defenders, when the yeomanry desert her banners?

Among all that description of persons who have been lately called ARISTOCRATS,
proud and selfish in their nature, Tories and Jacobites in their political
principles, it is obvious to remark the most haughty, overbearing manners in
the transactions of common life, in their domestic arrangements, in their
pleasurable excursions, their visits, their conversation, and general
intercourse. In all these, their grand object is to keep the vulgar, under
which appellation they comprehend many truly, though not nominally, NOBLE, at a
distance. They form a little world of their own, and entitle it, the circles of
fashion. Folly and vanity govern this little world with despotic rule; and
virtue, learning, usefulness have no claim to admission into it. Pride,
servility to courts, and a mutual, though tacit, agreement to treat the PEOPLE
with contempt, are among the principal recommendations to it. The grand secret
of its constitution is to claim dignity, distinction, power, and place,
exclusively, without the painful labor of deserving either by personal merit,
or by services to the commonwealth.

These people push themselves forward to notice at all public places. Though
they contribute no more than others to the support of such places, (for they
are sordidly parsimonious) yet they claim a right to dictate every regulation.
Countenanced by each other, they assume at theaters a bold behavior, such as
argues a sovereign contempt of the canaille. They talk loud, they laugh loud,
they applaud each other's wit, they strut with airs of perfect
self-complacency; but would not be supposed to cast an eye at the inferior
crowd, whose admiration they are at the same time courting, by every silly
effort of pragmatical vanity. They cannot live long at home. No; they must have
the eyes of the very people whom they affect to despise, constantly upon their
persons, their coaches, their livery servants; or else wealth loses its power
to gratify, and grandeur is no better than insignificance.

Nothing flatters such persons more, than to have a number of their
fellow creatures engaged as servants about their persons, with nothing to do,
or with such employments as MAN, properly so called, could not endure to have
done by another. It adds greatly to their happiness, if they can clothe these
superfluous menials in very fine and costly dress, far exceeding any thing
which the middle, yet independent, ranks of the people can either afford or
would choose to display. They also choose that their footmen should be handsome
in their persons, as well as sumptuously clad; the intention being to lead the
spectator to exclaim, when even the servants are such respectable personages,
"how stupenduously great must be the lordly master!"

A court, with all its forms and finery, is the very element of such persons.
They flutter about it like butterflies in the sunshine; and happy he, who, in
his way to it, excites the most admiration of his gaudy coach and coat in the
crowd of St. James's-street; that crowd, which nevertheless they scorn, through
fear of pollution, to look at, with eyes destined in a few minutes to enjoy the
beatific vision of royalty. But as a court is their delight; no wonder that
their sentiments on political matters are perfectly courtier-like. They are for
extending the powers and prerogatives of royalty, from a selfish idea that they
can recommend themselves to the notice and patronage of courts by servile
compliance, by riches and pomp; whereas the people would require personal merit
as the passport to their favor. They think the people have little to bestow but
bare esteem, or such offices as are honorable only in proportion as they are
well or ill discharged; such as require virtues and abilities: whereas, a court
can bestow on its favorites, without requiring painful virtues, ribbands,
garters, stars, and titles, all which gratify superficial minds by their
^^^ernal finery and distinction, independently of any idea that they are, or
should be, the public rewards of long and faithful services, in promoting the
welfare of the community, and the happiness of the human race.

To form an adequate idea of the proud and frivolous minds of those who are
intent on nothing but aggrandizing themselves by augmenting the power of courts
and ministers, whose favor they seek with the most despicable meanness, it will
be necessary to entertain right notions of the court of France, and the manners
of the noblesse, previously to the revolution. 'The two great aims' (says an
observing French writer) of the modern courtiers of France, like some of
another nation, where dissipation and the means of repairing the ruinous
consequences of that dissipation to their private fortunes. To obtain the
former end, they pursued her through all the fantastical labyrinth or versatile
folly; and to accomplish the latter, they startled at no depravity or
corruption which presented itself. Thus, the greatest personages in the nation
were most distinguishable for vice and meanness; the sole object was to indulge
in every vain and every sensual gratification, and then to procure places and
appointments, the profits of which were to pay the expenses of pride and
debauchery. The financier robbed the people. The great (as they are abusively
called) received the stolen goods; and the people, in return for their property
thus extorted from them, were at once oppressed, plundered and despised. If a
nobleman, impoverished by his enormous vices and silly vanity, married into a
rich but plebeian family, they called this degrading conduct, the taking DUNG
to fertilize their estates. At the same time, pollution as it was to marry the
honest daughter of an honest merchant, they prided themselves in choosing for
mistresses not only the lowest, but the most vicious persons, opera-dancers,
and actresses, notorious for prostitution. Such were many of the courtiers, the
noblesse, and sticklers for arbitrary power, in France; and have there not
appeared in other nations, instances of similar conduct in persons of similar
rank, and similar political principles?

In France, bishopries were usually considered as genteel provisions for the
sons of noble families. Religions considerations had little influence in the
appointment of them. Learning was not a sufficient recommendation. BLOOD was
the prime requisite. If by chance a man, with every kind of merit proper for
that station, rose to a bishopric, without the recommendation of blood, he was
despised by the fraternity, and called a BISHOP OF FORTUNE. I have heard in
England such men as Dr. Watson, and Dr. Porteus, and Dr. Secker, with all their
learning, spoken of as men that must not think themselves of any political
consequence; as men who should be satsfied with their good fortune, and not
pretend to vie with the NORTHS, and Cornwallises, and Kepples. How would such
men have despised JESUS CHRIST and the poor fishermen! yet they love
bishopries, so far as they contribute to secular pomp and parade.

A similar spirit must produce similar conduct. Therefore those who would not
wish the manners of the French, as they existed before the revolution, to
prevail in their own country, will check the spirit that gives rise to such
manners, by every rational means of opposition to it. That spirit and those
manners at once supported the French monarchy, and caused its abolition.

Indeed, the overbearing manners of the TORIES, or friends of arbitrary power,
are so disgusting in private life to every man of sense and independence, that
they must be exploded, wherever sense and independence can prevail over the
arts of sycophantism. They are no less offensive to humanity, and injurious to
all-the sweet equality of social intercourse, than they are to public liberty.
Observe one of these persons, who swells to an unnatural size of
self-consequence, from the emptiness of his head and the pride of his heart,
entering a coffee-house or public room at a watering place. To show his
contempt of all around him, he begins whistling, or beating a tune with his
fingers or with a stick on the table. He stands with his back to the fire,
holding up the skirts of his coat, protruding his lips, picking his teeth,
adjusting his cravat, surveying his buckles, and turning out his knees or toes;
showing, by every sign he can think of, his own opinion of his own importance,
and his sovereign contempt for the company. Presently he calls the waiter with
a loud voice and imperious ^one. Damn you, Sir, why don't you bring me a paper?
Then after strutting up and down two or three times, ^iewing himself in the
glass, bowing through the window to a coach with coronets on the sides, he
hastily rushes out, shutting the door with a sound that disturbs the whole
room. He steps back a moment, and having hallooed to the waiter -- "Has Sir
John been here?" shuts the door still louder, and departs to the other rooms,
to display the same airs of self importance.

Listen to him while he gives orders to his servants or workmen. His tone is so
imperious, you might imagine them negroes, and himself a negro-driver. And
happy, he thinks, would he be, if the laws of this country would allow him to
use the whip at once, instead of wearing out his precious lungs on such
low-born wretches. But as he dares not use the whip, (and indeed, he is
generally a coward as well as bully), he makes up for it as well as he can, by
threatening to use it on all occasions, whenever his will is not minutely and
instantaneously executed. He urges the propriety of keeping these people at a
distance, making them know their station, and preserving his own dignity.
Porters, hackney-coachmen, chairmen, whoever is so unfortunate as to be
obliged, through poverty and a low station, to minister to his luxury, are
sure, at the same time to be insulted by his insolence. He pays no more than
others; often less; but he swears and calls names. In truth, he considers this
order of useful people, certainly respectable when honest, sober, and
industrious, as not of the same flesh and blood with himself, but to be ranked
with the ass and the swine.

-- Animos servorum et corpora nostra
Materia constare putat, paribusque elementis?
"O Demens! ita servus HOMO est Have servants souls? -- and are their bodies
then
Of the same flesh and blood as gentlemen?
Have servants RIGHTS OF MEN to plead? O sure
It Is madness thus to patronize the poor.

?
JUV. This proud pretender to superiority, his sneaking slave of courts, and
tyrant of his household, would monopolize not only all the luxuries of
habitation, food, raiment, vehicles, attendants, but all notice, all respect,
all consideration. The world was made for him, and such as he, to take their
pastime in it. His family, his children, his house must all be kept from
plebeian contamination. It is worth while to observe the fences of his
premises, his high rails, gates, the walls before his house, the grim porter at
his door, and the surly mastiff, taught to hunt down the poor man and the
stranger that sojourns near the magnificent palace of selfish grandeur. The
well-barred portals, however, fly open at the approach of lords and dukes; and
he himself would lick the shoes of a king or prime minister, if such should,
for the sake of securing the influence of his wealth in parliament, condescend
to enter his mansion.

The aristocratical insolence is visible where one would least expect it; where
all the partakers of this frail and mortal state should appear in a state of
equality; even at church, in the immediate presence of Him who made high and
low, rich and poor; and where the gilded and painted ornaments on the walls
seem to mock the folly of all human pride. The pew of the great man is raised
above the others, though its elevation is an obstacle both to the eyes and ears
of those who are placed in its vicinity. It is furnished with curtains, adorned
with linings, and accommodated with cushions. Servants walk in his train, open
the door of his luxurious seat, and carry the burden of the prayer book. The
first reverence is paid to persons of condition around. Those who do not bow at
the name of Jesus Christ, bend with all lowliness to the lord in the gallery.
The whole behavior leads a thinking man to conclude, that the self-important
being would scarcely deign to enter Heaven, any more than he does the church,
if he must be reduced to an equality with the rustic vulgar.

Such persons, consistently with their arbitrary principles, are always
high-churchmen. Though they may be indifferent to religion, they are zealous
for the church. They consider the church as useful, not only in providing
genteelly for relations and dependents, but as an engine to keep down the
people. Upon the head of their despot, they would but a triple covering, the
crown, the mitre, and the helmet. The Devil offered our Savior all the
kingdoms of this world and their glory, if he would fall down and worship him;
and there is reason to fear, that such idolaters of the kingdoms of this world
and their glory, would apostatize from him who said his kingdom was not of this
world, if the same evil being were to make them the same offer. The
temporalities and splendors of the church triumphant endear it to them; but, if
it continued in its primitive state, or in the condition in which it was when
poor fishermen were its bishops, they would soon side, in religious matters,
with the miscreant philosophers of France. But while mitres and stalls may be
made highly subservient to the views of a minister, and the promoters of
arbitrary power and principles, they honor the church, though they know nothing
of Christ; they stickle for the bench, though they abandon the creed. An ally,
like the church, possessed of great power, must be cherished; though the very
persons who wish to avail themselves of that power, would be the first, if that
power were in real danger, to question its rights, and to accelerate its
subversion.

There is one circumstance in the conduct of the Tory friends to absolute sway
truly alarming to the champions of liberty. They are always inclined, on the
smallest tumult, to call in the military. They would depreciate the civil
powers, and break the constable's staff to introduce the bayonet. In their
opinion, the best executive powers of government are a party of dragoons. They
are therefore constantly sounding alarms, and aggravating every petty
disturbance into a riot or rebellion. They are not for parleying with the
many-headed monster; they scorn lenient measures; and while their own persons
are in perfect safety, boldly command the military to fire. What is the life or
the limb of a poor man, in their opinion? Not so much as the life or limb of a
favorite pointer or race-horse. They are always eager to augment the army. They
would build barracks in every part of the country, and be glad to see a free
country overrun, like some of the enslaved nations of the continent, from east
to west, from north to south, with men armed to overawe the saucy advocates of
charters, privileges, rights, and reformations.

Against principles so dangerous in public life, and odious in private, every
friend to his king and country, every lover of his fellow creatures, every
competent judge of those manners, which sweeten the intercourse of man with
man, will show a determined opposition. But how shall he show it with effect?
By RIDICULE. Nothing lowers the pride from which such principles proceed, so
much as general contempt and derision. The insolence of petty despots in
private life should be laughed at by an Aristophanes, while it is rebuked by a
Cato.

SECTION XIV. The despotic Spirit inclined to avail itself of Spies, Informers,
false Witnesses, pretended Conspiracies, and self-interested Associations
affecting Patriotism Sub Tiberio Caesare fuit accusandi frequens et paene
publica rabies, quae omni civili bello gravius togatam civitatem confecit.
Excipiebatur EBRIORUM sermo, simplicitas JOCANTIUM.

SENECA de Benef. Under Tiberius Caesar, the rage of accusing or informing was
so common, as to harass the peaceful citizens more than a civil war. The words
of drunken men and the unguarded joke of the thoughtless, were taken down, and
unguarded to the Emperor.


.
IT is not unfair to infer the existence of similar principles from similarity
of conduct. In that black page of history which disgraces human nature; I mean
the records of the Roman emperors, in the decline of Roman virtue; we read,
that spies and informers were considered as necessary functionaries of
government; that they became favorites at court, and were encouraged by rewards
due only to exemplary patriotism and public service. There have been periods
also in the history of England, when spies, informers, false witnesses, and
pretended plots, were deemed lawful and useful expedients by the rulers of the
state. In testimony of this assertion, we need only call to mind the pretended
Popish plot, with all its villainous circumstances, in the reign of Charles the
Second; a reign in many parts of it resembling the times of the Roman Tiberius.
But at whatever period spies, informers, false witnesses, and pretended plots
are adopted by men in power, to strengthen themselves in office, and destroy
virtuous opposition, there is reason to fear, in spite of all professions of
the contrary, that the tyrannic spirit of the degenerate Caesar's waits but for
opportunities to display itself in acts of Neronian atrocity. Power is
deficient; but inclination is equally hostile to the mass of mankind,
denominated the People, whom some politicians scarcely condescend to
acknowledge as possessed of any political existence.

The employment of spies and informers is a virtual declaration of hostilities
against the people. It argues a want of confidence in them. It argues a fear
and jealousy of them. It argues a desire to destroy them by ambuscade. It is,
in civil government, what stratagems are in a state of war. It tends also to
excite retaliation.

A ministry must be sadly corrupt, and unworthy the confidence either of king
on people, which can so far degrade itself as to require the assistance of the
vilest of the human race. Such are the whole race of spies, sycophants, (I use
the word in its proper sense), informers, and false witnesses. So great is the
unfortunate corruption of human nature, that men I ^e been always found to
execute the m^^ infamous offices, when a government has thought proper to seek
their cooperation. Extreme poverty, united with extreme profligacy of conduct,
and a total destitution of moral and religious principle, prepare men for the
most nefarious deeds which tyrants can meditate. For tyrants only, the robbers
and murderers of men, be such miscreants reserved. Tacitus has called them
INSTRUMENTA REGNI, the implements of government, when government falls into
hands which are skilled in the use of no better; into the hands of Neros and
Caligulas. May the minister of a free country, who has recourse to such tools,
be himself the first to feel their destroying edge!

Seneca, in the quotation at the head of this section, has handed down a
circumstance, in the reign of Tiberius, which must cause every man, who has a
just regard for the comforts of free intercourse and conversation, to shudder
at the prospect of being governed by a system supported by spies and informers.
He tells us, that the convivial merriment of friends assembled over a glass,
the innocent raillery and banter of jocular conversation, were, through the
encouragement given to informers by the government, made the grounds of a
serious charge of sedition and treason. The words of the drunken, and the
unguarded openness of the joker, were taken hold of by persons who mixed with
the guests, in order to recommend themselves to government, by reporting the
free language that might escape in the hour of unreserved confidence; when the
heart is opened by friendship, and the tongue loosened by wine.

He who dippeth with me in the dish, the same shall betray me, said our
Savior. But be it remembered, that the same persons who hired and paid Judas
Iscariot, crucified JESUS CHRIST.

But what shall we say? Have there been no Judas Iscariots in modern days? Have
our coffee-houses, taverns, and places of public amusement, been quite free
from hired wretches, who, while they dipped in the same dish with us, were
seeking to betray us, if possible, to prisons and to death? Did they this
wickedness of themselves, or were they hired and paid by persons influenced by
tory principles or high in office? Have not certain spies confessed, at a
solemn trial, that they were hired and paid by men in office? Have not the same
spies led to those extravagant speeches, or those offensive measures, which
they afterward informed against for hire; hoping to deprive the persons they
betrayed either of liberty or life? If such things have been, is it not time to
be alarmed, to guard against spies, informers, and false witnesses? And is it
not right to express, and increase, if possible, the public indignation against
both them and their employers?

When men high in office, of reputed abilities, and certainly possessing
extensive knowledge, patronize such miscreants as spies and informers, they
certainly corrupt the public morals, by leading the people, over whom their
examples must always have great influence, to believe, that treachery, perjury,
and murder are crimes of a venial nature. They teach men to carry the
profligacy of public characters and conduct into the requestered walks of
private life. They teach one of the most corrupting maxims; for they teach,
That when ends eagerly desired by knaves in power are to be accomplished, the
means must be pursued, however base and dishonest. They destroy at once the
confidential comforts and the most valuable virtues of private life.

But state-necessity is urged in defense of that policy which employs spies and
informers. I deny the existence of such necessity. There are excellent laws,
and there are magistrates and officers dispersed all over the kingdom, who are
bound to take cognizance of any illegal and injurious practices, and to prevent
them by a timely interference. If such magistrates and officers neglect their
duty, it is incumbent on those who appointed them, and who are amply paid for
their vigilance, to institute prosecutions, to punish and to remove them. The
law knows nothing of spies and informers. The only watchmen it recognizes are
magistrates, regularly appointed. The whole body of a people, well governed,
and consequently contented with their governors, are the natural and voluntary
guardians against seditions, treasons, and conspiracies to subvert the state.
When spies and informers are called in, it argues a distrust of the
magistrates, and of the whole body of the people. It argues an endeavor to
govern in a manner unauthorized by that constitution which the employers of
spies and informers pretend to protect, by instruments so dangerous and
unjustifiable.

I have a better opinion of men in power, in our times, corrupting as the
possession of power is allowed to be, than to believe that any of them would
hire a false witness. But let them be assured, that a hired spy and informer
will, by an easy transition, become a false witness, even in trials where
liberty and life are at stake. In trials of less consequence, there is no doubt
but that his conscience will stretch with the occasion. His object is not truth
or justice; but filthy lucre; and when he aspires at great rewards, great must
be his venture. Having once broken down, as a treacherous spy, the fences of
honor and conscience, nothing but fear will restrain him, as a witness, from
overleaping the bounds of truth, justice, and mercy. He will rob and murder
under the forms of law; and add to the atrocity of blood-guiltiness, the crime
of perjury. No man is safe, where such men are countenanced by officers of
state. They themselves may perish by his false tongue; suffering the vengeance
due to their base encouragement of a traitor to the public, by falling unpitied
victims to his disappointed treachery. The pestilential breath of spies and
informers is not to be endured in the pure healthy atmosphere of a free state.
It brings with it the sickly despotism of oriental climes.

But how ominous to liberty, if large associations of rich men, either
possessing or expecting places, pensions, and titles for themselves or their
relations, should ever take upon them the office of spying and informing! by
their numbers braving the shame, and evading the personal responsibility, that
would fall on an individual or unconnected spy or informer! Such an association
would be a most dangerous conspiracy of sycophants against a free constitution.
If the public should ever behold the venal tribe thus undermining the fair
fabric of liberty, and behold them without indignation, would it not give
reason to suspect, that the Tory and Jacobite principles, or the spirit of
despotism, had pervaded the body of the people?

The honest, independent, and thinking part of the community will be justly
alarmed, when they see either individuals or bodies of men encouraged by
ministerial favors, in calumniating the people, and falsely accusing the
advocates of constitutional freedom. They will think it time to stem the
torrent of corruption, which, rolling down its foul but impetuous tide from the
hills, threatens devastation to the cottages in the valley. But how shall they
stop an evil, promoted and encouraged, for private and selfish motives, by the
whole influence of grandeur and opulence acting in combination? By bearing
their testimony in favor of truth and justice; by giving their suffrages to
honest men; by rejecting the servile adulator of courts, and the mean sycophant
of ministers: and by shunning as pestilences every description of spies and
informers, whether poor or rich, mercenary or volunteer I subjoin a curious
passage from the 14th book of Ammianus Marcellinus, on the manner in which
spies executed their office, under the imperial authority of Constantius Gallus.

Excogitatum est super his, ut homines quidam ignoti, VILITATE IPSA par^m
cavendi, ad colligendo^ rumores per Antiochiae latera cuncta destinarentur,
relaturi qu^ audirent. Hi peragranter et dissimulanter honoratorum circulis
assistendo, pervadendoque divitum domus egentium habitu, quicquid noscere
p^terant vel audire, laten^^ intromissi per POSTICAS in regiam, nuntiabant: id
observ^^^^ conspiratione concordi, ut fingerent quaedam, et cog^^ta duplicare^t
in pejus: LAUDS VERO SUPPRIMERENT CAESARIS, quos INVITIS QUAMPLURIMIS, formido
malorum impendentium exprimebat.

Another expedient was, to place at every corner of the city certain obscure
persons, not likely to excite suspicion or caution, because of their apparent
insignificancy, who were to repeat whatever they heard. These persons, by
standing near gentlemen, or getting entrance into the houses of the rich, in
the disguise of poverty, reported whatever they saw or heard, at court, being
privately admitted into the palace by the BACK STAIRS: having concerted it
between themselves to add a great deal, from their own invention, to whatever
they really saw or heard, and to make the matter ten times worse. They agreed
also to suppress the mention of those LOYAL SONGS OR TOASTS, or) speeches, in
favor of the emperor, which the dread of impending evil squeezed out of many
against their will and better judgment.

The decline of the Roman empire was distinguished by spies and informers: it
is to be hoped that the use of spies and informers does not portend the decline
of the British empire.


. If they fail, they will feel the comfort of having discharged their duty.

SECTION XV. The Manners of Tory Courtiers, and of those who ape them, as
People of Fashion, inconsistent with Manliness, Truth, and Honesty; and their
Prevalence injurious to a free Constitution, and the Happiness of Human Nature.
AMONG a thousand anecdotes of the frivolity of the governing part of a
despotic country, I select the following, merely as a slight specimen of the
trifling disposition of those who, as they pretend, claim their elevated
situations for the GOOD OF MANKIND.

In the summer of the year 1775, the queen of France, being dressed in a
light-brown silk, the king good-naturedly observed, it was couleur de puce, the
color of fleas; and instantly every lady in the land was uneasy till she had
dressed herself in a silk gown of a flea color. The rage was caught by the men;
and the dyers worked night and day, without being able to supply the demand for
flea-color. They nicely distinguished between an old and a young flea, and
subdivided even the shades of its body. The belly, the back, the thigh, the
head, were all marked by varying tints. This prevailing color promised to be
the fashion of the winter. The silk-mercers found it would hurt their trade.
They therefore presented her majesty with patterns of new sattins; who having
chosen one, MONSIEUR exclaimed, it was the color of her majesty's HAIR!

Immediately the fleas ceased to be favorites at court, and all were eager to
be dressed in the color of her majesty's hair. Servants were sent off at the
moment from Fontainbleu to Paris, to purchase velvets, ratteens, and cloths of
this color. The current price of an ell in the morning had been forty livres,
and it rose in the evening to eighty and ninety. The demand was so great, and
the anxiety so eager, that some of her majesty's hair was actually obtained by
bribery, and sent to the Gobelins, to Lions, and other manufactories, that the
exact shade might be caught and religiously preserved.

Such was the little, mean, adulatory spirit of the court of France, and of the
people who at that time imitated the court with more than apish mimicry. To
show how little there is of truth and honesty in such servility, be it
remembered, that the nation so eager to catch the very color of the queen's
hair, soon afterward cut off the head on which it grew. Nothing silly, nothing
overstrained, can be lasting, because it wants a solid foundation. Let kings be
careful how they confide in court compliments and the addresses of corruption.
Mastiffs guard their master and his house better than spaniels.

While such a spirit prevails among the great, it is impossible that the
happiness of man can be duly regarded by those who claim a right to govern him.
Where frivolity and meanness are general, it is impossible that the people can
be wise or happy. Gaiety founded on levity or affectation, is not happiness. It
laughs and talks, while the heart is either unmoved or dejected. Happiness is
serious. The noise of folly is intended to dissipate thought; but no man would
wish his thoughts to be dissipated, who finds any thing within him to think of
with complacency.

Princes have always something important to think of, which, it might be
supposed, would preclude the necessity of trifling amusements to kill time. Yet
courts have always been remarkable for frivolity. This frivolity is not only
contemptible in itself, unworthy of rational beings, especially when executing
a most momentous trust, but productive of meanness, weakness, and corruption.
Long experience has associated with the idea of a courtier in despotic courts,
duplicity, insincerity, violation of promises, adulation, all the base and mean
qualities, rendered still baser and meaner, by assuming, on public occasions,
the varnish of hypocrisy.

Erasmus gives directions to a young man, in the manner of Swift, how to
conduct himself at court. I believe they never have been presented to the
English reader, and therefore I shall take the liberty of translating them, not
only for the sake of affording amusement, but that it may be duly confidered,
whether or not persons who form their manners and principles after such models,
are likely to be the friends of man, the assertors of the guardians of liberty:
whether the slaves of fashion, who seem to separate themselves from others, as
if they were a chosen tribe among the sons of men; as if they were made of such
clay as forms the porcelain, while others are merely earthen ware; whether, I
say, the slaves of fashion, which always apes a court in all its
extravag^ncies, are likely to consult the happiness of the majority of mankind,
the middle, lowest, and most useful classes, whom they despise, as an inferior
species of beings; as the whites in the West Indies formerly looked down upon
the negroes with disdain.

"As you are now going to live at court," says Erasmus, "I advise you, in the
first place, never to repose the smallest degree of considence in any man there
who professes himself your friend, though he may smile upon you, and embrace
you, and promise you; aye, and confirm his promise with an oath. Believe no man
there a sincere friend to you; and do you take care to be a sincere friend to
no man -- Nevertheless, you must pretend to love all you see, and show the
utmost suavity of manners and attentions to every individual. These attentions
cost you not a farthing; therefore you may be as lavish of them as you please.
Pay your salutations with the softest smiles on your countenance, shake hands
with the appearance of most ardent cordiality, bow and give way to all, stand
cap in hand, address every body by their titles of honor, praise without
bounds, and promise most liberally.

"I would have you every morning, before you go to the levee, practice in
making up your face for the day at your looking-glass at home, that it may be
ready to assume any part in the farce, and that no glimpse of your real
thoughts and feelings may appear. You must study your gestures carefully at
home, that in the acting of the day your countenance, person, and conversation
may all correspond, and assist each other in keeping up your character at the
court masquerade.

"These are the elements of the courtier's philosophy, in learning which, no
man can be an apt scholar, unless he first of all divests himself of all sense
of shame; and leaving his natural face at home, puts on a vizor, and wears it
constantly too. In the next place, get scent of the various cabals and parties
of the court; but be not in a hurry to attach yourself to any of them, till you
have duly reconnoitred. When you have found out who is the king's favorite, you
have your cue; mind to keep on the safe side of the vessel. If the king's
favorite be a downright fool, you must not scruple to slatter him, so long as
he is in favor with the god of your idolatry.

"The god himself, to be sure, will require the main efforts of your skill. As
often as you happen to be IN THE PRESENCE, you must exhibit a face of
apparently honest delight, as if you were transported with the privilege of
being so near the royal person. When once you have observed what he likes and
dislikes, your business is done."

He proceeds to advise his pupil to pursue his own interest, regardless of all
honor and honesty, whenever they may be violated without detection. He tells
him, in consulting his interest, to pay more court to enemies than friends,
that he may turn their hearts, and bring them over to his side. I cannot, in
this place, give the whole of the letter; but the curious reader may find it
under number fifty-seven, in the twenty-eighth book of the London edition.

Erasmus drew from the life. Though a most profound scholar, yet he was not
merely a scholar. He read the book of the world with as much accuracy as the
volumes of his library. I have brought forward this letter, because I find it
exemplified in the Precepts of Lord Chesterfield, and the Diary of Lord
Melcombe. It appears, under the testimony of their own hands, that these men
actually were the characters which Erasmus, in a vein of irony and sarcasm,
advises his court-pupil to become. It appears from them, that many of the
persons, with whom they acted, were similar. It follows that, if such men were
great, wise, and good men, truth, honor, sincerity, friendship, and patriotism
are but empty names, devised by politicians to amuse and delude a subject and
an abject people.

But the people (I mean not a venal mob, employed by a minister or by a
faction) are not so corrupted. They value truth, honor, sincerity, and
patriotism; and in their conduct often display them in their utmost purity.
Shall courtiers, then, be listened to, when they represent the people as the
swinish multitude, or as venal wretches? Shall courtiers, such as Lord
Melcombe, claim an exclusive right to direct human affairs? influencing senates
to make and unmake laws at pleasure; and to cry havoc, when they please, and
let slip the dogs of war on the poor, either at home or abroad? Shall a whole
nation be proud to mimic a court, not only in dress, amusements, and all the
vanity of fashion, but in sentiments, in morals, in politics, in religion, in
no religion, in hypocrisy, in CRUELTY?

Lord Melcombe and Lord Chesterfield were leading men, able men, eloquent men,
considered in their day as ornaments of the court and of the nation. But if
even they exhibit both precepts and examples of extreme selfishness, of deceit,
and of a total disregard to human happiness, what may we think of their
numerous dependents, under-agents, persons attached to them by places,
pensions, ribbands, titles, expecting favors for themselves, or their natural
children, or their cousins? Can we suppose these men to retain any regard for
the PUBLIC? Would they make any sacrifice to the general happiness of human
nature? Would they assert liberty, or undergo trouble, loss, persecution, in
defense of a constitution? They themselves would laugh at you, if you should
suppose it possible. They can be considered in no other light than as vermin,
sucking the blood of the people whom they despise.

Yet these, and such as these, are the men who are indefatigable in declaiming
against the people, talking of the mischiefs of popular government, and the
danger of admitting the rights of man. These, and such as these, are the
strenuous opposers of all reform in the representation. These, and such as
these, call all attempts at innovations, though evidently improvements,
seditious. These are the alarmists, who cry out, the church or the state is in
danger, in order to persecute honest men, or to introduce the military. The
military is their delight, their fortress; and to compass their own base ends,
they will not hesitate to bathe their arms in human blood, even up to their
very shoulders. Their whole object is to aggrandize a POWER, of which they pant
to participate, and from which alone, destitute as they are of merit and
goodness, they can hope for lucre and the distinctions of vanity.

"Where the ruling mischief," says the author of the Estimate, "prevails among
the great, then even the palliative remedies cannot easily be applied. The
reason is manifest: a coercive power is wanting. They who should cure the evil,
are the very delinquents; and moral and political physic no distempered mind
will ever administer to itself.

"Necessity therefore, and necessity alone, must in such a case be the parent
of reformation. So long as degenerate and unprincipled manners can support
themselves, they will be deaf to reason, blind to consequences, and obstinate
in the long-established pursuit of GAIN and PLEASURE. IN SUCH MINDS, THE IDEA
OF A PUBLIC HAS NO PLACE. Nor can such minds be ever awakened from their fatal
dream, till either the VOICE of an ABUSED people rouse them INTO FEAR, or the
state itself totter, through the general incapacity, cowardice, and disunion of
those who support it.

"Whenever, this compelling power, Necessity, shall appear, then, and not till
then, may we hope that our deliverance is at hand. Effeminacy, rapacity, and
faction, will then be ready to resign the reins they would now usurp. One
common danger, would create one common interest. Virtue may rise on the ruins
of corruption.

"One kind of NECESSITY, and which I call an internal NECESSITY, would arise,
when the voice of an abused people should rouse the GREAT into FEAR.

"I am not ignorant, that it has been a point of debate, whether, in POLITICAL
MATTERS, THE GENERAL VOICE OF A PEOPLE OUGHT to be held worth much regard?
Right sorry I am to observe, that this doubt is the growth of later times; of
times, too, which boast their love of freedom; but ought, surely, to blush,
when they look back on the generous sentiments of ancient days, which days we
stigmatize with the name of slavish.

"Thus runs the writ of summons to the parliament of the 23d of Edward the
First: -- The King, to the venerable father in Christ R. Archbishop of
Canterbury, greeting: As the most just law, established by the provident wisdom
of princes, does appoint, that what concerns ALL, should be approved by ALL; so
it evidently implies, that dangers common to all, should be obviated by
remedies provided by all. Ut quod OMNES tangit, ab OMNIBUS approbetur; -- sic
et innuit evidenter, ut COMMUNIBUS periculis per remedia provisa COMMUNITER
obvietur. A noble acknowledgement from an English king, which ought never,
sure, to be forgotten, or trodden under foot, by English subjects.

"There are two manifest reasons why, in a degenerate state, and a declining
period, the united voice of a people is, in general, the surest test of truth
in all essential matters on which their own welfare depends, so far as the ends
of political measures are concerned.

" First, Because in such a period, and such a state, the body of a people are
naturally the least corrupt part of such a people: for all general corruptions,
of whatever kind, begin among the leaders, and descend from these to the lower
ranks. Take such a state, therefore, in what period of degeneracy you please,
the higher ranks will, in the natural course of things, be farther gone in the
ruling evils than the lower; and therefore THE LESS TO BE RELIED ON.

" Secondly, A still more cogent reason is, that the general body of the people
have not such a bias hung upon their judgment by the prevalence of personal and
particular interest, as the GREAT, in all things which relate to state matters.
It is of no particulr and personal consequence to the general body of a people,
what men are employed, provided the general welfare be accomplished; because
nothing but the general welfare can be an object of desire to the general body.
But it is of much particular and personal consequence to the GREAT, what men
are employed; because, through their connections and alliances, they must
generally find either their friends or enemies in power. Their own private
interests, therefore, naturally throw a bias on their judgments, and destroy
that impartiality which the general body of an incorrupt people does naturally
possess.

"Hence, then, it appears, that the united voice of an incorrupt PEOPLE is, in
general, the safest test of POLITICAL GOOD AND EVIL."

Is it not then time to be alarmed for the public good, when great pains are
taken to depreciate the people; when the names of Jacobin, democrat, leveller,
traitor, and mover of sedition, are artfully thrown, by courtiers and their
adherents, on every man who has sense and virtue enough to maintain the cause
of liberty; that cause, which established the revolution on the ruins of
despotism, and placed the present family on the throne, as the guardians of a
free constitution? I cannot think such courtiers, however they may fawn, for
their own interest, on the person of the monarch, friends, in their hearts, to
a limited monarchy. If they could and dared, they would restore a Stuart. But
as that is impracticable, they would transfuse the principles of the Stuarts
into the bosom of a Brunswick. To expose their selfish meanness, and frustrate
their base design, is equally the duty and interest of the king and the people.

SECTION XVI. The Spirit of Truth, Liberty, and Virtue, public as well as
private, chiefly to be found in the middle ranks of the people.
Nemo altero nobilior, nisi cui rectius ingenium et artibu^ bonis aptius. Qui
imagines in atrio expenunt et nomi^^^ familiae suae..... NOTI magis quam
nobiles su^^.... ^^icenda haec fuerunt ad contundendam insolentiam hominum ex
fortuna pendentium. " No man is nobler born than another, unless he is born
with better abilities and a more amiable disposition. They who make such a
parade with their family pictures and pedigrees, are, properly speaking, ^^ther
to be called NOTED or NOTORIOUS than NOBLE persons. I thought is right to say
thus much, in order to repel the insolence of men who depend entirely upon
chance and accidental circumstances for distinction, and not at all on public
services and personal merit.


SENECA de Benef. THE people of this land are usually divided into nobility,
gentry, and commonalty. The nobility and gentry seem to be estimated as
officers in an army; the commonalty, or the whole body of the people, as the
rank and file.

There might be no original impropriety in these appellations; but that of
commonalty has been often used, by aristocratical upstarts, with insolence. The
commonalty comprize the grand mass of the nation; form the great fabric of the
political building; while the GENTRY, after all, are but the carving and
gilding, or the capitals of the pillars, that add to the support of the roof,
but constitute neither the walls nor the foundation. The commonalty, therefore,
being the main fabric, are worthy, in the eye of reason, of the highest esteem,
and the first degree of a patriot's solicitude. There can be no rational end in
our government but the happiness of the whole PEOPLE, King, Lords, and COMMONS.

The commonalty are, beyond all comparison, the most numerous order: and as
every individual of them is entitled to comfort and security in a well
regulated nation, the whole together-must demand the greatest attention of the
philosopher, the divine, the philanthropist, of every man of sense, goodness of
heart, and liberality. The pomp and parade, the superfluous luxury, the vain
distinctions of the FEW, sink to nothing, compared, in the mind of reasonable
and humane men, with the happiness of the million.

It is certainly true, that the greatest instances of virtue and excellence of
every kind have originated in the middle order. 'Give me neither poverty nor
riches,' was a prayer founded on a knowledge of human nature, and fully
justified by experience. The middle station affords the best opportunities for
improvement of mind, is the least exposed to temptation, and the most capable
of happiness and virtue.

This opinion has long been received and acknowledged. I could cite, from the
sermont of our best divines on Agair's Prayer, many passage; in confirmation of
it. I dwell upon it now, for no other reason, but because it has lately been
the fashion, among those who are alarmed for their privileges by the French
revolution, to run down the people, and to cry up that silly spirit of chivalry
which established the systems of false honor, claiming rank and respect from
society, without rendering it any service, without possessing any just claim to
esteem, much less to public honor, exclusive privileges, and titular
distinction. The terms sans culottes, canaille, bourgeoise, scum of the earth,
venal wretches, and the never to be forgotten swinish multitude, have been
reserved for the people, especially those among them who have had sense and
spirit enough personally to oppose the progress of despotic principles and
practices. Every thing that malice, urged by the fear of losing the ribands,
the titles, and the solid pence which a corrupt and corrupting minister can
bestow, has been thrown out, in newspapers hited by the people's money for the
purpose of vilifying the people.

It is time, therefore, that the people should vindicate their honor. What are
these insolent co^tiers, what these placemen and pensioners, who live on the
public bounty, that they should thus insult those whose bread they eat? For the
most part, they are persons who, if they were stripped of the false splendour of
great mansions, numerous retinues, painted carriages, would appear among the
meanest and most despicable members of society. They indeed are to be pitied
and borne with, while they abstain from iusulting the people; but when their
filly pride presumes to trample on the mass of the community, they become
deserving of contempt as well as commiseration.

These are the persons whom a patriotic Lord describes "as giving themselves up
to the pursuit of honors and dignities, as LOVING THE SPLENDOUR OF A COURT, and
attaching themselves to the cause of monarchy, (not from any conviction that
monarchy is the most favorable to human happiness, not even from personal
attachment to the monarch,) but because they see in the increased power of the
monarch the source of additional weight and SPLENDOUR to those (that is,
themselves) who surround the throne, and an increase of value to the favors
which the sovereign can confer; such as stars, garters, ribands, and titles."

But is a passion, childish from its vanity, and diabolical in its unfeeling
greediness, to be borne with any longer, when, not content with engrossing the
profits of office and the pageantry of state, it dares to speak of the middle
and lower classes, as beings scarcely deserving notice, as mere nuisances when
not employed in the servile office of administering to aristocratic pride.

Virtue is nobility. Personal merit, useful, generous, benevolent exertion, the
only honorable distinction. The trappings which every tailor can make to clothe
a poor puny mortal, add no real dignity. In ages of ignorance, they might
strike with awe. Those ages are no more. Nor will they ever return,
notwithstanding the efforts of petty despots, (fearing the loss of those
distinctions which they know they never earned), to keep the people in the
grossest ignorance.

God Almighty, who gives his sun to shine with as much warmth and radiance on
the cottage as on the palace, has dispensed the glorious privilege of genius
and virtue to the poor and middle classes, with a bounty perhaps seldom
experienced in any of the proud pretenders to hereditary or official grandeur.
Let us call to mind a few among the worthies who have adorned the ages that
have elapsed: Socrates; was he noble in the sense of a king at arms? Would he
have condescended to be bedizened with ribands, and stars, and garters? Cicero;
was he not a novus homo? a man unconnected with patricians, and deriving his
glory from the purest fountain of honor, his own genius and virtue? Demosthenes
would have scorned to owe his estimation to a pedigree.

Who were the great reformers, to whom we of England and all Europe are
indebted for emancipation from the chains of superstition? ERASMUS and LUTHER;
Erasmus, as the monks of his day objected to him, laid the egg, and Luther
hatched it. But was it Archbishop Erasmus? Lord Luther, Marquis Luther, Sir
Martin Luther? Did they, either of them, seek the favor of courts? Were they
not among the swinish multitude?

Thomas Pain contributed much, by his Common Sense, to the happy revolution in
America. I need not observe, that he had nothing of the luster of courts or
nobility to recommend him. The virulent malice of courtiers and venal
scribblers has blackened him as they once blackened Luther, when they asserted
of him, that he was actually a devil incarnate, disguised in the shape of a
monk with a cowl. I do not advert to any of his subsequent publications. I only
say, if they are so contemptible as they are said by courtiers and ^ristocrats
to be, why not undertake the easy task of refuting him? Bloody wars and
prosecutions are no refutation.

"Who is this Luther?" (said Margaret, governess of the Netherlands.) The
courtiers around her replied, "He is an ILLITERATE MONK." "Is he so? (said
she.) I am glad to hear it. Then do you, gentlemen, who are not illiterate, who
are both learned and numerous, do you, I charge you, write against this
illiterate monk. That is all you have to do. The business is easy; for the
world will surely pay more regard to a great many scholars, and great men, as
you are, than to one poor illiterate monk."

Many did write against him, and poured forth the virulence of a malice
unchecked by truth, and encouraged by crowned heads, But Luther prevailed, and
we Englishmen have reason to celebrate the victory of truth and virtue over
corrupt influence and cruel persecution.

The greatest scholars, poets, orators, philosophers, warriors, statesmen,
inventors and improvers of the arts, arose from the lowest of the people. If we
had waited till courtiers had invented the art of printing, clock-making,
navigation, and a thousand others, we should probably have continued in
darkness to this hour. They had something else to do, than to add to the
comforts and conveniences of ordinary life. They had to worship an idol, with
the incense of flattery, who was often much more stupid than themselves, and
who sometimes had no more care or knowledge of the people under him, or their
wants, than he had of arts or literature.

The education of the middle classes is infinitely better than the education of
those who are called great people. Their time is less consumed by that vanity
and dissipation which enfeebles the mind, while it precludes opportunity for
reading and reflection. They usually have a regard to character, which
contributes much to the preservation of virtue. Their honor and integrity are
valued by them, as pearls of great price. These are their stars, and these
their coronets. They are for the most part attached to their religion. They are
temperate, frugal, and industrious. In one particular, and that one adds a
value above all that courts can give, they greatly excel the GREAT, and that
particular is SINCERITY. They are in earnest in their words and deeds. They
have little occasion for simulation and dissimulation. Courtiers are too often
varnished, factitious persons, whom God and nature never made; while the people
preserve the image unessaced, which the Supreme Being impressed when he cerated
MAN.

SECTION XVII. On debauching the Minds of the rising Generation and a whole
People, by giving them Military Notions in a free and commercial Country.
IN proportion as great men refuse to submit to reason, they are inclined to
govern by violence. They who have the sword in their hands, are unwilling to
wait for the slow operation of argument. The sword cuts away all opposition. No
troublesome contradiction, no unwelcome truth, will impede the progress of him
who uses the ratio ultima regum, and mows down all obstacles with the scythed
car.

Hence the abettors of high prerogative, of absolute monarchy, and
aristocratical pride, always delight in war. Not satisfied with attacking
foreign nations, and keeping up a standing army even in time of peace, they
wish, after they have once corrupted the mass of the people by universal
influence, to render a whole nation military. The aggregate of military force,
however great, being under their entire direction, they feel their power
infinitely augmented, and bid defiance to the unarmed philosopher and
politician, who brings into the field truth without a spear, and argument
unbacked with artillery.

But such a system tends to gothicize a nation, to extinguish the light of
learning and philosophy, and once more to raise thick fogs from the putrid
pools of ignorance and superstition, the bane of all happiness, but the very
element of despotism.

The diffusion of a military taste among all ranks, even the lowest of the
people, tends to a general corruption of morals, by teaching habits of
idleness, or trifling activity, and the vanity of guady dress and empty parade.

The strict discipline which is found necessary to render an army a machine in
the hands of its directors, requiring, under the severest penalties, the most
implicit submission to absolute command, has a direct tendency to familiarize
the mind to civil despotism. Men, rational, thinking animals, equal to their
commanders by nature, and often superior, are bound to obey the impulse of a
constituted authority, and to perform their functions as mechanically as the
trigger which they pull to discharge their muskets. They cannot, indeed help
having a will of their own: but they must suppress it, or die. They must
consider their official superiors as superiors in wisdom and in virtue, even
though they know them to be weak and vicious. They must see, if they see at
all, with the eyes of others; their duty is not to have an opinion of their
own, but to follow blindly the behest of him who has had interest enough to
obtain the appointment of a leader. They become living automatons, and
self-acting tools of despotism.

While a few only are in this condition, the danger may not be great to
constitutional liberty; but when a majority of the people are made soldiers, it
is evident that the same obsequiousness will become habitual to the majority of
the people. Their minds will be broken down to the yoke, the energy of
independence weakened, the manly spirit tamed; like animals that once ranged in
the forest, delighting in their liberty, and fearless of man, caught in snares,
confined in cages, and taught to stand upon their hind legs, and play tricks
for the entertainment of the idle. They obey the word of command given by the
keeper of the menagerie, because they have been taught obedience by hunger, by
the lash of the whip, by every mode of discipline consistent with their lives,
which are saleable property. But they are degenerate, contemptible animals.
Compare a bird or a beast, thus broken down, with one of the same species
flying in clear expanse of air, or roaming in the forest. Their very looks
speak their degradation. The discipline of Mr. Astley causes the fiery steed to
bend his knees in apparent supplication. But how are the mighty fallen! when
the animal has broken from his obedience to nature, to fall down prostrate
before Mr. Astley.

Suppose a whole nation, thus tamed, and taught submission to the command of
one of their own species. Be it remembered, the horse, in learning unnatural
tricks, submits to one of another species, who is naturally his superior. But
suppose a whole nation, or at least the mass of the common people thus broken
in by a skilful rider. Will they not lose all energy? Will they dare, I do not
say to speak, but to think of liberty? No; they will sink to the rank of German
mercencries let out for hire, claiming no rights, enjoying no privileges above
the SWINE; a state of degradation at which the spirit of man, unspoiled by
despotic government, revolts; and rather than fall into which, every true
Englishman, from the palace to the hovel of the itinerant beggar, will be ready
to exclaim, in the language of the scriptures, "Why died I not from the womb?"

Is it not time, then, for the virtuous guardians of Heaven's best gift,
LIBERTY, to be alarmed, when they see a propensity in ministers, who have
gained enormous power and corrupt influence, to render a whole people military?
The gold chain of corruption is thus let down and ramified, in a million of
directions, among those who never thought of courts or courtiers; but enjoying
a noble independence, the independence of honest industry, chaunted their
carols at the plough and the loom, glorying in the name of Englishmen, because
England is free; and delighting in peace, because peace is the parent of plenty.

But, under the auspices of such a ministry, many an emulous esquire, hoping to
be distinguished and rewarded, in some mode or other, by court favors, fond of
the dress and name of a CAPTAIN, and the privilege of commanding with absolute
sway, bribes volunteers from behind the counter and the plough. He clothes them
in the finest frippery that his own or his lady's imagination can invent. He
himself parades at their head; a very pretty sight on a summer's day. And now
HE is distinguished as a SOLDIER, who before only figured as a hunter of hares
or foxes, and a prosecutor of poachers. Ambition, as well as vanity, begins to
fire his soul. The raising of so many men in his neighborhood must please the
minister; especially if the esquire uses the influence he gains over the
vicinity, in a proper manner, at a general election. If the esquire wants not
money, he may want honor. Then let the minister make him a baronet. If he has
no sons of his own in the army, navy, law, or church, he may have nephews or
cousins. If not these, he must have nominal friends, to direct on whom the
favors of ministers, though it proceed not from benevolence, must flatter
pride, and add to rural consequence.

The whole of the military system is much indebted for its support, to that
prevailing passion of human nature, Pride. Politicians know it, and flatter
pride even in the lowest of the people. Hence recruiting-officers invite
gentlemen only, who are above servile labor. "The vanity of the poor men (says
a sagacious author) is to be worked upon at the cheapest rate possible. Things
we are accustomed to we do not mind, or else what mortal, that never had seen a
soldier, could look, without laughing, upon a man accoutred with so much paltry
gaudiness and affected finery? The coarsest manufac^ (...) that can be made of
wool, dyed of a bri^^-dust color, goes down with him, because it is in
imitation of scarlet or crimson cloth; and to make him think himself as like
his officer (...) it is possible, with little or no cost, instead of silver or
gold lace, his hat is trimmed with white or yellow worsted, which in others
would deserve bedlam; yet these fine allurements, and the noise made upon a
calfskin, have drawn in and been the destruction of more men in reality, than
all the killing eyes and bewitching voices of women ever slew in jest. Today
the swineherd puts on his red coat, and believes every body in earnest that
calls him gentleman; and two days after, Sergeant Kite gives him a swinging rap
with his cain, for holding his musket an inch higher than he should do.... When
a man reflects on all this, and the usage they generally receive -- their pay
-- and the care that is taken of them when they are not wanted, must he not
wonder how wretches can be so silly, as to be proud of being called gentlemen
soldiers? Yet if they were not so called, no art, discipline, or money, would
be capable of making them so brave as thousands of them are.

When all the base arts which custom is said to have rendered necessary, are
practiced only to raise and support a regular army, perhaps they might, however
reluctantly, be connived at by the watchful friend of freedom. But when the
major part of the laboring poor, and all the yeomanry, are made gentlemen
soldiers, merely to support a MINISTER, it is time for every virtuous and
independent mind to express, as well as feel, ALARM.

It appears from the above cited passage of an author who had anatomized human
nature, to find out its most latent energies, that the spirit of pride is
rendered, by artful statesmen, the chief means of supplying an army. But the
spirit of pride is in fact the spirit of despotism; especially when it is that
sort of pride which plumes itself on COMMAND, on external decoration, and the
idle vanity of military parade.

When this pride takes place universally in a nation, there will remain little
industry, and less independence. The grand object will be to rise above our
neighbors in show and authority. All will bow to the man in power, in the hope
of distinction. Men will no longer rely on their own laborious exertions; but
the poor man will court, by the most obsequious submission, the favor of the
esquire; the esquire cringe to the next baronet, lord, or duke, especially if
he be a lord lieutenant of the county; and the baronet, lord, or duke, or
lieutenant of the county, will fall prostrate before the first lord of the
treasury; and the first lord of the treasury will idolize PREROGATIVE. Thus the
military rage will trample on liberty; and DESPOTISM triumphant march through
the land, with drums beating and colors flying.

SECTION XVIII. Levity, Effeminacy, Ignorance, and Want of Principle in private
Life, inimical to all public Virtue, and ^avorable to the Spirit of Despotism.
"THE constitution of the British government (says Bolingbroke) supposes our
KINGS may abuse their power, and our REPRESENTATIVES betray their trust, and
provides against both these contingencies. Here let us observe, that the same
constitution is very far from supposing the PEOPLE will ever betray themselves;
and yet this case is possible.

"A wise and brave PEOPLE will neither be cozened nor bullied out of their
liberty; but a wise and brave people may cease to be such; they may degenerate;
they may sink into sloth and luxury; they may resign themselves to a
treacherous conduct; or ABET THE ENEMIES OF THE CONSTITUTION, under a notion of
supporting the PRIFNDS OF GOVERNMENT; they may want the sense to discern their
danger in time, or the courage to resist when it stares them in the face.

"The Tarquins were expelled, and Rome resumed her liberty; Caesar was
murdered, and all his race extinct; but Rome remained in bondage. Whence this
difference? In the days of Tarquin, the people of Rome were not yet corrupted;
in the days of Caesar, they were most corrupt.

"A free people may be sometimes betrayed; but no people will betray
themselves, and sacrifice their liberty, unless they fall into a state of
UNNIVE^SAL CORRUPTION.

"As all government began, so all government must END by the people; tyrannical
government, by their virtue and courage; and even free governments, by their
VICE and BASENESS. Our constitution indeed makes it impossible to destroy
liberty by any sudden blast of popular fury, or by the TREACHERY OF THE FEW;
but if the MANY will concur with the FEW; if they will advisedly and
deliberately suffer their liberty to be taken away, by those on whom they
DELEGATE POWER TO PRESERVE IT, this no constitution can prevent. God would not
support his own theocracy against the concurrent desire of the children of
Israel; but gave them a king in his anger.

"How then should our human constitution of government support itself against
so universal a CHANGE, as we here suppose, in the TEMPER and CHARACTER of the
PEOPLE. It cannot be. We may give ourselves a tyrant, if we please. But this
can never happen, till the whole nation falls into a state of political
reprobation. Then, and not till then, political damnation will be our lot."

So far a political writer, who strenuously supports the cause of liberty, and
who has been, for that reason, lately depreciated. The words just now cited are
worthy the serious consideration of every man who wishes to leave the
inheritance of liberty, which he received from his forefathers, unimpaired to
his posterity. We are jealous of charters, privileges, and laws, but not
sufficiently aware of (...) which liberty (...) from degeneracy of manners. But
what avail laws preventing constructive treason, and bills of rights
ascertaining our liberties, without virtuous dispositions in the people?

-- Quid leges sine moribus
Vanae proficient?
HOR. A charter, as an advocate at the English bar expressed it, it is but a
piece of parchment with a bit of wax dangling to it, if men have lost that
energy of mind which is necessary to preserve the rights it was intended to
confer or secure. The trial by jury, the bulwark of liberty, as we have lately
experienced it in very remarkable instances, will be but a tottering wall, when
oaths have lost their sanctity, and when truth and justice are considered only
as phant^^s. What will avail a constitution, when every one is immersed in
private concerns, private pleasures, and private interest, acknowledging no
PUBLIC CARE, no general concern, nothing out of the sphere of domestic or
personal affairs, worthy of anxious regard?

I lately heard a sensible man affirm, in a tone of apparent despondency, that
in England there was, at the time he spoke, NO PUBLIC. I thought the expression
strong, and paused to consider it. I hope it was the ebullition of sudden
vexation at circumstances, which, when it was spoken, seemed to argue a general
insensibility in the PEOPLE to the blessings of a free country. It was uttered
at a time when a (...), real o^ pretended for the ^unisters of government,
seemed totall^ to overlook, in its mistaken ard^^, the PUBLIC WARFARE.

"There is NO PUBLIC," said the sagacious observer. I understood ^im to mean,
that from an ambitious attachment to party, in some of the higher ranks; to
self-interest, in some of the lower; to general dissipation, in all, the number
of independent, liberally minded, and well-informed men who zealously wished
and sought the public good and the happiness of man, was too inconsiderable to
effect any great and important purpose. Public virtue must arise from private.
Great pretensions to it may be made by the profligate, but they will be found
to originate in selfishness, in rancour, in envy, or some corrupt principle
inconsistent with a virtuous character and benevolent conduct.

If there be such a defection from private and public virtue, what is to
preserve a regard for the constitution, whenever ministerial influence shall so
far prevail as to render it the personal interest of great majorities of
POWERFUL, because RICH, men, to neglect it, or even to connive at infringements
upon it? If the people fall into universal corruption, the words liberty and
constitution will be considered by them as fit only to adorn a school-boy's
declamation. In such a state there will be no more security for the tenant of a
throne than of a cottage. A junto, that has no regard for either, and is solely
actuated by the love of power, its distinctions and emoluments may, by
distributing distinctions and emoluments on many, and by raising the hopes and
expectations of more, make the mass of the people themselves (thus corrupted at
the very fountainhead) become the instruments of annihilating the best part of
the constitution. A limited monarch, whose throne is founded on the basis of a
people's affection, and a judicious preference both of his person and form of
government, will be as reasonably anxious as any among the people can be, to
guard against the prevalence of such corruption, and the success of such
corruptors. It is the cause of courts, if they mean to consult their stability,
as much as it is of popular conventions, to preserve public virtue, and prevent
the people from losing all sensibility to the value of a free constitution, the
liberty of the present age, and of ages to come.

I firmly maintain, that the prevention of this popular degeneracy is to be
effected, not by political artifices, not by prosecutions, not by sycophantic
associations of placemen, pensioners, and expectants of titles and emoluments,
but by reforming the manners of the people. Principles of religion, honor, and
public spirit must be cherished. The clergy must be independent, and the PULPIT
FREE. Books written without party views, intending to promote no interests but
those of truth and philanthropy, must not only not be checked by crown lawyers,
but industriously disseminated among the people. Religion must be considered by
the GREAT, not merely as a state engine, but as what it is, the source of
comfort and the guide of conscience. Its professional teachers must be advanced
from considerations of real merit and services, and not from borough interest,
and the prostitution of the pulpit to the unchristian purposes of ministerial
despotism.

No writings of skeptical or infidel philosophers do so much harm to christian
faith and practice, to religion and morality, as the using of CHURCH revenues
and CHURCH instruction as instruments of court corruption. The very means
appointed by God and the laws, for checking the depravity of the people,
contribute to it, when they appear to be considered by the GREAT as little more
than artifices of politicians, designed to keep the vulgar (as they are often
unjustly called) in subjection to wicked upstarts, possessed of temporary and
official power, by intrigue and unconstitutional influence.

It is certainly in the power of a well regulated government, by rendering the
CHURCH effective, and by good examples and sincere attachment to virtuous men
and virtuous principles, to correct the levity, effeminacy, and want of
principle in private life, which leads to the loss of liberty. The church will
be effective, as soon as the people are convinced that all preferments in it
are bestowed on those who have preached the gospel faithfully; and not on
time-servers, and the friends and relarelations of parasites, who have no other
view in seeking seats in the senate, but to serve a minister for their own
advantage. Till the people are convinced that an administration is sincere in
religion, they will be too apt to consider not only religion, but common
honesty, as an empty name.

The religious principle being thus destroyed by the greedy aspirants at
worldly grandeur, no wonder the people lapse into that dissolute co^^luct,
which seeks nothing seriously but selfish pleasure and private profit. Levity
of manners both proceeds from, and produces, defect of moral principle.
Erseminacy, the na^ural consequence of vice and lu^ury caused by defect of
mora^ principle, precludes courage, spirit, and all manly, virtuous exertion.
Ignorance must follow; for to obtain knowledge requires a degree of labor and
laudable application, which those who are sunk in indolence and sensuality will
never bestow. When ignorance is become general, and vice reigns triumphant,
what remains to oppose the giant Despotism, who, like a Colussus, strides over
the ^^g^y and insignificant slaves of oriental climes, from trampling on MEN in
countries once free?

Farewell, then, all that truly ennobles human nature. Pride, pomp, and CRUELTY
domineer without control. The very name of liberty becomes odious; and man,
degenerated, contents himself with the license to eat, drink, sleep, and die at
the will of an ignorant, base, libidinous superior. The sword rules absolutely.
Reason, law, philosophy, learning, repose in the tomb with departed liberty.
The sun of the moral world is extinguished; and the earth is overshadowed with
darkness and with death. Better had it been for a man not to have been born,
than born in a country rendered by the wickedness of government, corrupting and
enslaving a whole people, a HELL anticipated.

SECTION XIX. Certain Passages in Dr. Brown 's "Estimate" which deserve the
serious Consideration of all who would oppose the Subversion of a free
Constitution by Corruption of Manners and Principles, and by undue Influence.
FEW books have been more popular than BROWN's Estimate of the Manners and
Principles of the Times. He wrote with sincerity and ability; but his
unfortunate end, occasioned by mental disease, had a very unfavorable influence
on the circulation of his book, and his posthumous fame. Nothing can, however,
be more unreasonable, than to depreciate a book, allowed by all, at its first
appearance, to contain indisputable and important truth, because of the
misfortune, or even misconduct, of its author subsequent to its publication. I
confidently recommend the following passages to the consideration of every true
lover of that free constitution, which renders our country conspicuously happy
and honorable among the nations which surround it.

"The restraints laid on the royal prerogative at the revolution, and the
accession of liberty thus gained by the PEOPLE, produced two effects with
respect to parliaments. One was, that instead of being occasionally, they were
thenceforward annually assembled; the other was, that whereas on any trifling
offense given they had usually been intimidated or dissolved, they now found
themselves possessed of new dignity and power; their consent being necessary
for raising annual supplies.

"No body of men, except in the simplest and most virtuous times, ever found
themselves possessed of power, but many of them would attempt to turn it to
their OWN PRIVATE ADVANTAGE. Thus the parliament, finding themselves of weight,
and finding, at the same time, that the disposal of all lucrative employments
was vested in the crown, soon bethought themselves, that in exchange for their
concurrence in granting supplies, and forwarding the measures of government, it
was but equitable that the crown should concur in vesting them or their
dependents with the lucrative employments of state.

"If this was done, the wheels of government ran smooth and quiet; but if any
large body of claimants was dispossessed, the public uproar began, and public
measures were obstructed or overturned.

"William the Third found this to be the natural turn, and ^^t himself like a
politician, to oppose it; he therefore silenced all he could by place^ and
pensions, and hence the origin of MAKING OF PARLIAMENTS."

This making of parliaments, I contend, is fundi nost^ calamitas, the origin of
all our present political evil; it defeated the good purposes of the
revolution, and tended to introduce the despotism of the Stuarts, under the
mask of liberty. It arose from the corruption of the people; and has gone on
augmenting it to this very day.

"Vanity, luxury and effeminacy (proceeds Dr. Brown) increased beyond all
belief within these thirty years; as they are of a selfish, so are they of a
craving and unsatisfied nature. The present rage of pleasure and UNMANLY
DISSIPATION has created a train of new necessities, which (...) their demands
outstrip every supply.

"And if the great principles of religion, honor, and public spirit are weak or
lost among us, what effectual check can there be upon the GREAT, to control
their unwarranted pursuit of LUCRATIVE EMPLOYMENTS, for the gratification of
these unmanly passions?

"In a nation so circumstanced, it is natural to imagine that, next to GAMING
and RIOT, the chief attention of the GREAT WORLD must be turned on the business
of ELECTION JOBBING, of SECURING COUNTIES, controling, bribing or BUYING
BOROUGHS; in a word, on the possession of a great parliamentary interest.

"But what an aggravation of this evil would arise, should ever those of the
highest rank, though PROHIBITED BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, insult the laws, by
interfering in elections, by soliciting votes, or procuring others to solicit
them, by influencing elections in an avowed defiance of their country, and even
selling vacant seats in parliament to the BEST BIDDER."

Would not this be TREASON against the constitution? a more dangerous and
heinous political crime than any that have been prosecuted by
attornies-general? Does not this directly destroy the democratical part of the
system, and establish a power, independent both of the monarch and the people?
Are not both, therefore, interested in putting a stop to such gross violations
of law and equity?

"What (continues Dr. Brown) can we suppose would be the real drift of this
illegitimate waste (among the GREAT) of time, honors, wealth, and labor? Might
not the very reason publicly assigned for it be this: 'that they may strengthen
themselves and families, and thus gain a lasting interest (as they call it) for
their dependents, sons, and posterity?' -- Now, what would this imply but a
supposed right or privilege of DEMANDING LUCRATIVE EMPLOYS, as the chief object
of their views? -- We see then, how the political system of self-interest is at
length completed.

"Thus faction is established, not on ambition, but on AVARICE: on AVAIRCE and
RAPACITY, for the ends of DISSIPATION.

"The great contention among those of family and fortune, will be in the affair
of ELECTION INTEREST: next to effeminate pleasure and gaming; this (for the
same end as gaming) will of course be the capital pursuit; this interest will
naturally be regarded as a kind of family fund, for the provision of the
younger branches.

"In a nation so circumstanced, many high and important posts, in every public
and important profession, must of course be filled by men, who, instead of
ability and virtue, plead this interest (in elections) for their BEST TITLE.

"Thus, in a time when science, capacity, courage, honor, religion, public
spirit are rare, the remaining FEW who possess these virtues, will often be
shut out from these stations, which they would fill with honor; while every
public and important employ will abound with men, whose manners and principles
are of the newest fashion.

"Is not the parliamentary interest of every powerful family continually rung
in the ears of its branches and dependents? And does not this inevitably tend
to relax and weaken the application of the young men of quality and fortune,
and render every man, who has reliance on this principle, less qualified for
those very stations, which by this very principle he obtains. For why should a
youth of family or fashion, (thus he argues with himself), why should he submit
to the drudgery of schools, colleges, academies, voyages, campaigns, fatigues,
and dangers, when he can rise to the highest stations by the smooth and easy
path of parliamentary interest?

"Where effeminacy and selfish vanity form the ruling character of a people,
then those of high rank will be of all others most vain, most selfish, most
incapable, most effeminate.

"Such are the effects of the prevailing principle of self-interest in high
life. But if we take into the account all that despicable train of political
managers, agents, and boroughjobbers, which hang like leeches upon the GREAT,
nor ever quit their hold till they are full gorged, we shall then see this
reigning evil in its last perfection. For here, to incapacity and demerit, is
generally added INSOLENCE. Every low fellow of this kind looks upon the man of
genius, capacity, and virtue, as his natural enemy. He regards him with an evil
eye; and hence undermines or defames him; as one who thwarts his views,
questions his title, and endangers his expectations."

In another place, the fame author very plainly deduces the corruption of the
youth of the nation, the young nobility and gentry in particular, from
parliamentary corruption.

"Notwithstanding the privilege vested in the commons of commanding the purses
of their constituents, it is not difficult to point out a situation, where this
privilege would be nothing but a name. And as in the last century the regal and
democratic branches by turns bore down the constitution, so, in such a
situation as is here supposed, the real danger, though hidden, would lurk in
the aristocratic branch, which would be secretly bearing down the power both of
the king and the people.

"The matter may be explained in a small compass. Cannot we put a case, (...)
which the parliamentary interest of the great nobility might swallow up the
house of commons? Members might be elected, indeed; and elected in form too.
But by whom might they be really elected? By the free voice of the people? No
impartial man would say it. It were easy to suppose thirty or forty men, who,
if wanted, might go nigh to command a majority in the lower house. The members
might seem to be the representatives of the people; but would be, in truth, a
great part of them, no more than the commissioned deputies of their respective
chiefs, whose sentiments they would give, and whose interests they would pursue.

"Thus, while power would, in appearance, be centering in the lower house, it
would in reality be lurking in the higher.

"This state of things might not perhaps result from any design in the
aristocratic branch to destroy the constitution. They might have no farther
views than those of gain, vanity, or pleasure. Notwithstanding this their
conduct might have those effects which their intentions never aspired to. Let
us consider the most probable effects.

"The first fatal effect which offers itself to observation is, that the
consciousness of such an increasing and exorbitant power, which the lords might
acquire in the house of commons, would destroy all honest ambition in the
younger gentry. They would know, that the utmost point they could hope to
arrive at would only be to become the deputy of some great lord, in a county or
borough. All the intentions of such a post can be answered by ignorance and
servility, better than by genius and public spirit. People of the latter stamp,
therefore, would not naturally be appointed to the task; and this, once known,
would check the growth of genius and public spirit throughout the nation. The
few men of ability and spirit that might be left, seeing this to be the case,
would naturally betake themselves to such private amusements as a free mind can
honestly enjoy. All hope, and therefore, by degrees, all desire of serving
their country, would be extinguished.

"Thus HONEST ambition would naturally and generally be quenched. But even
where ambition continued, it would be perverted. Not useful, but servile
talents would be applauded; and the ruling pride would be, not that of freemen,
but of slaves."

The above remarks were made long before American independence was established,
the French revolution thought of, or the discussions on the subject of
parliamentary reform became general. The author wrote the pure result of
impartial observation; and what he wrote deserves the serious attention of all
HONEST men, all good members of the community. I will make no comments upon it,
but leave it to operate on the mind with its own force.

SECTION XX. On several Subjects suggested by Lord Melcombe 's "Diary,"
particularly the Practice of bartering the Cure of Souls for the Corruption of
Parliament.
IT is very desirable, that country gentlemen, who are often inclined to show a
blind attachment to ministers, as if LOYALTY were due to the servants of a
court as well as to the master, would peruse, with attention, the Diary of Lord
Malcombe. There they are admitted behind the curtain, and even under the stage,
to see the machinery. There they behold filthy workmen, dirty wheels within
wheels, every thing offensive to the eye, and all busy for hire to produce a
specious, outside show on the stage, for the amusement of the spectators, while
the shew-men pocket the pence. It would have been worth the while of courtiers
to have paid the price of a campaign in Flanders, and the subsidy of a German
prince, to have suppressed the publication of Lord Malcombe's Diary. The
secrets of the ministerial conclave are there laid open; and the light and
stench are no less disgustful man those which strike the senses on the opening
of a jakes or a common sewer. Nothing but the most selfish coverousness, the
weakest vanity, the meanest, di^^iest, most villainous of the passions! No
regard for the happiness of the nation, much less for the happiness of mankind;
one general struggle, by artifice and intrigue, not by honorable and useful
exertions, for power, profit, and titles! It might be supposed, that the
parties concerned were banditti, contending in a cave about the division of
plunder. How are the words lord and duke disgraced and prostituted, when
prefixed to miscreants warmly engaged in such transactions! Such men are truly
levellers, the enemies of the peerage, the involuntary promoters of equality!
In a greedy rapaciousness for themselves, they forget not only the good of
their country and mankind, but the interest of their own privileged order.

When little and base minds, like the heroes of Bubb Doddington's Diary, be a
rule, every thing, even religion itself, becomes an instrument of corruption.
It is well understood by every body, that church preferments, even with cur^ of
souls, have long been used to secure the interest of courts in venal boroughs;
but the following passage contains a curious proof of it, under the hand of
Lord Malcombe, and under the authority of the then prime minister, the Duke of
Newcastle.

"December the 11th, 1753," says Lord Melcombe, "I saw the Duke of Newcastle. I
told him, that in the election matters (of Bridgwater and Weymouth) those who
would take money I would pay, and not bring him a bill; those that would not
take, he must pay; and I recommended my two parsons of Bridgwater and Weymouth,
Buroughs and Franklin: -- he entered into it very cordially, and assured me
they should have the first crown livings that should be vacan^ in those parts,
if we would look out and se^d him the first intelligence. -- I said, I must
think, that so much offered, and so little asked, in such hands as theirs, and
at a time when boroughs were particularly marketable, could not fail of
removing, at least, resentments, and of obtaining pardon..... His Grace was
very hearty and cordial.

"29th. Went to the Duke of Newcastle, and got the living of Broadworthy for
Mr. Buroughs.

"March 21. Went to the Duke of Newcastle -- told him I was come to assure him
of my most dutiful affection and sincere attachment to him, having no
engagements to make me look to the right or the left.... I engaged to choose
two members for Weymouth, which he desired might be a son of the Duke of
Devonshire, and Mr. Ellis of the admiralty. I supposed he would confirm that
nomination -- but that was nothing to me. -- Tuus, O dux magne, quid optes
Explorare labor; MIHI jussa capessere fas est.
VIRG.
He might name whom he pleased. -- Mr. Pelham told me the KING asked him if I
seriously designed to endeavor to keep Lord Egmont out of Bridgwater. Mr.
Pelham told his Majesty that he thought I would; that I desired him to lay me
at the king's feet, and tell him, that as I found it would be agreeable to his
majesty, I would spare neither pains nor expense to exclude him. The Duke of
Newcastle said he had feet, how handsome my proceedings had been; that this was
the most noble that could be imagined!... I said, What if I came into the place
Sir Thomas Robinson left? He considered a little, and said, Very well, pray go
on. I said I would particularly support him in the house where he would chiefly
want it. He said he knew I would. I said, There is my old place -- Treasurer of
the Navy; I should like that better than any thing. But I added, Why should I
enter into these things; I leave it wholly to your grace. He said the direction
of the house of commons was fallen upon him -- therefore he could not choose by
affection, but must comply with those who could support him there. I said I
understood so; and that I thought I might pretend to some abilities that way;
that in the opposition, I was thought of some use there; that in court, indeed,
I never undertook much, because he knew I never was supported: but now, when I
should be supported, I hoped I might pretend to be as useful there as my
neighbors. He said it was incontestably so. I said, that considering that I
chose six members for them at my own great expense, I thought the world in
general, and even the gentlemen themselves, could not expect that their
pretensions should give me the exclusion. He said, that what I did was very
great! that he often thought with surprise at the ease and cheapness of the
election at Weymouth! that they had nothing like it! I said, I believed there
were few who could give his majesty six members for nothing. He said he
reckoned five, and had put down five to my account.... I said I must be excused
from talking any more about myself; that I left it entirely to him and to the
King; that I was fully determined to make this sacrifice to his Majesty; that I
knew I had given no just cause of offense, but that I would not justify (...)
with his Majesty; that it was enough that he was displeased, to make me think
that I was in the wrong, and to beg him to forget it: I would not even be in
the right against him; and I was very sure I would never again be in the wrong
against him, for which I hoped his Grace would be my caution. He said he would
with all his heart. He took me up in his arms, and kissed me twice, with strong
assurances of affection and service."

A few days after, this honest man went to Bridgwater to manage the election,
and thus proceeds his Diary.

"April 14, (...), 16. Spent in the infamous and disagreeable compliance with
the low habits of venal wretches," the electors of Bridgwater.

If the men of Bridgwater, urged perhaps by want, were venal wretches, what
must we think of the Duke of Newcastle and Lord Melcombe? I hope my reader will
pause, and ponder the words of the preceding passage. They furnish a great deal
of matter for very serious reflection to those who regard the true interests
either of church or state.

Lord Melcombe's Diary was much read when it first came out; but it has since
fallen into neglect. Events, however, have happened in the political world,
which render it extremely interesting at the present period. In consequence of
the French revolution, much pains have been taken to decry the people, and
extol the aristocratical part of society. The tide has run wonderfully, in
consequence of false alarms and ministerial artifices, in favor of courts and
courtiers. The people have been called, not only venal wretches, but the
swinish multitude. Long and tiresome books have been written to run down the
people, as destitute of virtue, principle, of every thing honest and honorable,
and that can give them any right to interfere with the grand mysteries of a
cabinet. But he who reads and considers duly the very striking anecdotes and
conversations in Lord Melcombe's Diary, will see, that, in order to find
venality in its full growth, and survey sordidness in its complete state of
abomination, it will be necessary to turn from low to high life.

The people are often turbulent and indiscreet in their transactions, but they
are always honest and always generous. They feel strongly for the cause of
humanity and justice. They have a noble spirit, which leads them to view
meanness and sinister conduct with detestation. But is there any of this manly
independence, this honest openness, this regard for the rights and happiness of
man, among those whom Lord Melcombe, so unfortunately for the great vulgar, has
introduced to public notice? There is all the deceit in his own character,
which would denominate a man a swindler in the commercial walks of life. All
the transactions of the junto are conducted with the timidity, secrecy,
duplicity of a nest of thieves, mutually fearing and fawning, while they hate
and despise each other from their heart's core.

On the practice of purchasing votes in boroughs, by bartering the cure of
souls, the most sacred charge, if there be any thing sacred in human affairs, I
shall expatiate more at large in a future Section.

This Bubb Doddington, after selling himself, betraying the prince, and
offering his six members to the best bidder, was made a lord. He was created
Baron of Melcombe Regis, as a reward for such prostitution of principles as
ought to have caused him to be branded in the forehead with a mark of indelible
infamy.

But can we suppose that there has been but one Bubb Doddington in this
country? one Newcastle? I wish the supposition were founded in probability. It
would be the simplicity of idiotism to suppose, that Bubb Doddington has not
exhibited in his Diary a picture of parasitical courtiers, in all times and
countries, where corruption is the main principle of administration.

If such men should, in any country of Europe, influence the councils of
princes, and manage the popular assemblies, would there not be reason to be
alarmed for the best constitution ever devised by human wisdom? Such men hate
the people. They love nothing but themselves, the emoluments of places, the
distinction of titles, and the pomp and vanity of the courts in which they
flatter and are flattered. They will ever wish for a MILITARY government, to
awe the saucy crowd, and keep them from intruding on their own sacred
privileges and persons. The Herculean hand of a virtuous people can alone
cleanse the Augean stable of a corrupted court formed of miscreant toad-eaters
like Lord Melcombe.

SECTION XXI. On choosing rich Men, without Parts, Spirit, or Liberality, as
Representatives in the National Council.
IT has been long observed, that none are more desirous of increasing their
property than they who have abundance. The greatest misers are those who
possess the greatest riches. None are fonder of the world than they who have
engrossed a large share of it. If they should acknowledge that they have enough
money, yet they cannot but confess, at the same time, that they think
themselves entitled, in consequence of their property, to civil honors, power,
and distinction. They have a kind of claim, in their own opinion, to court
favor; especially as they are ready to use the influence, which their riches
give them, in support of any minister for the time being, and in the general
extension of royal prerogative. Are such men likely to be independent members
of a senate, honestly following the dictates of their judgment or conscience,
and consulting no interest but that of MAN in general, and the people in
particular, by whom they are deputed? There are no men greedier of gain than
such men, and none more attached to those vain honors, which a minister bestows
in order to facilitate the movements of his political machine. None will rake
so deeply in the dirt to pick up a penny as a rich miser; none will contend
more eagerly for a feather in the cap, than those whose minds are weak, empty,
and attached to the world by the consciousness of being, in great measure, its
proprietors.

But what is it to me, as an elector, that the man who solicits my vote has, by
great cunning, sordid arts, and insatiable avarice, accumulated great riches?
Has wisdom, has virtue, has knowledge, has philanthropy increased with his
increasing fortune? Uncommon success, enormous wealth, acquired in the short
space of half a human life, is a presumptive evidence of little principle in
the means of acquiring, and as little generosity in the modes of giving or
expending it. Perhaps he inherits his unbounded riches. What then? His
ancestors were probably knaves or muck-worms. In this case, he has not to plead
the merit of industry. His ancestors have left him vast sums of money; when
perhaps his own talents would scarcely have earned him a penny, or kept him out
of the parish poor-house.

Nevertheless, because he is rich, though totally destitute of parts and
virtue, he stands forward boldly as a candidate to represent a city or a
county. He finds thousands ready to clamor on his side, and to give him their
vote. He can treat bountifully, open houses, and give away ribands plentifully.
Therefore he is constituted a senator, a national counselor, commissioned to
vote away the people's money, and to decide on the most important questions of
constitutional liberty.

What can he do but put himself into harness, and be driven his daily stage, by
the political coachman, the prime minister? He cannot go alone. He has not
sense enough to judge for himself in the smallest difficulty. He has not spirit
enough to preserve his independence; therefore he will consider himself merely
as a puppet, to be moved by the higher powers, at their will; a stop-gap, to
fill up a place which might be occupied by an abler member, whose virtues and
talents might serve the public indeed, but would render him troublesome to
those who gladly dispense with all virtuous interference.

Let us suppose, for argument sake, four such poor creatures (such I call them,
though rich in gold) chosen to represent the city of London, the grand emporium
of the world, and, from the number of its inhabitants, claiming a fuller
representation than any part of the nation. I own the supposition is most
disgraceful; for it can never happen, one would think, that such a city should
not supply men of the first abilities, for a trust so important and so
honorable. But let us suppose the CITY, from a system of manners favored by,
and favorable to, ministerial corruption, so far degraded as to choose four men
of very moderate abilities and characters, merely because they happen to be
rich contractors, and of sycophantic dispositions, likely to pursue their own
interest by servilely obeying the beck of a minister.

Suppose them once in for seven years. The taverns are now shut up, the
advertisements, the canvassing all forgotten, and they commence as arrant
courtiers as the meanest tool of power, put, by a paltry lord, into a rotten
borough of Sussex, Wiltshire, or Cornwall.

But mark the mischief. As they nominally represent the first city in the
world, the measures which they vote for, (because they are bidden, and hope for
contracts and baronetages), are supposed, by foreigners at least, to have the
concurrence of the most important part of the British empire. Though the
minister may despise them from his heart, personally, yet he avails himself of
that weight which the place they represent gives them in the eyes of strangers.
"The GREAT city is with him," (in the only place he pretends to know it, the
house of representatives).

Their ignorance, their meanness, and their sycophancy, have another effect,
highly injurious to all plans of constitutional reformation. "Here (says the
courtier) are four men sent by the first city in the world. Are they better
senators, or more respectable men, than those who are sent from Old Sarum, or
any of the boroughs inhabited by beggars, and purchased by lords, as a
lucrative speculation?" The probability is, (he will say of them), that, with
more greediness after gain, from the sordid habits of their youth, they have
less of the accomplishments and liberality of gentlemen. Their eagerness to
raise their families, renders them more tractable tools in the hands of a
skilful minister, than those whose families are already raised, and who,
however they may place themselves under the guidance of the peerage, have had
an education which ought to have given them enlarged minds and sentiments of
honor.

Thus the friend to despotic principles, and the opposer of parliamentary
reform, draws an argument from the meanness of rich men, (sent by great cities
to parliament merely because they are rich), against all improvement of the
representation. The boroughs, he alleges, send at least gentlemen, and
well-informed men, though in circumstances comparatively indigent; whereas
these great commercial bodies, placing all excellence in the possession of
superior wealth, depute men as senators, who are unqualified for any department
beyond the warehouse or the counting house, whose views are confined, and
purposes habitually sordid and felfish. He urges, that, from the specimens
afforded by great cities, there is no reason to conclude, that the extension of
the right of suffrage would render the representative body more virtuous or
enlightened. He doubts whether it would be favorable to liberty. If great
bodies depute men only for their property, since they who have most usually
want most, none will be readier to sell themselves and their constituents to a
minister, for a feather or sugar-plumb, than the representatives of great
bodies, delegated to parliament merely because they have inherited or acquired
excessive riches, with scarcely any ideas beyond the multiplication-table.

Men deputed to parliament, should certainly be far above want; but I contend
that riches, independent of personal merit, can never be a sufficient
recommendation. It is the most important trust that can be reposed in man. It
requires a most comprehensive education, strong natural abilities, and, what is
greater than all, a just, honest, upright heart, with a manly firmness, and an
enlarged philanthropy.

Can there be any difficulty in finding, at any time, four men of such
character in the city of London, or two such in any county of England?
Certainly not; especially when the corrupting idea shall be exploded, that
PROPERTY is the best qualification of a national counselor and lawgiver. Able
and honest men are not the most inclined to thrust themselves forward, and to
obtrude themselves, much less to enter into competition, when all the influence
of riches and ministerial favor will be exerted to traduce their character, to
frustrate their endeavors, and send them back to private lise with their
fortunes injured, and their tranquillity disturbed. The electors must search
for such men, and draw them from their virtuous obscurity. Thus honored, they
will go into the senate with the pure motives of serving their country and
mankind, and return with clean hands, sufficiently rewarded by the blessings of
the people.

The city of London, and all great cities, as well as counties, are to be most
seriously exhorted to consider the importance of the trust they delegate at an
election, and to choose men of known abilities, and experienced attachment to
the cause of the people. They should beware of men, however opulent and
respectable in private life, who can have no other motive for obtruding on
public life, for which they are unqualified, but to raise themselves, and
families to fortune and distinction, by selling their trust to a minister. Such
men can never be friends to liberty and the people. They contribute, by means
of their property, to the general system of corruption, and, perhaps without
knowing it, (for they know but little), promote, most effectually, the spirit
of despotism.

SECTION XXII. Of the despotic influence of great Merchants over their
Subalterns, of Customers over their Tradesmen, and rich trading Companies over
their various Dependents, in compelling them to vote for Court Candidates for
Seats in Parliament, merely to serve PRIVATE INTEREST, without the smallest
Regard for public Liberty and Happiness, or the Fitness or Unfitness of the
Candidate.
THE rottenness of corruption, originating from ministers, intoxicated with the
love of power, and greedy after the emoluments of office, is sometimes found
(especially under the influence of false alarms) to pervade the whole mass of
the people, and to infect the very heart of the body politic. The vitals of
liberty become tainted, and, without great efforts, a mortification may be
justly apprehended.

In this corrupt state, little despots, aspiring at court favor, hoping to draw
the notice of the minister on their faithful endeavors to serve him, arise in
almost every town and village of the country, and in every street of a great
city. They claim and exercise a jurisdiction over certain VASSALS, as they
think them, their tradesmen, their tenants, and all others, who derive
emoluments from them in the way of their business, or expect their custom and
countenance. If the VASSALS presume to act for themselves as MEN and freemen,
they lose their business, their dwelling places, their farms, and all chance of
acquiring a competency. The vengeance of the little despots pursues them; and
frequently quits not the chase, till it has hunted them down to destruction.

Even in the CITY OF LONDON, opulent as it is, and independent as it might be,
a city which used to be the first to stand up in defense of liberty, an
overbearing influence can find its way to the obscurest district, and insinuate
itself into the blindest alley. The Great Merchant or Manufacturer, who is
necessarily connected with many subordinate traders or workmen, considers the
influence he gains from extensive connections in business, as a very valuable
and vendible commodity at the market of a minister. Naturally wishing to make
the most of his trade, he resolves to treat this connection as a part of his
stock, and cause it to bring him an ample return. At least he will adventure.
It may be a prize to him, as it has been to many. Much depends on his own
prudential management of the commodity. It may lead to a valuable contract,
especially if kind fortune should kindle the flames of war; it may open the
path to court favors of various kinds; it may ultimately confer a seat in the
house, and perhaps a baronettage. This last honor is highly desirable, as it
removes at once the FILTH that naturally attaches to the very name of citizen,
dealer and chapman.

In the city of London, the majority of electors, who send the few members of
parliament allotted to it, are of the middle, and indeed of the inferior rank
of shopkeepers, rarely rising to the dignity of MERCHANTS, who reside at the
houses with great gates, or rather in the new squares, two or three miles
north-west of the polluted and polluting city: for such is the insolence of
little city DESPOTS who are in a very great way, that they commonly despise the
freedom of the city where their counting house stands, and where they gain
their plumbs. They do not condescend to be FREE of the city. They would
consider it as a degradation from their gentility to be LIVERYMEN and members
of a city company. Liverymen, indeed! What! great men, as all BANKERS are, East
India Directors, usurious money-lenders, living magnificently in Portland-place
or Portmansquare, or the grand avenues to them, to be LIVERYMEN! Horrid
degradation! The very idea is shocking to the spirit of despotism. It is time
enough to take up their FREEDOM of the city, when it is necessary, as
candidates, to possess that qualification. There are too many votes to make it
worth while to be a voter. These great men, therefore, view the electors as
subordinate persons, whom they may send on an errand to Guildhall to VOTE for
the minister's candidate, just as they would dispatch a clerk or porter to the
Custom-house to take a Custom-house-oath, or to do any JOB connected with the
low trade or manufacture which enables them to associate with the fine folk of
St. James's.

The elector who goes to the hustings must, indeed, vote upon his oath, that he
has received and will receive no BRIBE. He does not consider the lucrative
employments and the emoluments arising from the great man's custom, which would
be lost on disobedience, as a bribe, and therefore votes against his judgment,
conscience, and inclination, without a murmur; especially as his daily bread
may perhaps depend on his obsequiousness, and very likely the comfort and
security of a wife and large family.

This conduct of the GREAT MEN is not only unconstitutional and affronting to
the city, but as truly DESPOTIC in principle as any thing done by the Grand
Seignior. It is mean also and base to the last degree; for the great men
usually exert not their influence from friendship to the minister, or to a
candidate, or from any regard to a cause which they think connected with the
public good; but solely to serve themselves, to provide for poor relations, to
enrich or to aggrandize an upstart family, already rendered contemptible by
fungous pride.

The glorious rights and privileges of Englishmen, of which we read and hear so
much, are then to be all sacrificed to serve a man, who perhaps went out as a
writer to the East Indies, and returned in five or six years, laden with
riches; the injured widow and orphan in vain lifting up their heads, and
uttering their lamentations over the deaf ocean, while the spoiler is hastening
to Europe with that treasure which, as it was gained by extortion, is to be
expended in corruption.

Male parta male dilabuntur. A prodigious recommendation this, as a
representative in parliament of industrious citizens, who have toiled all their
lives at the counter, or in the manufactory, for a bare competence!

When NABOBS, as they are called, perfect ALIENS, recommended only by riches
and court influence, can seat themselves for great cities and counties as
easily as they used for Cornish BOROUGHS, there certainly is reason to fear
that the spirit of despotism has rapidly increased, and is proceeding to
destroy all remains of public virtue among the PEOPLE. The question naturally
arises, if a NABOB, a perfect alien, should ever be elected for the city of
London; whether, in so large a body as the freeborn citizens, and among the
livery of London, a man is not to be found who has served a regular
apprenticeship, gone through all the gradations of successful trade, and become
a member of the corporation, worthy to represent the first COMMERCIAL body in
the universe? Is it necessary to IMPORT members, as we do tea and ^^slins, from
China and Bengal? Honesty, virtue, independence, and abilities, must indeed be
rare qualities, from Templebar to Whitechapel, if not enough of them can be
found to constitute a representative in parliament. Must the English oak be
neglected, for EXOTICS raised rapidly in warm climates; and from the hasty
growth of which, very little is to be depended upon, when the wind and weather
assail them? A sad encouragement this to the young merchants, trade^^, and
manufacturers who enter regularly on business, and become freemen and
liverymen, to find that the most industrious and successful trader, and the
best character, cannot secure the honorable appointments and important trusts,
in the gift of their fellow-citizens! to find, that persons, who never served
apprenticeships, never carried on trade, never became free, never were
connected in the city companies, perfect strangers to the corporation, and
^vewed despisers of them ALL, shall be made, by the influence of a minister,
and the overbearing weight of oriental riches, LEGISLATORS for the emporium of
Europe! If such an event were ever to happen, it would discourage all virtue in
the rising generation of merchants, traders, and manufacturers; and teach them,
that every thing bows to ALMIGHTY MONEY, however obtained, and to COURT
INFLUENCE, always ready to favor overbearing and overgrown property. It would
be a m^^ancholy symptom of degeneracy among the people. It would show that the
manly spirit begin to fade and wither, as it has long done in Turkey and
Egypt, under the spirit of despotism.

It is truly alarming to all true Englishmen, to see great trading companies
using the influence which riches bestow, in seconding the views of a minister,
without the least attention to the public good, the preservation of liberty,
and the happiness of the human race. It is certain, that men united in
corporate bodies, will act in a manner which they would be ashamed of in their
private capacities; because, when so united, the responsibility appears to be
thrown from individuals on the AGGREGATE, and so attaching to every one, can be
fixed on none. Such bodies may be truly dangerous, when, from the hope of
titles and other favors, the members who compose them, are servilely devoted to
the minister; not indeed to the man, but to the favorite at court, who, from
his office, has in his hands the means of corruption, contracts, loans,
lottery-tickets, appointments in all the professions, and, above all, TITLES.

Such monopolizing fraternities attack liberty with the club of Hercules. They
rise with gigantic force. Reason, argument, the law and the constitution yield
to them, as the chaste before the wind. If they should not receive a powerful
check from the people at large, who have not yet fallen down worshippers of
GOLD, they must go on to establish, on the banks of the Thames, oriental
despotism: and it would not be wonderful to see the two sheriffs riding up
Cheapside on elephants, with the Lord Mayor borne in a palanquin, on the necks
of liverymen, hastening to prostrate themselves at the feet of a prime
minister, now become as great as the Emperor of China: it would not be
wonderful to see BANKERS erecting an oligarchy; the great house in
Leadenhall-street, a temple, and a golden calf the GOD.

SECTION XXIII. Of the Pageantry of Life; that it originates in the Spirit of
Despotism; and contributes to it, without advancing private any more than
public Felicity.
THE proud despise the people, represent them as little superior to the brutes,
laugh at the idea of their rights, and seem to think that the world was made
for themselves only; yet the proud are never satisfied but when they attract
the notice of this very people, by splendour, by ostentation, by the exercise of
authority over them, and by insolent airs of self-importance. The people, it
must be owned, in the simplicity of their hearts, gape with admiration at the
passing spectacle which insults them with its glare, and feel themselves
awe-struck with the grandeur of the cavalcade, which would trample them in the
dirt if they did not struggle to escape.

Politicians, observing this effect of finery and parade on the minds of the
unthinking, take care to dress up the idol, which they themselves pretend to
worship, and which they wish the people really to adore, in all the taudry
glitter of the lady of Loretto. They find this kind of vulgar superstition
extremely favorable to their interested views. Accordingly, in all despotic
countries, great pains are taken to amuse and delude the people with the
trappings of royalty. Popery prevailed more by the gaudiness of its priests and
altars, and the pomp of its processions, than from the progress of conviction.
The people, in such circumstances, have indeed the pleasure of fine sights; but
they usually pay much more dearly for them than for exhibitions at the theater;
and have this mortifying reflection, as a drawback from their pleasure, that
the payment is involuntary, and the sight a political delusion. It insults
their understandings, while it beguiles them of their rights; and takes from
them the earnings of their industry, while it teaches them to feel their own
insignificance.

But not only despots, courtiers, and public functionaries, think it proper to
strike the vulgar with awe, by purchasing finery of the builder, the tailor,
and the coach-painter; but the titled and the overgrown rich men, through every
part of every community, where family aggrandizement is procurable without
public services, or private or personal virtue. Riches, in such societies,
confer not only the means of luxurious enjoyment, but of civil superiority.
They assume a value not naturally their own, and become the succedanea of
wisdom, patriotism, valor, learning, and beneficence. The great object is
therefore to make an ostentation of riches, and to keep the people at a
distance, by dazzling their eyes with the blaze of equipage and magnificence.
As all the minuter luminaries gravitate to the sun in our solar system, so all
these aspirants at distinction and superior importance gravitate to royalty.
The crown is the glittering orb round which they ambitiously revolve. They
would all therefore contribute, if they were able, to add new brilliancy, new
heat, new influence and powers of attraction to their fountain of glory. They
turn to it as the sun-flower to the sun; and feel their colors brighter, and
their leaves invigorated, when a ray of favor falls upon them in a peculiar
direction. They cannot turn a moment to the people. The popular climate chills
them. The gales from this quarter are as the icy breezes from the frozen
regions of the north, where the genial beams of solar influence can scarcely
penetrate.

It may then be fairly presumed, that where all orders of the rich are vying
with each other to make a splendid appearance, even above their rank and means
of support, the spirit of the times, among these orders at least, is favorable
to the increase of court influence, and therefore to the spirit of despotism.

This rivalry in splendour is, in course, attended with great expense; an
expense, which, by reducing independent fortunes, diminishes independence of
spirit. They who are ruined in seconding the purposes of a court, naturally
think themselves entitle^ to indemnity from court favor. They become then,
merely tools of the minister, and dare not speak or act, in any instance,
against him, lest they renounce all hope of the glittering prize, the secret
douceur, the share of the loan, the lottery-tickets, the contract, the place,
the provision for a son, a nephew, a cousin, or the clerical tutor of the
family, who has perhaps grown gray in hungry hope, fed only by the meagre diet
of a ministerial promise.

Thus the rage for outshining others in externals, contributes to ruin both
fortune and principle. Add to this, that the prevalence of pageantry erects, in
society, a false standard of human excellence. Money becomes the deity. Money
is to give consequence, consideration, power. Money engrosses honor, which is
due, and has often been paid, to poverty, when adorned with art, virtue,
knowledge, or any other kind of personal merit. The man becomes nothing, and
money all. How must the human mind sink in such a conjuncture! Its noblest
energies cannot give it that estimation with mankind, which money, inherited by
a fool, or acquired by a knave, boldly claims and obtains. Then what
encouragement to young men to pursue improvement with any singular ardor?
Common seize are perhaps the best adapted to facilitate the acquisition
of money. Common seize and supers^^ial ornaments will form the whole of
education. In the mean time, MIND is neglected, and human nature degenerates.
Then steps in the despot. For the consequence, take the map, and look over the
countries which formed ancient Greece.

The pageantry of life, considered in a political view, as designed by the
grandees to awe the people, and keep them out of the PARK of selfish happiness,
which the grandees have fenced with high pales, and guarded with spring-guns
and man-traps, certainly may lay claim to the praise of deep cunning or worldly
wisdom. The pageantry of life may answer the purpose of the scenery of the
playhouse, and keep the vulgar from beholding the grandees of the world,
before they are dressed and made up for public exhibition. The galleries would
certainly lose much of their veneration for the theatrical kings, queens, and
nobles, if they were to see them behind the scenes, unbedize^^d. The pageantry
of life is therefore highly efficacious in deluding the vulgar. When not
carried too far, and abused for the purposes of oppression, it may sometimes
have its use. But is it, i^ general, conducive to the happiness of man; either
of those who are the actors in the pageant, and gratify their pride by
attracting the eyes of beholders; or of those who are led by it to a foolish
admiration and a tame acquiescence? Chains of gold and silver are no less
galling than fetters of iron.

Pageantry has contributed perhaps more than any other cause to the prevalence
of war, the bane of happiness, the disgrace of human nature. The grand
operations of war, the splendour of arms, the finery of military dress, have
been the amusements which despots have chiefly delighted in, whenever they
could behold them in perfect consistence with their own personal safety. The
pageantry of war dazzles young minds, and supplies both armies and navies with
willing victims. The ugliness of slaughter, the desolation of fertile plains,
the burning of peaceful villages, have all been unnoticed, amid the pride,
pomp, and circumstance of glorious war. The taste for false glare and deceitful
appearances of happiness and glory, has then been one of the most prolific
parents of human calamity. It has palliated robbery, and covered foul murder
with a glittering veil of tinsel.

All imposture is ultimately productive of evil. Pageantry, in a wretched world
like this, assumed by infirm mortals doomed shortly to die, cannot but be
deceitful. Its object is to put off false and counterfeit goods for true, There
is nothing in human affairs that will justify or support that glare of
happiness which the pageantry of the rich and great seek to display. The mask
is too small and too transparent to conceal the face of woe, the wrinkles of
decay and imperfection. In times of great ignorance, when scarcely any could
read, and very little communication was preserved among the different orders of
society, the mummery of courts and courtiers taught the vulgar to believe that
the internal organization of beings, so decorated externally, must be of a
superior nature. Princes and priests dressed themselves in grotesque garbs, in
a kind of masquerade habit, to carry on the delusion. But the reign of great
wigs, fur gowns, hoods, and cloaks, is nearly at its close. Gilded coaches,
horses richly caparisoned, gaudy hammer-cloths, fine footmen, endeavor to
supply their place; but they have lost much of their influence; and at last it
will be found, that to obtain the respect of the people, it will be necessary
to deserve it. No longer will the public admire the poor creature who rides
within the coach, for a splendour which he owes entirely to the manufacturer of
carriages, the painter, the carver, the gilder, the harness-maker, the
horse-dealer, and the groom. No longer will men unjustly transfer the praise
due to the tailor and hair-dresser, to the proud beau, who struts as if the
earth were not good enough to tread upon, nor the people whom he meets, to look
at as he passes them

The pageantry displayed by contractors, by placemen, by pensioners, by
commissaries, by all who fatten on the public spoils, may justly be considered
as an insult on the people. In times of great prosperity it might be winked at;
but in times of distress and adversity, it is offensive. It answers no good
end. It merely gratifies the vanitiy of those who make the ostentation. How can
they find in their hearts to throw away sums that would maintain thousands, in
setting off themselves, and making a figure, during an hour or two every day,
in Bond-street and Pall Mall, while they pass hundreds who are ready to perish
with cold and hunger, and cannot but know that the world abounds with instances
of extreme want and misery? The pageantry of the unfeeling great in France
aggravated the sense of suffering under its despotism; but, on the other hand,
in provoking the people by the insult, it accelerated and completed the
glorious revolution.

It is probable that every little wretch who decorates himself, and all that
belongs to him, with finery to the utmost of his power, would be a despot, if
he could, and dared. He shows all the dispositions to assume superiority
without merit. He certainly has a narrow and vain mind. He cannot be a
philosopher or philanthropist. With all his style and splendour in eating,
drinking, dwelling, dressing, and riding, we cannot admire him; then let us
pity, or deride.

Mere folly might be laughed at and neglected; but the folly I describe is
mischievous. It delights in oppression and war; and is one of the principal
promoters of the despotic spirit.

SECTION XXIV. Insolence of the higher Orders to the Middle Ranks and the Poor;
with their affected Condescension, in certain Circumstances, to the lowest of
the People.
PUBLIC corruption must produce private. When PRIDE is a ruling principle in
the conduct of state affairs, it must display itself in every part of domestic
life, accompanying its lordly possessor from the palace at St. James's and the
levee in Downing-street, to the rural mansion in the distant province, to the
convivial table, to the fireside, to the stable, and to the dog-kennel.

A due degree of self-respect, a dignified behavior, a demand of what is due
to oneself, attended with a cheerful payment of what is due to others, are
highly laudable, and have no connection with that senseless, sullen, cruel
pride, which marks the spirit of despotism.

This latter fort of pride is totally destitute of feeling for others. It
scarcely acknowledges the common tie of humanity. It stands alone, completely
insulated from all human beings below it, and connected only by a narrow
isthmus with those above it. It seems to think the world, and all that it
contains, created for its own exclusive gratification. The men and women in it
are merely instruments subservient to the will and pleasure of aristocratic
insolence.

With this idea of its own privileges and claims, it is no wonder that it shows
symptoms of extreme soreness and excessive irritation on the least opposition
to its will and pleasure. Accordingly, those of the human race, whose unhappy
lot it is to be domestic or menial servants to persons of either sex who swell
with the selfish pride of aristocracy, are kept in a state of abject servility,
compelled to watch the looks and motions of the demigod or demigoddess, and
spoken to with a severity of language seldom used to the horses in the stable,
or the dogs in the kennel. No attendance, by night or by day, can be
sufficient. Such superior beings cannot perform the most ordinary operations of
nature without assistance, which degrades both the giver and receiver. They
cannot put on their own clothes; but like eastern tyrants, surrounded by
slaves, stretch themselves on the couch of indolence, while their
fellow creatures, equals by nature, with trembling solicitude fasten a button,
or tie a shoe-string. The slightest error, delay, or accident, draws down
imprecations on the head of the offender, more terrible than the anathemas of a
pope.

If the little Mogul affect spirit, then he talks, in his ire, of horsewhips,
kicking down stairs, breaking every bone in the skin of the wretched operator,
who, as human nature is prone to error, may have deviated, in adjusting a curl,
from the standard of court propriety. When he has occasion to speak of one of
his servants, he commonly says, "one of my rascals did this or that;" and when
he speaks to them, especially on the slightest neglect or mistake, his choler
breaks out into oaths, curses, and epithets, expressive of bitterness and
venom, for which language has not yet found adequate terms. The genius of
Homer, which described the wrath of Achilles, can alone paint in color black
enough, the atrocity of the great man's ire. If it were not for that vulgar
thing law, which, on some occasions, makes no distinctions, the great man would
trample the little man who has buckled his shoe awry, out of existence.

To maintain that accuracy of dress and splendour of appearance, which so
superior a being thinks absolutely necessary, certain vulgar people, called
tradesmen, must inevitably be employed; and in this country of plebeian
liberty, they will no more work for a nabob, or a rich contractor, or a peer of
the realm, without payment, than for a French sans culottes. But woe betide
them, if they have the insufferable insolence to present their bills uncalled,
though their families are starving, and their landlords are ejecting them from
their habitations. "The insolence of the rascals! (exclaims the great man), let
them wait, let them call again, and think themselves well off if I do not
chastise them with a horsewhip, or kick them down stairs, for knocking at my
door, and bringing bills without order. But, do you hear: pay the scoundrels this
time, and mind, I never deal with them any more!" Then follows a volley of
oaths and curses on the heads of all such blackguards, low-lived wretches, scum
of the earth, thieves, and pickpockets, that do not know how to keep their
distance, and treat a gentleman with due respect. "Aye, (he adds), there we see
the spirit of the times, the effect of these cursed doctrines, which those
miscreants Lord Auckland's expression, when speaking of modern philosophers.
, the philosophers, have broached, to the destruction of all law, order, and
religion, throughout Europe."

The middle rank of people, who reside in his vicinity, he takes no more notice
of, than if they lived at the arctic or antarctic pole. He keeps them at a
distance, because, though not so rich as himself, yet claiming and supporting
the rank of gentlemen, they would be likely to approach too near, and perhaps
presume upon something of an equality, not only by nature, but by self-esteem
and institution. He passes his next-door neighbors in his carriage or on
horseback, in his daily rides, without condescending to turn his eyes upon
them. He does not recollect even their names. They may be very good sort of
people, for any thing he knows to the contrary; but really he has not the honor
of knowing them. A despot will not bear a rival near his throne; and therefore
he cannot bear any who, with inferior fortunes, might happen to equal him in
spirit, in sense, in behavior, and in education. But if there is any body in
the neighborhood very low indeed; so low, as to be removed from all possibility
of clashing with his importance, such an one he will make a companion, and show
him most mavelous marks of humility and condescension. Indeed, for the sake
of obtaining a little popularity, he will notice cottagers and poor children at
play, and make extremely free with clowns, jockies, grooms, huntsmen, and all
who have any thing to do with dog and horse flesh. But keep your distance, ye
little squires, parsons, and professional men, who make saucy pretensions to
knowledge or ingenuity. However, he can never be at a loss for company, while
he and his equals drive phaetons and four, to dine with each other at fifteen
miles distance, and while officers are quartered in the vicinity. He is
abjectly servile to his superiors, insolent and neglectful to the middle ranks,
and free and easy to the humble sons of poverty, who will bear a volley of
oaths whenever he thinks proper to discharge them, and who, if spit upon, will
not spit again, because they are his workmen or tenants.

He who can eradicate such insolence from a neighborhood, by treating it with
the contempt and ridicule which it deserves, certainly contributes to the
happiness of society. It is confined in its sphere of action; but it is the
same sort of despotism which ravages Poland, and deluges the earth with human
gore. In a free country like this, where law and liberty flourish, it is a
vulture in a cage, but still it is a vulture; and the little birds, to whom
nature has given the free air to range in, ought to unite in endeavoring to
destroy it.

Does any sensible man believe that such persons, if their power were equal to
their will, would suffer freeholders of forty shillings ayear, to vote for
members of parliament; or juries of twelve honest plebeians to decide in state
trials, where ministers are anxious (as they value their places) for a verdict
favorable to their administration? They would not permit, if they could help
it, the middle ranks to breathe the common air, or feel the genial sun, which
God has given to shine indiscriminately on the palace and the cottage. They are
as much enemies to kings as to the people, because they would, if possible, be
kings themselves; but as that is impossible, they crouch, like fawning
spaniels, to the hand which has it in its power to throw them a bone.

This description of persons is peculiarly formidable to liberty, because they
are insatiably greedy of power. From their order chiefly arise the purchasers
of boroughs, in which they traffic on speculation, like dealers in hops,
determined to re-sell their commodity, as soon as they can, to the best bidder.
They are also of that hardened effrontery which pushes its way to public
employment, stands forward at court, and, on all occasions, assumes that
importance, which, from the general diffidence of the better part of mankind,
is but too easily conceded to the most impudent pretensions. In consequence of
this unblushing assurance, this arrogant, audacious presumption, this hardened
temper, which can bear repulse without being abashed or dispirited, they
oftenest rise to the highest posts; and such as would be posts of honor, if
they were not filled by men who have not one quality of a beneficent nature, or
which deserves the esteem of their fellow creatures. But though they have no
inclination to do good; they acquire the power, which they fail not to
exercise, of doing much evil. They encourage arbitrary principles. They
depreciate the people on all occasions; and add weight and confidence to the
aristocratical confederacy. They may sometimes be men of parts. They are seldom
deficient in the graces of Lord Chesterfield. But they are hard-hearted,
selfish wretches, attached to the childish vanity of the world, and preferring
a title or a riband to the peace, the lives, the property, and the liberty of
their fellow-mortals; all which they are ready to sacrifice, even for the
chance of pleasing a prime minister, and obtaining some bauble, which reason
ever despises, when it is not the badge of experienced virtue. "One of these
(says an old writer Samuel Johnson; not the Lexicographer, whose religion was
often Popish superstition, and whose loyalty the most irrational Toryism. I
venerate his abilities; but detest his politics. He would have displaced the
Brunswick family for the Stuarts, if his power had kept pace with his
inclinations.
) values being called His Grace, or Noble Marquis," ( unideal names as they
are), "more than a million of lives, provided that in such a general
destruction he can save ONE; and to confirm themselves in their ill-gotten
honors, they generally hatch plots, suborn rebellions, or any thing that they
think can create business, keep themselves from being questioned, and THIN
mankind, whereby they lose so many of their enemies."

SECTION XXV. Of a Natural Aristocracy.
NOBILITY, according to the idea of the vulgar, both in high and low life, is
nothing more than RICHES that have been a long time in one family: but it often
happens that riches have been originally gained and preserved in one family by
sordid avarice, by mean and dishonest arts; such arts as are utterly
incompatible with true nobility, with superiority of intellects, united with
generosity of disposition.

Most of the titles of nobility, and other civil distinctions, were taken from
WAR: as a marquis, a duke, a count, a baron, a landgrave, a knight, an esquire.
The inventors of arts, the improvers of life, those who have mitigated evil and
augmented the good allotted to men in this world, were not thought worthy of
any titular distinctions. The reason is indeed sufficiently obvious: titles
were originally bestowed by despotic kings, who required and rewarded no other
merit but that which supported them by violence in their arbitrary rule. In
some countries they are now given, for the same reasons, to those who effect
the same purposes, not by war only, but by CORRUPTION.

Persons thus raised to civil honors, thus enriched by the long-continued favor
of courts, would willingly depreciate all dignity which is derived from GOD and
virtue only, unindebted to patents royal. They would create an artificial
preference to a distinguished few among the human race, which nature is for
ever counteracting, by giving superior abilities to those who are pushed down
among the despised and neglected many. This conduct is both unjust and
unnatural. It cannot be favorable to human happiness, because it is adverse to
truth, and does violence to the will of God manifested in the operations of
nature. In France it was carried to that extreme which brought it to its
termination. There is a tendency to carry it to extremes in all countries where
courts predominate. The friend of reason and of man will therefore endeavor to
convince the people, that an aristocracy, founded on caprice or accident only,
without any regard to superior abilities and virtues, is a fertile cause of
war, and all those evils which infest a great part of civil society.

That the BEST and ablest men should govern the worst and weakest, is
reasonable: and this is the arist^eracy appointed by God and nature. But what
do we mean when we say the best and ablest men? Do we mean men of the BEST
families; that is, men in whose families riches and titles have long been
conspicuous? By the ABLEST men, do we mean men who possess the greate^ power,
by undue influence, in borough and county elections, though the ex^^tion of
that power be strictly forbidden by the law and constitution? Or do we mean men
of honest, upright, and benevolent HEARTS; of vigorous, well-informed,
well-exercised understandings? Certainly the latter sort, which forms the
aristocracy established by God and nature. This is gold; the king's head
stamped upon it may make it a guinea. The other is only copper; and though the
same impression may be made upon it at the mint, it is still intrinsically
worth no more than a halfpenny.

But Mr. Burke has favored mankind with a description of what he calls a true
natural aristocracy.

The first requisite See Appeal from the new to the old Whigs, page 128.
, according to him, is " To be bred in a PLACE of estimation." Mr. Burke is a
good classical scholar, and often writes Latin in English Thus he uses the word
VAS^, which the common reader understands VERY GREAT, in its classical sense,
for desolate. Many other instances might ^e given.
. PLACE here is the Latin LOCUS, which every polite scholar has observed to
signify FAMILY. If I were to translate this little sentence into Latin, I might
venture to render it in this manner: honesto opor^^t oriundus sit loco -- you
must, as the common people would express it, be a gentleman born. The accident
of birth therefore is placed at the head of the qualifications necessary to
give a man pre-eminence in society. This doctrine is certainly consistent with
the whole tenor of the book; but wh^^ner it contributes to the general
happiness of mankind, or tends to the spirit of despotism, let impartial
observers determine. Mr. Burke had said a few lines before, satis est equitem
mihi plauder^ -- "It is enough for me that gentlemen or nobles approve my
doctrine;" and there is therefore little doubt but that he is satisfied; for
their approbation must be secured by opinions so favorable to their importance
in society, independently of laborious, virtuous, and useful exertion.

The next requisite is, "to SEE nothing low or sordid from one's infancy;" that
is, to be kept at a distance from the swinish multitude, so as not to know
those wants which it is the bu^^ness of superiors, or of a natural aristocracy,
to supply or alleviate.

The third requisite is, "to be taught to respect oneself." This seldom
requires any great teaching among persons who have the two preceding
requisites. Pride and selfishness are the very principles of despotism.

The fourth requisite to natural aristocracy, "is to be habituated to the
censorial inspection of the public eye." Yes; so habituared as to be hardened
by effrontery, and to say that a king holds his crown Mr. Burke's doctrine.
in contempt of the people; and, satis est equitem mihi plaudere, which may be
rendered, paraphrastically, "I care nothing for the people's censorial eye or
tongue, if the GREAT honor me with their applause, for defending their
exclusive privileges from being trodden under the hoof of the swinish
multitude."

I pass over some very proper requisites, to proceed to the last. The last is,
"to be among RICH traders, who, from their SUCCESS, are presumed to have sharp
and vigorous understandings, and to possess the virtues of diligence, order,
constancy, and regularity, and to have cultivated an habitual regard to
commutative justice. -- These are the circumstances of men who form what I
should call a natural aristocracy, without which there is ^O NATION. Without
this," (the writer intimates in a few subsequent lines), "HE cannot recognize
the existence of the PEOPLE."

Respecting Mr. Burke greatly, as I do, and ag^^^^g with him in many
particulars in this very passage, I cannot help thinking that he has laid too
much stress on riches and BIRTH, in pointing out the men intended by NATURE to
take the lead in all human affairs, and to form what he calls a true natural
aristocracy. Nam genus et proavos et quae non secimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco.
I think it injurious to society and mankind at large, to lavish honors and
confer power on accidental qualities, which may exist in their greatest degree
and perfection without the least particle of personal merit, without wisdom or
benevolence. It discourages industry. It stis^es all virtuous emulation. It
makes RICHES the grand object of pursuit; not for their own intrinsic value,
not for their power of supplying necessaries, and even luxuries, but for the
political consequence they bestow, independently of the mode of acquisition or
expenditure. I would have no IDOLATRY. God has shown his peculiar indignation
against it. I would not worship a calf, though a golden one. KINGS LOG, and
Gods made of stocks and stones, can only command reverence from men really sunk
to a state below the swine.

I know Lord Bolingbroke's doctrines of liberty are disliked, by those who see
their own consequence increasing in the increasing spirit of despotism. But I
will cite a passage from him, which may counterbalance the servile ideas which
some men entertain of the aristocracy constituted by NATURE.

"It seems to me, (says he), that in ordes to maintain the moral system of the
world at a certain point, far below that of ideal perfection; but however
sufficient upon the whole to constitute a state easy and happy, or, at the
v^^^st, tolerable; I say, it seems to me, that the Author of Nature has thought
fit to mingle, from time to time, among the societies of men, a few, and but a
few, of those, on whom he is graciously pleased to bestow a larger portion of
the aetherial spirit, than is given, in the ordinary course of his providence,
to the sons of men.***

"You will find that there are superior spirits, men who show, even from their
infancy, though it be not always perceived by others, perhaps not felt by
themselves, that they were born for something more and better. These are the
men to whom the part I mentioned is assigned. Their talents denote their
general designation.

"I have sometimes represented to myself the VULGAR, who are accidentally
distinguished by the titles of KING and SUBJECT, of LORD and VASSAL, of
nobleman and peasant; and the FEW who are distinguished by nature so
essentially from the herd of mankind, that (figure apart) they seem to be of
another species. The former loiter or trifle away their whole time; and their
presence or their absence would be equally unperceived, if caprice or accident
did not raise them often to stations, wherein their stupidity, and their vices,
make them a PUBLIC MISFORTUNE. The latter come into the world, or at least
continue in it, after the effects of surprise and inexperience are over, like
men who are sent on more important errands. They may indulge themselves in
pleasure; but as their industry is not employed about trifles, so their
amusements are not made the business of their lives. Such men cannot pass
unperceived through a country. If they retire from the world, their splendour
accompanies them, and enlightens even the obscurity of their retreat. If they
take a part in public life, the effect is never indifferent. They either appear
like ministers of divine vengeance; and their course through the world is
marked by desolation and oppression, by poverty and servitude; or they are the
guardian angels of the country they inhabit, BUSY to avert even the most
distant evil, and to maintain or procure PEACE, plenty, and the greatest of
human blessings, LIBERTY."

Such men, when they take the latter course, and become the guardian angels of
the country they inhabit, are the aristocracy appointed by God and nature. Such
men, therefore, should be selected by kings for civil honors, and public
functions of high importance. If kings were republicans in the proper sense,
all the people would be royalists. But when brilliant honors and ministerial
employments are bestowed on fools and knaves, because they were begotten by
ancestors whom they disgrace, or possess riches which they abuse, government
becomes a nuisance, and the people feel an aristocracy to be little better than
an automaton machine, for promoting the purposes of royal or MINISTERIAL
despotism.

SECTION XXVI. The excessixe Love of Distinction and Power which prevails
wherever the Spirit of Despotism exists, deadens some of the finest Feelings of
the Heart, and counteracts the Laws of Nature.
IN a system of manners, which renders the possession of riches more honorable
than the possession of virtue, which attaches a degree of merit to hereditary
rank and nominal distinctions, above all that personal exertions can possibly
acquire, the natural ideas of right and wrong are confounded; and man, become a
depraved, artificial animal, pursues pre-eminence in society, by counteracting
nature, as well as by violating justice.

That he counteracts nature, under such a system, will be evident, on
considering the present state of conjugal union among those who appear to place
the chief good of man in riches, splendour, title, power, and courtly
distinctions. LOVE is every day sacrificed, by the loveliest of the species, on
the altar of PRIDE.

The fine sensibilities of the heart, if suffered to influence the choice of a
companion for life, might lead to family degradation. "Nature, then, avaunt
(exclaims Aristocracy). Love is a vulgar passion. The simplest damsel, that
slumbers under the roof of straw, feels it in all its ardor. Daughter, you have
nobler objects than mere nature presents. Remember your birth. You must make an
alliance which may aggrandize the family, which may add title to our riches, or
new brilliancy to our title."

In vain have the Loves and the Graces molded her shape and face with the
nicest symmetry. In vain has art added her finest polish to the work of nature.
Poor IPHIGENI^ must be sacrificed. Her heart, peradventure, has chosen its
mate, and happy would she be, if she could renounce all the embarrassments of
high fortune, and emulate the turtle-dove of the vale. But no; she must not
tell her love. Perhaps the object of it is only a commoner; perhaps he is only
a younger brother; perhaps he has little to recommend him but youth, beauty,
honor, and virtue. He cannot keep her an equipage. He has no mansion house.
Yet, her heart inclines to him, and both God and nature approve her choice; but
neither her heart, nor God, nor nature, will be heard, when pride and
aristocratical insolence lift up their imperious voice, and command her to
remember her rank, and keep up the family dignity.

Lord ***** is introduced as a suitor, under the father's authority. Lord *****
influences five or six boroughs, and the junction of such an interest with that
of the family must, in all human probability, secure a riband, and perhaps a
marquisate.

His lordship is ten years older than poor Iphigenia. His life has been spent,
from infancy, in the midst of luxuries and pleasures, to speak of it in the
softest terms. He has a lively juvenile pertness about him; but his face is
that of of an old man -- pale, or rather yellow except his nose, which is
decorated with a settled redness, and his forehead, which is var^egated with
carbuncles. Several of his front teeth are gone, having been sacrificed to
Venus by the god Mercury. His breath -- ye poets, bring your roses, your
honeysuckles, your jasmines -- not for comparison -- but, if possible, to drown
the stench which, while he solicits Iphigenia's hand, is like that which issues
from a putrid carcass, or the apertures of a boghouse. Nothing offensive,
however, oozes from his neck, the deep holes of the king's evil having lately
been completely cicatrized by a skilful quac doctor, as a measure preparatory
to his approaching nuptials.

Behold, then, the suitor, alighting from a high phaeton, beautifully adorned
with coats of arms, not only on the sides and back, but on the lining, drawn by
four cream-coloured ponies, and followed by two fine figures of men in white
liveries, with horses richly caparisoned, and displaying, in every part, where
it is possible, coronets of silver.

Iphigenia appears delighted at the honor of his proposal, though her heart,
when she reclines on her pillow, feels a pang of regret which no language can
describe. The struggle between love and pride is violent; but it passes in
secret. She hears of nothing among her companions, but of the great alliance
she is going to make with an ancient and illustrious family. Splendid mansions,
glittering carriages, birth day dresses, flit before her imagination. Above
all, the delightful idea that she shall take precedence of those who now think
themselves her equals and superiors, dispels every thought of LOVE. As to the
MAN, the husband, he is scarcely considered at all, or he must be considered
with disgust. But his title, his house in town, his mansions and parks in the
country, his parliamentary interest, the favor in which he stands at court, the
brilliant appearance he makes in the realms of fashion; these, added to a
father's influence, determine Iphigenia at once to forget the object of her
love, and give her hand to deformity, disease, putre^^ence, and folly. She
marries: the family estates and ^^fluence are united, and the battered,
worn-out bridegroom becomes, in time, a MARQUIS.

The puny offspring of such connubial alliances are trained in the same
idolat^ons veneration of rank, title, and grandeur; and WOMAN, formed to love
and be loved, sacrifices her happiness to family pride, and lives and dies a
legal prostitute, without once tasting the exquisite and natural delight of
virtuous, equal, and sincere affection. -- Taught from the cradle to believe
herself a superior being, she is cheated of the happiness which falls to the
lot of those who view their fellow creatures as one great family, and are nor
too proud to partake of the common banquet of life, and to choose a partner
like the turtle of the vale.

Now mark the consequence. In no rank of society is conjugal happiness more
rarely found than among those who have imbibed most copiously the
aristocratical principles of selfish pride. The present age abounds with public
and notorious instances of infelicity of this sort in the highest ranks of
society. It would be painful to dwell upon them. I drop a tear of pity on the
lovely victims to despotism, and let the curtain fall.

But surely that degree of PRIDE, nursed by ill-constructed systems of society,
which leads to the violation of the first law of nature, and produces misery of
the severest kind ought to be disgraced and reprobated by all who have hearts
sufficiently tender to sympathize with the sufferings of their fellow-mortals.
Love, and the natural affections between human creatures, are the sweet
ingredients which Providence has thrown into the cup of life, to sweeten the
bitter beverage. And that state of society, which divests man of his nature,
which renders him a factitious creature, which hardens his heart with
selfishness, and swells him with the morbid tumors of vanity, deserves
execration. It increases all the natural misery of man, and withholds the
anodyne.

Something may be said in excuse for the more amiable part of the species, when
they discard love from their bosoms to indulge pride. Their haughty fathers too
often inculcate the lesson of pride from the earliest infancy; and teach them
to think nothing really beautiful and lovely, which is not marked by fashion,
or varnished by titles, riches, and heraldic honors. The men in general set
them the example. They lavish their love on the courtezan, and follow prudence
in the choice of a wife; that is, they seek not a heart that beats in unison
with their own, but a legal connection which increases their fortune, or
aggrandizes their situation. A marriage of love, at an age when the heart is
most prone to it, is considered as a folly and a misfortune, unless it advances
the man in society. The women learn to retaliate, and to give their hands
without their hearts; gratifying pride at the expense of love.

When truth, justice, reason, and nature are little regarded, in competition
with the DESIRE of distinction, which is the case wherever the spirit of
despotism has insinuated itself, all true and solid happiness will be
sacrificed for the appearance of superiority in birth, in possessions, in
houses and carriages, and above all, in court favor. The tenderest ties of
consanguinity, affinity, and friendship, snap asunder when opposed to the force
of any thing which is likely to contribute to personal splender or family
pride, political consequence, influence at elections, and finally, to the
honors conferred by royalty. The little aspirants at subordinte degrees of
despotism, are continually crawling up the hill, ever looking at the brilliant
object on the summit, and leaving below, all that love and nature teach them to
embrace.

From this principle, unnatural as it is, arises the anxious desire of
aristocratical bigots to make, as they express it, an ELDEST SON; to starve, or
at least to distress, a dozen sons and daughters, in order to leave behind them
one great representative, who may continue to toil in the pursuit of civil
pre-eminence, for the gratification of family pride. The privileges of
primogeniture establish petty despots all over the land, who are interested,
and sufficiently inclined, from pride as well as interest, to promote the
spirit of despotism. They would have no objection to the feudal system, in
which the only distinction was that of lords and vassals. Not contented with
engrossing the property which ought to be shared among their brothers and
sisters, they claim privileges in consequence of their property, and would
appropriate the birds of the air and the beasts of the forest for their
recreation in the field, and their luxury at the table.

When the laws of nature, and eternal truth and justice, are violated, no
wonder that despotism advances, and man is degraded.

SECTION XXVII. On the Opinion that the People are annihilated or absorbed in
Parliament; that the Voice of the People is no where to be heard but in
Parliament; and on similar Doctrines, tending to depreciate the People.
THERE is no doctrine so absurd but pride and selfishness will adopt and
maintain it with obstinacy, if it be conducive to their gratification.
Alexander, it is said, really believed himself a god. The vilest of the Caesar's
demanded divine honors. Many instances are on record of wretched beings, with
hardly any thing worthy of man about them, forgetting, in consequence of a
little elevation above others, that they were mortals; behaving with the
wickedness and cruelty of devils, and at the same time arrogating the power and
dignity of the celestial nature. It is related of Hanno, the Carthaginian, that
he taught starlings to say " Deus Hanno Hanno is a God.
;" and that when a very large number had learned their lesson, he turned them
loose into the woods, hoping that they would teach the wild beasts on the trees
to repeat the same words, and that thus the divinity of Hanno might be wafted
into the remotest regions, and become the worship of the universe. Such conduct
appears to resemble the the ravings of the poor lunatic, who crowns himself, as
he sits in his desolate cell, with a crown of straw, and imagines, while he
sways a scepter of the same materials, that he is an emperor. But in truth, the
pride of despots, I mean those who have all the dispositions of despots, though
they may not have the diadems, displays many of the symptoms of downright
lunacy. Pride is allowed by the physicians to have a powerful effect in turning
the brain; and though it may not always fit the unhappy sufferer for Bedlam,
yet commonly renders him unfit for the offices of social life.

Shocking as madness is, it sometimes behaves in a manner which turns pity into
laughter. Can any thing be more ridiculous, than the insolence of some persons,
who, having adopted high aristocratical notions, to correspond with their high
birth, high titles, and high rank, declare that they know not what is meant by
the people out of parliament; that they do not acknowledge the political
existence of the people, but on the benches of St. Stephen's chapel?
Individuals of low degree they may know, and employ in their service, but they
know nothing of the people, as millions of MEN, possessing rights or power.
"The constitution (say they) knows nothing of the people considered as
individuals." King, lords, and commons constitute the nation; but what is meant
by the people they cannot divine. A mob they know, and would always have them
dispersed by the military, as soon as two or three are gathered together; but
the people, as a part of the constitution, they never could discover.

Mr. Burke, the great Goryphaeus of aristocracy, says, "As a people can have no
right to a corporate capacity without universal consent, so neither have they a
right to hold exclusively any lands in the name and title of a corporation. On
the scheme of the present rulers in our neighboring country, regenerated as
they are, they have no more right to the territory called France than I (Edmund
Burke) have. Who are these insolent men, calling themselves the French nation,
that would monopolize this fair domain of nature? Is it because they speak a
certain jargon? Is it their mode of chattering? The crowd of men on the other
side of the Channel, who have the impudence to call themselves a PEOPLE, can
never be the lawful exclusive possessors of the soil." How truly laughable to
hear an individual, Mr. Edmund Burke, taxing twenty-six millions of human
creatures with IMPUDENCE, for presuming to call themselves a PEOPLE! I must
smile at such absurdity, while I sincerely lament that this ingenious man has
missed the opportunity of raising his family to the peerage, the grand object
of so many years indefatigable labor, by a loss never to be repaired, and in
which every feeling heart must sympathize. Ambition, what art thou to the
feelings of a father, exclaiming, like David, "O Absalom, my son, my son!" The
great teacher Death shows the vanity of all human aspirations at sublunary
glory. He who loses a son in the prime of life and the career of honor, may
learn to weep over the thousands, whose dearest relatives have been cut off by
the sword of war, in consequence of doctrines which he maintained by a gaudy
display of his eloquence, without foreseeing or regarding the calamities they
had a tendency to produce.

The subtle writer goes on and observes, that "When the multitude (from the
context he means a MAJORITY of the people) are not under the habitual social
discipline of the wiser, mo^^ expert, and more opulent, they can scarcely be
said to BE in civil society.... When you separate the common sort of men from
their proper chieftains, so as to form them into an adverse army, I no longer
know that venerable object called the PEOPLE, in such a disbanded race of
deserters and vagabonds. For awhile they may be terrible indeed; but in such a
manner as wild beasts are terrible. The mind owes to them no sort of
submission. They are, as they have always been reputed, rebels. They may
lawfully be FOUGHT WITH and brought under, whenever an advantage offers."

What gave rise to these elucidations he has told us a few pages before. "The
factions now so busy amongst us, in order to divest men of all love of their
country and to remove from their minds all duty with regard to the state,
endeavor to propagate an opinion that the PEOPLE, in forming their
commonwealth, have by no means parted with their power over it!" Horrendum
dictu!

"Discuss any of their schemes -- their answer is -- it is the act of the
PEOPLE, and that is sufficient! -- The people are masters of the commonwealth;
because in substance they are the commonwealth! The French revolution, say
they, was the act of the majority of the people; and if the majority of any
other people, the people of England for instance, wish to make the same change,
they have the same right. -- Just the same, undoubtedly. That is, NONE AT ALL."

Such is the doctrine of this warm partisan to aristocratical distinction. But
what say seven or eight millions of good people, who wish nothing, in their
interference in politics, but to secure and extend their own happiness, and to
make all others happy within the spheres of their influence? Let them say what
they please, their remonstrance must not be heard. They are political
non-entities; they are, as pride commonly calls inferiors in private life,
NOBODY, or people whom nobody knows.

But now comes the tax-gatherer. These non-entities must find real tangible
money to pay for the salaries of places, to pay pensions, and the interest of
money advanced for the waging of wars, said to be in defense of law, order, and
religion. It will not do to plead that they have no political existence. A very
considerable part of their property, the produce of their labor, must be
annually paid for the support of those who have the effrontery to say they are
not visible, as a majority of individuals, in the eye of the constitution.

At a general election, would any candidate for a considerable city or county
dare to advance such opinions respecting the insignificance, or rather
nonexistence, of the people, as have been advanced by borough members, in
their zeal for power and prerogative? The People would deny the doctrine with a
voice loud enough to silence the most obstreperous declaimer.

Mr. Burke will make no new converts to this opinion. The Tory party had
adopted it, previously to the instruction of their sanguine advocate. It was
always one of their principles. The people themselves will certainly reprobate
ideas which lead to their political annihilation, in every respect, but in the
privilege of contributing to the public revenue. But one cannot be surprised at
any wild assertions of a man who writes under the impulse of passion. Anger,
inflamed by mortified pride, seems to animate almost every sentence of his late
invective. And what are we to think of the WHIGISM of one, who, in the
commencement of the alarm concerning French principles, is said to have
proposed to Mr. Fox to join together (these are the very words of the proposal)
in "FROWNING DOWN THE DOCTRINES OF LIBERTY See Mr. Wyvill's Letter to Mr. Pit,
page 108.
." The proposer must have no small opinion of himself, when he imagined that,
assisted by one more, he could frown down the doctrines of liberty. Jupiter
shook Olympus with a nod; and Burke was to discountenance liberty, and
annihilate the political existence of a people, with a FROWN.

Divisum imperium cum Jove, Burkus habet. I revere the private virtues of the
man. I feel and admire his excellence as a writer. I deplore the mistake which
has led him to gratify the few in power, at the expense of millions of his
fellow creatures, who would have rejoiced in such an advocate against the
influence of the despotic spirit. Imperial power has means enough to maintain
itself. Genius should ever espouse the cause of liberty, and of those who have
no standing armies, no treasury, no tribe of dependents, nothing to stand their
friend, but a good cause, which, in a corrupt state of society, is too often
defeated by a bad one.

May the people, in all climates which the sun views in his daily progress,
prove their political existence by their public virtue! May despots learn to
fear the power of those whose happiness they have dared to destroy. In our own
country, we have a king who rules in the hearts of his people, and who would
therefore be the first to reject the doctrines of Mr. Burke, which tend to sink
the people, as a majority of individuals, into a state of insignificance. May
the people claim and preserve their rights, in defiance of all overruling
influence, and all sophistical declamation. But let them pursue their
philanthropic ends with steady coolness. Let them respect themselves, and act
consistently with their dignity. Let not a single drop of blood be shed, nor a
single mite of property unjustly seized, in correcting abuses, and recovering
rights. Let them pass a glorious act of amnesty, and generously forgive the
Pitts, the Burkes, the Loughboroughs, the Aucklands, the Mansfields, the
Wyndhams; proving to an admiring world, that a great PEOPLE can be gentle and
merciful to frail, erring individuals, while it explodes their errors, and
calmly evinces, by virtuous energies, its own political existence and supreme
authority.

SECTION XXVIII. The fashionable Contempt thrown on Mr. Lock, and his Writings
in Favor of Liberty; and on other Authors and Books espousing the same Cause.
IT is an infallible proof of great abilities in a writer who espouses the
cause of the people, when he is cavilled at, written against, and condemned by
the persons whose despotic principles he has endeavored to expose and refute.
It is a sign that he has touched them to the quick, and left a fore place, the
smart of which is continually urging them to murmur. Their affected derision
and contempt of him are but transparent veils to hide the writhings of their
tortured minds; an awkward masque to cover the ugly features of impotent
revenge, struggling, through pride, to conceal the painful emotions of rage.

It is amusing to observe what mean and little arts are used by these angry
persons, to lower the character of any writer, whose arguments they cannot
refute. They hire a venal tool to write his life and crowd it with every
falsehood and calumny which party malice can invent, and popular credulity
disseminate. They relate, without examination into a single fact, and decide,
without the smallest attention to candor or justice. The man is to be hunted
down. The minister and his creatures cry havoc, and let slip the vermin of
corruption. The newspapers, in daily paragraphs, discharge the venom of abuse
on his name. Venal critiques pour their acrimonious censure, in general terms,
on his compositions, which they could not equal, and dare not examine with
impartiality. Nicknames are fastened on him; and whenever he is spoken of, all
additions of respect are omitted, and, in their place, some familiar and vulgar
abbreviation of his christian name is used to vilify his surname. Poor
artifices indeed! for while they expose the malice and weakness of those who
use them, they leave the arguments and doctrines of the writer rather confirmed
than shaken by an attack so feeble.

It is not surprising, indeed, that cotemporary writers in favor of the people,
whatever their abilities, and however convincing their arguments, are treated
with affected contempt, as often as they excite real admiration. Envy always
strikes at living merit. The policy of the aspirants at arbitrary power unites
with envy, to depress all who are rising to public esteem by personal exertion,
by their own virtue, independently of court patronage and hereditary
distinction. But it might be supposed that departed genius, elevated, by the
conspiring voice of nations, to the highest rank, would be surrounded with a
sanctity which would defend it from profanation. It is not so. The love of
power, in the hearts of mean and selfish men, acknowledges no reverence for
genius. It has no reverential feelings beyond the purlieus of a court. The
false brilliancy of what is called high and fashionable life, is preferred by
it to the permanent luster of all solid personal virtue.

Mr. Lock, therefore, one of the chief glories of English literature, is to be
depreciated, for he wrote on the side of liberty. Possessing reason in greater
perfection than most men, ^e naturally inclined to espouse the cause of MAN,
without confining his regard to those who boasted adventitious honors, the
fantastic distinctions of birth, or the fortuitous advantages of fortune. These
are few, compared with the millions who constitute the mass of a commonwealth.
His understanding, greatly elevated above the ordinary standard, clearly saw,
that the purposes of real philanthropy can be accomplished solely by improving
the condition of the MANY. They must be taught to know and value their rights.
They must learn to reverence themselves, by feeling their importance in
society. Such an improvement of their minds will lead them to act consistently
with their dignity as rational creatures, and as members of a community which
they love, and the welfare of which they find to depend on their own virtue.

Mr. Lock was certainly stimulated to write his book on government by these
philosophical and philanthropic ideas. In pursuance of those ideas, he wished
to support, by doctrines favorable to general liberty, the REVOLUTION. Let us
attend to his own words in his Preface.

"These papers, (says he), I hope, are sufficient to establish the throne of
our great Restorer, our present King William; to make good his title, in the
CONSENT OF THE PEOPLE, which, BEING THE ONLY ONE OF ALL LAWFUL GOVERNMENTS, he
has more fully and clearly than any prince in Christendom; and to justify to
the world the people of England, whose love of their just and natural rights,
with their resolution to preserve them, saved the nation when it was on the
very brink of slavery and ruin."

Mr. Locke's book then tends directly to strengthen the foundation of the
throne on which the present royal family is seated. It is equally favorable to
the king and the people. Yet because it is at all favorable to the people and
the general cause of liberty, it is the fashion, in the aristocratical circles,
to revile it. It is said to contain the elements of those doctrines which the
philosophers of France have dilated, which gave independence to America, and
rendered France a republic. It is said, very unjustly, to contain the seminal
principles of Mr. Paine's matured and expanded tree. Mr. Lock, therefore, the
great defender of the Revolution and of King William, is reprobated by Tory
courtiers, and numbered, by the aspirants at enormous power and privileges, to
which they have no just and natural claim, among Lord Auckland's "miscreants
called philosophers."

Men who undertake to defend any thing contrary to the common sense and common
interest of mankind, usually hurt the side they intend to defend, by promoting
a discussion, and calling forth common sense, excited by the common interest,
to defend its own cause. Thus Sir Robert Filmer's book gave rise both to
Sydney's and Locke's defense of liberty. Thus Mr. Burke's Reflections on France
drew forth Mr. Paine's Rights of Man, in which is much excellent matter,
mingled with a blameable censure of limited monarchy. Thus Salmasius's
mercenary invective against the republicans of England in the last century,
provoked the great Milton, scarcely less eloquent in prose than in poetry, to
defend the right of the people of England to manage, in their own country their
own concerns, according to their own judgment and inclination.

Milton and Lock are great names on the side of liberty. But Milton has been
treated coutemptuously; and some have shown a spirit illiberal enough to
detract from his poetry in revenge for his politics. His last biographer, Dr.
Johnson, who had many early prejudices which his most vigorous reason could not
to the last subdue, was, by early prejudice, a violent Tory and Jacobite. I
think there is reason to believe, that he would have been easily made a convert
to popery. I venerate his abilities and virtues; but I cannot help remarking,
that his high-church and high-prerogative principles led him to speak less
honorably of Milton than he must have done if he had viewed him through a
medium undiscolored. Milton was a greater man than Johnson; and though I think
he went too far in his hatred to monarchy and episcopacy, yet, in extenuation,
let it be considered how much monarchy and episcopacy had been abused in his
time, and how much more friendly to freedom they both are in our happier age.
Milton discovered a noble spirit of independence, and his writings contain some
of the finest passages that ever were written in vindication of civil liberty.
They contributed to raise that spirit which afterward produced our happy
revolution; and I have no doubt but that Milton would have rejoiced under a
limited monarchy. It is to writings and to a spirit like his mankind are
indebted for the limitation. If honest and able minds like Milton's had not
appeared on the part of the people, it is probable that no such thing as a
limited monarch would have been found on the face of the earth; and the family
now on the British throne, would have been known only in the petty dynasties of
the German empire.

Free spirits are therefore to be pardoned in some errors, which the propensity
of human nature to err must ever render venial; and the general tendency of
their writings to make the mass of mankind free and happy, ought to secure
attention to their doctrines, and honor to their names. The enemies to the
spirit of despotism have seen, with pain, the attempts to lessen these great
men in the eyes of the world extended to writers of less renown, but of more
recent date. They have seen men, good men in private life, and philosophers,
whose discourses and letters have gained the notice and esteem of every
enlightened country, reproached, vilified, persecuted, and almost destroyed,
because, in consequence of that fine understanding which had done so much in
philosophy, they made some discoveries in polities which must for ever militate
powerfully against the spirit of despotism. Voltaire, Rousseau, Raynal, Price,
Priestley, Pain, however different their characters, seize, and
abilities, are all vilified together, (because they have written admirably on
the side of liberty), all involved in one indiscriminate torrent of obloquy.
The partisans of unlimited power would persuade us, not only that they were
knaves, but fools. Some of them have very exceptionable passages in their
works; but where they treat of civil liberty, they plead the cause of human
nature. They have not pleaded it unsuccessfully. Political artifices cannot
(...) truth and common sense.

The independent part of mankind, who detest parties and ^action, and mean
nothing but the happiness of their fellow creatures, will do well to be upon
their guard against the misrepresentations of those who would vilify a Lock, a
Milton, a Sydney. Let them read and judge for themselves. The men who are
anxious to withhold or extinguish the light, may fairly be suspected of
intending to do evil.

SECTION XXIX. Of the Despotism of INFLUFNCE; while the Forms of a free
Constitution are preserved.
THE words of a great lawyer, instructing ^he youth of a nation at a celebrated
university, must be supposed to be well considered. Blackstone, the grave
commentator, after expatiating on the advantages derived from the Revolution,
proceeds to remark, that "though these provisions have nominally and in
appearance, reduced the strength of the executive power to a much lower ebb
than in the preceding period; yet if, on the other hand, we throw into the
opposite scale the vast acquisition of force arising from the RIOT ACT, and the
annual expedience of a STANDING ARMY; and the vast acquisition of PERSONAL
ATTACHMENT, arising from the magnitude of the national debt, and the manner of
levying those yearly millions that are appropriated to pay the interest; we
shall find that the CROWN has gradually and imperceptibly gained almost as much
INFLUENCE as it has apparently lost in prerogative."

Blackstone, consistently with the habits of his profession, expressed himself
cautiously. He says the Crown has gained almost as much influence as it has
apparently lost in prerogative. There are men of great pol^tical judgment who
think that it has gained more. The House of Commons has, in an auspicious hour,
resolved, and it can never be too often repeated, that the influence of the
crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished. Influence is
more dangerous than pretogative. It is a subtle poison that acts unseen.
Prerogative can be resisted, as a robber; but influence is as an assassin.

Lord Bolingbroke tells us, that "we have lost the spirit of our constitution;
and therefore we bear, from little engrossers of delegated power, what our
fathers would not have suffered from true proprietors of the royal authority."

Such suggestions are certainly alarming. They come from high authority, and
are abundantly confirmed by recent transactions. The magnitude of the national
debt, and the share that almost every family in the kingdom, directly or
indirectly, possesses in the public funds, contribute, more than all other
causes, to increase the influence of the Crown among the mass of the people.
But the debt is still increasing, in consequence of war. Property in the funds
is still more widely diffused; the influence, in consequence, more extended.
Liberty may be more effectually invaded by the influence of the stocks, than it
ever was invaded, in the days of the Stuarts, by the abuse of prerogative.

We are happy in a king, who, making the happiness of the people his first
object, certainly would not avail himself of any advantages afforded by
circumstances, to entrench upon their liberty. But be it remembered, that
ministers in this country, with their favorites, often constitute an OLIGARCHY.

This ministerial OLIGARCHY may certainly abuse the influence of the Crown, so
as to render itself virtually superior to the limited and constitutional
monarchy. Should such ever be the case, the oligarchy will be a species of
despotism, the more formidable as the more insidious, possessing the power, but
denying the form. By a judicious distribution of favors, by alluring all the
ric^ and great to its side, either by hope or by fear, it may erect a rampart,
which the independent part of the people, acting from no system, and disunited,
may vainly seek to demolish. The monarch and the people may join hand in hand,
without effect, against a ministerial oligarchy, thus buttressed by a faction
composed of rank and wealth, artfully combined, in the meanest manner, for the
basest purposes. False alarms may be spread on the danger of property from the
diffusion of new principles, so as to drive all who possess an acre of land, or
a hundred pounds in the public funds, within the ministerial pale. Religion may
be said to be in danger, in order to bring in the devout and well disposed.
Order may be declared in jeopardy, that the weak, the timid, and the quiet may
be led, by their fears, to unite with wealth and power. Plots and conspiracies
are common expedients of delusion. They have been used, by profligate
ministers, with such a total disregard to truth and probability, that they now
begin to lose their effect. But how dreadful, if influence should ever prevail
with JURIES, to gratify the inventors of false plots, treasons, and
conspiracies, by bringing in verdicts favorable to the views of the villainous
fabricators! English juries are indeed still uncorrupted. They are unconnected
with courts and ministers. And the incorrupt part of our system, in cases of
state trials, is able to prevent the mischief which would be caused by the
corrupt part of it. The honest juries, in the late trials for treason, have not
only done honor to our country and to human nature, but added great strength to
the cause of truth, justice, and the constitution.

But it is truly alarming, to hear the verdicts of juries obliqely impeached by
GREAT MEN in the legislative assemblies. There has appeared no stronger symptom
of the spirit of despotism, than the attempts of courtiers and crown lawyers,
in the public senate, to vilify juries and their verdicts, given after a more
solemn and longer investigation than ever took place on similar trials. Persons
acquitted after such an ordeal, have been said to be no more innocent than
acquitted felons. That the people have borne such an insult on their most
valuable privilege, with patience, is a proof that a tame acquiescence has been
produced among them, unknown to their virtuous ancestors. It is to be hoped the
insult will stimulate future juries to preserve their rights with jealous
vigilance, and render them impregnable by ministerial influence, directly or
indirectly applied. If the men who disapprove the verdicts of the virtuous
juries, on the late occasions, had themselves been the jurors, they would have
given different verdicts, pronounced the prisoners guilty, and assigned them
over to the resentment of irritated, aristocratic pride. So mighty is the
despotism of influence, that neither justice nor mercy can check it in the
breast of a proud parasite.

There is every reason to believe, (and the belief is highly consolatory), that
juries will long continue to preserve their integrity; because they are
indiscriminately selected from the middle rank and the mass of the people.
Influence cannot reach every individual in the millions that constitute a great
nation. But we must remember that influence is increasing; and that its nature
is to diffuse deadly poison, without giving alarm. Like the air loaded with
infection, it silently and secretly wafts disease into the strongest abodes of
health, and penetrates the castle, which is impregnable to the sword of the
open invader. Therefore, as influence increases, the jealousy and vigilance of
the uninfected part of the community should increase in proportion. Though
undue influence may never operate on juries, yet is there no danger lest it
should, at some distant period, contaminate the minds of judges and crown
lawyers, for whose obsequious interpretations of law may be held up prizes most
glittering in the eyes of imagination, and most alluring to avarice and vanity?

But granting that the foul stain of corruption should never spot the white
robe of justice; that the religion of an oath should still be revered, and
conscience hold the balance with an even hand; yet is there no danger lest the
despotism of influence should destroy the vitals of a free constitution, and
leave nothing behind but the form, the exuviae, the name? There was a senate
under the vilest of the Roman emperors. The British house of commons might
become, under a ministerial oligarchy, the mere levee of a prime minister. They
might meet merely to "bow and bow," receive their orders and douceurs, and then
depart in peace.

The present state of the house of commons cannot be too generally known; and I
therefore transcibe the following passage from the Proceedings of the Society
of the Friends of the People.

"The condition of the House of Commons is practically as follows:

"Seventy-one peers and the Treasury NO^INATE ninety members, and procure the
return of seventy-seven, which amount to one hundred and sixty-seven.
Ninety-one commoners nominate eighty-two members, and procure the return of
fifty-seven, which amount to one hundred and thirty-nine."

So that the peers, the Treasury, and rich commoners with influence equal to
peers, return three hundred and six members out of five hundred and thirteen,
which is the whole number of English representatives in the House of Commons.
The Scotch members are not considered in this part of the Report.

The Society give the names of the different patrons at full length, to
authenticate their statement; and I believe its accuracy and authenticity have
never been controverted.

After observing that seventy-one PEERS and the Treasury nominate or procure
the return of one hundred and sixty-seven members of parliament, who may vote
away the people's money, and make laws, with the other branches, to bind many
millions, let us remember, that at the commencement of every session, the
following resolutions are entered on the Journals:

"Resolved, that no peer of this realm has any right to give his vote in the
election of any member to serve in parliament. Resolved, that it is a high
infringement upon the liberties and privileges of the Commons of Great Britain,
for any lord of parliament, or any lord lieutenant of any county, to concern
themselves in the elections of members to serve for the Commons in Parliament."

The committee of the Friends of the People say, "they have been the more
disposed to take notice of those resolutions, because the power of the House of
Lords, in matters of election, has been prodigiously increased, within the last
ten years, by the creation of nine peers, who return, by nomination and
influence, no less than TWENTY-FOUR members to the House of Commons. If,
therefore, the interference of the Lords in the election of the Commons be, as
the latter uniformly declare, a high infringement of their liberties and
privileges, the Committee must report those liberties to have been of late
subject to the most alarming and frequent attacks."

After producing facts that defy denial, I confidently leave every honest and
sensible man in the kingdom, unblinded by prejudice, unwarped by interest, to
determine whether the cause of liberty is not on the decline, and the spirit of
despotism likely to avail itself of the general corruption of the aristocracy,
and the tame acquiescence of the people.

I leave the question to be determined by such men, whether it is not possible
that INFLUENCE may create a complete despotism in a country, even while the
forms of a free constitution are preserved inviolate?

SECTION XXX. The Spirit of Despotism delights in War or systematic Murder.
"THE people of England are industrious, they are peaceful, they wish to enjoy
the fruits of their industry without a war, and to recover their lost weight in
our mixed frame of government, without the hazards of a revolution.

"It is from the prevalence of Mr. Burke's politics alone, among the upper
classes of society, that the rise of any dangerous disaffection in this country
is to be apprehended. To the plain sense of Englishmen, a war commenced with
France, on his principles, must appear to be a war on French liberty, to beat
down the equitable claims of reformation here, and eventually to destroy every
valuable right of the people.

"Such will be the suspected motives for plunging this country in a war, in
which our fleets may be victorious, but in which even our successes must be
ruinous. For views thus wild and chimerical, the nation, whose wounds received
in the late war with America are hardly yet closed up, must prepare to bleed
afresh. For objects thus odious and destable, the industrious classes of the
people must forego their comforts; the shoulders, already galled with taxes,
the pernicious consequence of former INJUSTICE and FOLLY, must submit again to
new and heavier impositions.

"They will be cheerfully voted, no doubt, by the faithful Commons; but the
Commons will no longer enjoy the confidence of the public. Every vote of credit
or supply will then increase the general disgust; and should no greater
disaster befall us, the mere protraction of the war must exhaust the patience of
a disabused people.

"But what may be the contagious effect of French opinions on a nation sick of
the war of kings, groaning under an intolerable load of taxes, and hopeless of
redress from men, whom they will cease to consider as representatives, it is
needless to state. To foresee it, is easy; to prevent it, may be impossible."

Thus far the excellent WYVILL, in a letter to Mr. Pit, in which he wisely
dissuaded him from the unfortunate and disgraceful war, of which that minister
must soon repent, though power and repentance do not usually unite. No
dissuation could cool Mr. Pitt's heroic ardor, or check his juvenile
impetuosity. War was hastily commenced. The consequences were foretold, and the
prediction is fulfilled.

But to an accurate observer it is an alarming proof of the spirit of
despotism, when the GREAT are eager to rush into war; when they listen to no
terms of accommodation, and scorn to negociate, in any mode or degree,
previously to unsheathing the dreadful instrument of slaughter. If war, instead
of being what it has been called, the ratio ultima, becomes the ratio prima
regum, it is a proof that reason has lost her empire, and force usurped her
throne.

FEAR is the principle of all despotic government, and therefore despots make
war their first study and delight. No arts and sciences, nothing that
contributes to the comfort or the embellishment of human society, is half so
much attended to, in countries where the spirit of despotism is established, as
the means of destroying human life. Tigers, wolves, earthquakes, inundations,
are all innocuous to man, when compared with the fiercest of monsters, the GORY
DESPOTS. Fiends, furies, demons of destruction! may the day be near, when, as
wolves have been utterly extirminated from England, despots may be cut off from
the face of the whole earth; and the bloody memory of them loaded with the
execration of every human being, to whom God has given a heart to feel, and a
tongue to utter!

Wherever a particle of their accursed spirit is found, there also will be
found a propensity to war. In times of peace, the grandees find themselves
shrunk to the size of common mortals. A finer house, a finer coach, a finer
coat, a finer livery than others can afford, is all that they can display to
the eye of the multitude, in proof of their assumed superiority. Their POWER is
inconsiderable. But no sooner do you blow the blast of war, and put armies
under their command, than they feel themselves indeed great and powerful. A
hundred thousand men, in battle array, with all the instruments of destruction,
under the command of a few grandees, inferior, perhaps, in bodily strength, to
every one of the subject train, and but little superior in intellect or
courage, yet, holding ALL, on pain of death, in absolute subjection; how must
it elevate the little despots in their own opinion! "This it is to live," (they
exclaim, shaking hands with each other), "this is to be great indeed. Now we
feel our power. Glory be to us on high; especially as all our fame and
greatness is perfectly compatible with our personal safety; for we will not
risque our precious persons in the scene of danger, but be content with our
extended patronage, with the delight of commanding the movements of this human
machine, and with reading of the blood, slaughter, and burnt villages, in the
Gazette, at our fireside."

All the expense of war is paid by the people, and most of the personal danger
incurred by those, who, according to some, have no political existence; I mean
the multitude, told by the head, like sheep in Smithfield. Many of these
troublesome beings, in human form, are happily got rid of in the field of
battle, and more by sickness and hardship previous or subsequent to the
glorious day of butchery. Thus all makes for the spirit of despotism. There
are, in consequence of a great carnage, fewer wretches left to provide for, or
to oppose its will; and all the honor, all the profit, all the amusement, falls
to the share of the grandees, thus raised from the insignificance and
inglorious indolence of peace, to have their names blown over the world by the
trumpet of Fame, and recorded in the page of history.

But a state of war not only gives a degree of personal importance to some
among the great, which they could never obtain by the arts of peace, but
greatly helps the cause of despotism. In times of peace, the people are apt to
be impertinently clamorous for reform. But in war, they must say no more on the
subject, because of the public danger. It would be ill-timed. Freedom of speech
also must be checked. A thousand little restraints on liberty are admitted
without a murmur, in a time of war, that would not be borne one moment during
the halcyon days of peace. Peace, in short, is productive of plenty, and plenty
makes the people saucy. Peace, therefore, must not continue long, after a
nation has arrived at a certain degree of prosperity. This is a maxim of
Despotism. Political phlebotomy is necessary in a political plethora. "Bleed
them usque ad deliquium," (says the arbitrary doctor), "and I will undertake
that in suture the patient shall be more tractable."

Erasmus, the friend of man, the restorer of civil and religious liberty, has
the following passage in a Dissertation on War, lately translated into English
under the title of Antipolemus:

"There are kings who go to war for no other reason than that they may with
greater case establish despotic authority over their own subjects at home. For
in time of peace, the power of parliaments, the dignity of magistrates, the
vigor of the laws, are great impediments to a prince who wishes to exercise
arbitrary power. But when once a war is undertaken, the chief management of
affairs devolves on a few, the ministers of executive government, who, for the
general safety, assume the privilege of conducting every thing according to
their own humor, demanding unlimited confidence. The prince's favorites are all
exalted to places of honor and profit. Those whom he dislikes are turned out
and neglected. Now -- (the time of war) is the time for raising as much money
upon the people as the despot's heart can wish. -- In short -- now -- the time
of war, is the time that they feel themselves despots in very deed and truth,
not in name only, but despots with a vengeance. In the mean while, the grandees
play into one another's hands, till they have eaten up the wretched PEOPLE,
root and branch. Do you think that men of such dispositions would be backward
to seize any, the slightest occasions for war, so lucrative, so flattering to
avarice and vanity?" " Sunt qui non aliam ob causam bellum movent, nisi ut hac
via facilius in SUOS TYRANNIDEM exerceant. Nam pacis temporibus, senatus
auct^ritas, magistratum dignitas, legum vigor, nonnihil obstant, quo minus
liceat principi, quicquid libet. At, bello suscepto, jam omnis rerum summa ad
paucorum libidinem devoluta est. Ev^huntur quibus been vult princeps;
dejici^ntur quibus insensus est. Exigitur pecuniae quantum libet. Quid multis?
TUM DEMUM ^ENTIUNT ^E VERE MONARCHAS esse. Colludunt interim duces, donec
infelicem populum usque ad radicem arroserint. Hoc animo ^^i sint, an ^os putas
gravatim arreptur^s, oblatam quam^unque belli occasionem?"

ERASMUS.


Language has found no name sufficiently expressive of the diabolical villainy
of wretches in high life, who without personal provocation, in the mere
wantonness of power, and for the sake of increasing what they already possess
in too great abundance, rush into murder! Murder of the innocent! Murder of
myriads! Murder of the stranger! neither knowing nor caring how many of their
fellow creatures, with rights to life and happiness equal to their own, are
urged by poverty to shed their last drops of blood in a foreign land, far from
the endearments of kindred, to gratify the pride of a FEW at home, whose
despotic spirit insults the wretchedness it first created. There is no greater
proof of human folly and weakness than that a whole people should suffer a few
worthless grandees, who evidently despise and hate them, to make the world one
vast slaughterhouse, that the grandees may have the more room to take their
insolent pastime in unmolested state. A man, a reasonable being, a christian,
plunging the bayonet, without passion, into the bowels of a man, for hire! The
poor creatures who actually do this (in despotic countries) are but mechanical
instruments of knaves in power. Their poverty, and not their will, consents.
May Heaven's sweet mercy, then, wash off the blood-stains from their hands, and
reserve its wrath for those whose thirst of power, which they never had a wish
to use for the good of man, leads them to wade to it through seas of human gore!

Let any dispassionate man, uninfluenced by placemen, pensioners, contractors,
and expectants of court favor, impartially consider, from the earliest ages to
the present, the history of war. He must observe that scarcely any wars have
been just and necessary; though they almost all have claimed these epithets,
with a persevering formality which would excite ridicule, if ridicule were not
lost in abhorrence. He will find that folly, extreme folly, wearing a crown
instead of a fool's cap, has in many countries, from the mere wantonness of
mischief, cried, "Havoc, and let slip the dogs of war." He will find that in
most countries (our own, of course, always excepted) war has been eagerly
sought, from policy, to divert the people's attention from domestic abuse, to
aggrandize those who build the fabric of their grandeur on the ruins of human
happiness, and to depress, impoverish, and humble the people.

There is nothing from which the spirit of liberty has so much to fear, and
consequently the spirit of despotism so much to hope, as from the prevalence of
military government, supported by vast standing armies, and encouraged by
alliances with military despots on the continent of Europe. The whole energy of
the sound part of our free constitution should be exerted in its full force to
check a proud minister, who rashly runs into a war, and notwithstanding
accumulated disasters, perseveres in its prosecution. He cannot hope for
victory. He must have some other motive for persevering against all rational
hope. Let the PEOPLE investigate the motive; and if it be inimical to LIBERTY,
let them succor her in distress, by calling in her best auxiliary, PEACE.

SECTION XXXI. On the (...) that we have arrived at Perfection in ^^olitics
though all other Sciences are in a progressive (...).
THOSE who have been fortunate enough to have gained possession of honors and
profits, under a corrupt system, well pleased with things as they are, boldly
contend that they cannot be better. But these, compared with the mass of the
community, are few and ultimately of little consequence. Their opinion
therefore must not weigh against any improvement which is likely to promote the
melioration of human affairs. Let them enjoy unmolested the luxuries of the
table, the splendour of equipages, large houses, and every other external
advantage, which makes little man swell into fancied importance. In the mean
time let every honest, benevolent member of the community, who is satisfied
with being happy himself, without desiring to entrench on the happiness of
others, endeavor to reform abuses, and promote every improvement which can
render human life (short as it is, and full of calamity) more comfortable, and
less exposed to the injuries and con^umelies of the proud oppressor.

Rewards are offered for the discovery of the longitude at sea. Men are not
only allowed but encouraged to prosecute their enquiries into all other arts
and sciences. But the grand art, the art of government, that is, the art of
securing the civil happiness of millions, is to be considered as sacred and
inscrutable. Those very millions whom it more immediately interests, dare not,
if the despots could prevail, to lift up the awful veil. Racks, gibbets,
bowstrings, chains, and prisons, are prepared, in most of the kingdoms of the
world, to awe the curious, and check the spirit of political improvement.
OPTIMISM has long been established in the courts of despotic princes. Whatever
is, is right, say they; for knowing that they stand on a rotten foundation,
they fear that the very fixing of the scaffold for repair would precipitate the
downfall of the whole fabric.

Mankind might, at the close of this century, justly celebrate a general
jubilee; for arbitrary government, in Europe at least, has received its death
blow by the revolution in France. And it is devoutly to be wished, for their
own sakes, that in limited monarchies, the voice of truth and virtue, calling
for the reform of abuses, existing evidently as the meridian sun, will never be
silenced by the terrors of the law in the hands of crown lawyers, or the sabre
of dragoons, under the command of a despotic minister.

Is it to be believed that governments were brought to perfection in early and
dark ages, when the minds of the great as well as the little were enveloped in
the mists of ignorance, and shackled by the chains of superstition? Is it
reasonable to suppose that they who were narrow-minded, ill-informed, childish,
and barbarous in all other parts of knowledge and of conduct, were liberal,
wise, and illuminated in the science and practice of government; so liberal, so
wise, so illuminated, as to strike out at once a system complete in all its
parts, and such as could in no subsequent age, in no variety of circumstances,
admit of correction, addition, or melioration? Did this wonderful fagacity,
approaching to inspiration, produce any thing else, in any other department,
which defies all improvement, and challenges the respect and veneration of the
latest posterity? Reasoning from analogy, we must conclude, that men, capable
of establishing at once a perfect system of government, must have produced
other inventions for the accommodation and security of life, worthy to be
preserved inviolate, and handed down unaltered, till time itself be absorbed in
the ocean of eternity. But where shall we look for it? The very question
implies a doubt of its existence; for singular excellence, such excellence as
approaches to perfection, cannot be concealed, but will shine with its own
luster and force, observation and wonder. Is the architecture of these paragons
of wisdom superior to the modern, in beauty or convenience? Let us only walk
the streets of London, and mark those houses which were spared by the great
fire, and which may fairly be supposed improvements on the more ancient
fabrics. We see them, contrary to every principle of common sense, with stories
projecting over each other. We see them ugly, mean, inconvenient. Let us
proceed to the northwest parts of that great town. Take a view of
Portland-place. Contrast the symmetry, the accommodation, the magnificence,
with the old edifices of Holborn or Aldersgate, and be persuaded that modern
improvements in government might be as much superior to the work of ancient
bunglers, as the elegant buildings of an Adams or a Wyat to the old mansions
now converted into inns, in the dirtiest streets, in the most decayed districts
of the metropolis.

Man is a progressive animal, and his advance toward improvement is a
pleasurable state. Hope cheers his path as he toils up the hill that leads him
to something better than he has yet experienced, on its gay summit gilded with
suushine. The labor of the ascent is a delight. But if he cannot help
conceiving, from a sense of grievances which he feels, something EXCELLENT, to
which he is prohibited by coercion from approaching, hope sickens, and
ill-humor succeeds to complacency. Hence arises a disagreement between the
governed and the governors; and the governors being possessed of present power,
use force and rigor to stifle the murmurs of complaint. Coercion but increases
the ill humor, which often lies latent, like the fires of a volcano, for a
considerable time, but at last bursts forth with irresistible fury. It is wise,
therefore, as well as just, in all governors, who have a regard for any thing
but their present and private interest, to encourage discussion, to seek
improvement of the system, and to reject no reform proposed by great numbers,
without a cool, a temperate, and a long deliberation. The reasons for rejection
should be clearly stated, with the utmost regard to open and ingenuous
behavior; and those who remain unconvinced, after all, should not be treated
with asperity. Every individual, in a free country, has a right to approve or
disapprove the system under which he lives, without peril or control, while be
preserves the peace. His peaceable deportment and acquiescence in the opinion
of others, contrary to his own conviction, renders him a very meritorious
character. He may be won over by gentleness; but force only tends to excite the
violence which it would imperiously repel.

But to tell a man of sense, reading, and reflection, that he must not venture
to entertain an opinion on political matters, or the existing government,
different from that of the minister and the herd of courtiers, is an impotent
endeavor to exercise a despotism over his mind, against which nature revolts,
and a manly spirit must rebel. Such a man can usually judge of governments, and
all the institutions of social life, better than mere men of business, however
high their rank or important their employments; far better than courtiers,
occupied in vain ceremonies, and usually as little able as inclined to enter
into deep disquisition.

Indeed it is difficult to avoid laughing at the extreme ignorance of crowned
heads themselves, in despotic countries, when one contrasts it with the
importance they assume, and the pomp and splendour with which they transfer
their royal persons from place to place. The sight is truly ludicrous. Are
these the men, occupied, as they usually are, in the meanest trifles and the
most degrading pleasures, who tell us that the government over which they
preside, is a perfect system, and that the wifest philosopher knows not how to
govern mankind -- that is, to consult their happiness and security -- so well
as themselves, neglected as they have been in youth, and corrupted in manhood
by panders to their vices, and flatterers of their foibles, their pride, and
their ambition? There is reason to believe that many kings, in despotic
kingdoms, have been less well educated, and possess less abilities, than a
common charity-boy, trained in a parish school to read and write. Yet these are
the men who, with their upstart creatures, presume to call philosophers
wretches, and to condemn the Voltaires, the Rousseaus, the Sydneys, the
Harringtous, and the Locks.

There are persons, even in countries where limited royalty is established who
are for ever extolling the CONSTITUTION, with all the abuses that have
insinuated themselves into it, in terms of extravagant and unqualified praise.
They talk against better knowledge, and may therefore be suspected of some
sinister motive. They can see defects as well as others; but they assume the
worst of all blindness, that which is voluntary.

The truth is, these men, for the most part, are such as would not like the
constitution in its purity, because in its purity the constitution is really
excellent, and highly favorable to the liberty which they hate. The
constitution, in its purity, renders the people of consequence, whose political
existence they are inclined to controvert or deny. But the constitution, in its
state of corruption, is favorable to prerogative, to aristocratical pride and
influence, to Tory and jacobi^ical principles; therefore it is, in their eyes,
criminal to handle it, to hint at its improvement, to remove a grievance, or
reform an abuse. The whole, together, though violated every day by corrupt
influence, they affect to consider as a written charter, dropped down from
heaven, like the old Roman Ancilia, and therefore scarcely to be viewed by
vulgar eyes, and certainly not to be touched by the hand of the profane PEOPLE.

Despotism is so ugly in its form, and so hostile, in its nature, to human
happiness, that no wonder those who wish to diffuse its spirit are inclined to
check and discourage among the people all political investigation. But let it
be a rule among those who really value liberty and the constitution, to use the
more diligence in political discussions, in proportion as courtiers and
ministers display a wish to suppress political writings and conversations, and
disterninate the doctrine, that things are so well constituted as neither to
require nor admit any improvement.

SECTION XXXII. On POLITICAL ETHICS; their chief Object is to throw Power into
the Hands of the worst Part of Mankind, and to render Government an Institution
calculated to enrich and aggrandize a (...) at the Expense of the Liberty,
Property, and Lives of the many.
IN the schools of early discipline, where youth is usually initiated in the
studies of humanity, men are taught to believe, that virtue is founded on
eternal truth, and that the distinctions of right and wrong are as clearly
definable as those between the meridian sunshine and the midnight shade. They
are told, from the highest authority, that happiness is to be found in
rectitude of conduct; and that under all circumstances, whatever may be the
consequence, nothing can justify the dereliction of integrity. The sacred
scriptures, the ancient philosophers, parental authority, the laws of their
country, and the PROCLAMATIONS of kings, all combine to convince them, that
morality is founded on the rock of truth, and that governments are sincere in
their professions to encourage those who do well, and be a terror only to the
EVIL.

Why was a national church instituted and supported at a great expense, but to
enforce among the people the laws of God, as paramount to all human laws, and
superceding the wretched devices of state policy? Government, by entering into
a strict alliance with the church, certainly engages to support the doctrines
of Christian morality: and it is no less impious in a king or a minister to
promote or increase any public measures repugnant to Christian morality, than
it would be in the bench of bishops.

When we enter our libraries, we find ourselves surrounded with authors,
celebrated for ages by the most enlightened part of the world, who teach the
immutability of truth, enforce the purest doctrines of morality, and endeavor
to found the dignity and happiness of human nature on the basis of virtue.

But let us leave a moment the school, the church, the library, and enter a
court and a cabinet. There Machiavelian ethics prevail; and all that has been
previously inculcated appears like the tales of the nursery, calculated to
amuse babes, and lull them in the lap of folly. The grand object of counselors
is to support and increase the POWER that appoints to splendid and profitable
offices, with little regard to the improvement of human affairs, the
alleviation of the evils of life, and the melioration of human nature. The
restraints of moral honesty, or the scruples of religon, must seldom operate on
public measures so as to impede the accomplishment of this primary and
momentous purpose. A little varnish is indeed used, to hide the deformity of
Machiavelism; but it is so very thin, and so easily distinguished from the
native color, that it contributes, among thinking men, to increase the
detestation which it was intended to extenuate.

Thus, for instance, treaties between nations commence with a most solemn
avowal of good faith, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Great and mighty nations, professing Christianity, maintaining a church, united
most intimately with the church, enter into agreements, under this awful
sanction, and break them without the least reluctance, whenever a cabinet
minister finds it in his inclination, or imagines it his interest to cause a
rupture. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are little thought of; but the
great object is to strike a blow with advantage, before the adverse nation is
on its guard, and while it is relying on the treaty.

Another instance of political religion is conspicuous in the prevailing
practice of rendering the emoluments of the church subservient to the minister,
in securing him a majority, and facilitating what is called his principal duty,
the management of the SENATE.

The Roman pontiffs, while in the rank of inferior clergy, and even of
cardinals, have exhibited the appearance of great piety, and a religious regard
to truth and justice; but when advanced to the triple mitre, and become, in
fact, KINGS, they have usually become perfectly secular in their public conduct
at home, and in their eonnections with surrounding nations, and have pleaded,
in excuse, state necessity. But can any necessity arise to violate the eternal
laws of truth and justice? Is religion a leaden rule, in the hands strong
enough to bend it to their various purposes? Pope JULIUS the Second appears to
have been one of the very worst princes that ever reigned. He delighted in WAR,
while he professed to be the representative of the Prince of Peace. He was
guilty of oppression and injustice; and while he pretended to be feeding the
sheep of Christ, gave himself no other concern but how he might secure the
fleece. Yet all his conduct was palliated, by the politicans around him, from
the plea of state necessity. Morality and religion gave way to the system of
POLITICAL ETHICS; and he, who ought to have blessed mankind, and to have
preached peace, became their oppressor, despot, and unrelenting murderer. I
mention JULIUS only as a striking instance, and hundreds may be adduced, of the
depraved system which rules cabinets, and which, for the gratification of the
FEW, renders the MANY miserable. No Machiavels can ever justify, in the eyes of
God, or of men uninfluenced by corruption, any politics, however subtle and
able, which, for the sake of aggrandizing a nation, (an abstract idea), much
less of gratifying a court, renders all the individuals of the nation so to be
aggrandized, poor, wretched, insecure, and slavish.

Let us suppose a nation entering most eagerly, and without listening one
moment to terms of accommodation, into a most dangerous war, professedly to
exterminate the bad principles and morals of a neighboring people, and to
defend law, order, and religion. It is impossible to imagine but that a nation
acting in this manner, and with this profession, must regulate all its own
public conduct, especially in a war of this kind, according to the strictest
law, order, and religion.

Will that nation oppose an armed neutrality, instituted to prevent the
interruption of neutral commerce? Will she maintain her reputation for justice,
if she should be the first and most violent in destroying this neutrality? Will
she break the law of nations, by insulting ambassadors? Will she take up arms,
and actually fight in defense of popery; after professing herself at the head
of protestantism, and the opposer of all intolerant superstition? Will she,
after declaring herself the friend of order, religion, and liberty, enter into
alliances with and subsidize the plunderers and oppressors of Poland? Will she,
pluming herself upon the love of order and religion, and detesting the cruelty
of the nation with whom she is at war, suffer Asia to be pillaged, and its
inhabitants to be slaughtered by her own sons; or encourage the Indians to
attack her brethren in North America; or hire mercenaries of German princes to
do the work of death, in a contest in which they have no immediate concern?
Will she endeavor to starve a whole nation, with whom she is at war, not only
the rulers and warriors, but infants, women, and old people, by preventing the
importation of corn? Will she FORGE assignats? Will she continue the slave
trade?

A conduct like this appears to be not only inconsistent with the pretended
defense of law, order, and religion, but at once proceeding from the spirit of
despotism, and promotive of it. It is certain that a man in private life,
acting in this manner, would be thought a bad man, a man destitute of
principle, and with whom it would be scarcely less dangerous to be on terms of
professed friendship than of open enmity. But actions do not alter their nature
with the paucity or multiplicity of the actors; and a nation may be guilty of
perfidy as atrocious and contemptible in its nature as an individual, and
infinitely more mischievous. Certainly the advisers and abettors of such
conduct do not take the most effectual means of recommending to mankind that
monarchy which they wage war to re-establish. They are hurting the cause of
KINGS in the minds of independent men and of posterity, while they blindly
appear to themselves to be promoting it with the greatest energy.

Whatever may be urged by sophists or politicians, it is certain that the great
eternal laws of truth and justice cannot be violated with impunity. The
violation may answer some fordid and temporary purpose; but in the end, it must
be injurious, if not fatal. Truth, like the sun in the heavens, is one. The
clouds indeed are variegated; but then they are insubstantial, and of momentary
existence. So is falsehood. It can assume any color. But time causes the hues
to fade; and truth bursts forth with new effulgence. We see despotism gradually
withdrawing from the finest countries of Europe. It must depart, at last, from
all, for it is opposed by reason and nature. They who endeavor to render it
permanent, labor in vain; but at the same time, they may detain it a while, and
cause, in the interval, misery and CARNAGE.

Let us reject all Machiavelism, all political ethics, that contradict the
acknowledged principles of truth and moral honesty. There can be no legitimate
government which is not founded and supported by systems of conduct favorable
to the happiness of human creatures -- the great mass of the people. Good
government cannot be formed on the basis of falsehood and chicanery. Let the
government of England ever stand on the square, solid, upright pedestals of
truth and justice, and it must defy every shock, but the convulsion of the
world's dissolution.

SECTION XXXIII. On trafficking with the CURE OF SOULS (Cura Animarum,) for the
Purpose of political, i. e. moral Corruption.
THE parish priests of a protestant country, when they are, what they ought to
be, and what they would usually be, if it were not for political influence,
CHRISTIAN ORATORS and CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHERS, are the most useful body of men,
considering their numbers and their power, in the whole community. The good
they are able to do is beyond all estimate; but unfortunately, it is a sort of
good not always taken into the account of those who are in pursuit of more
palpable advantages, SOLID GOLD, high station, and DOMINION OVER THEIR FELLOW
CREATURES. The proper business of the clergy is to mortify this very pride, the
indulgence of which is to their courtly patrons, the summum bonum, the chief
good of existence.

These persons, not having time or inclination to attend to religion, or any
thing but the pomp and vanity of the world, idolizing themselves, and unwilling
to acknowledge any other Deity, consider religion and the church merely as
state engines; powerful engines, in conjunction with military force, to press
down the clastic spirit of the people. They think, indeed, the emolume^ts
attending ecclesiastical functions too much, if cons^idered as recompenses for
religious services, which, in their minds, are no services at all, but scarcely
enough, when converted into douceurs for the business of corruption, the grand
object of modern ministers.

Ambitions noblemen, therefore, buy boroughs, and, like Lord Melcombe, send
their myrmidons to the senate; and ministers pay the expense of the purchase,
by conferring the highest ecclesiastical dignities, with stipends of many
thousands a year, designed originally to be spent in charity, on the younger
brothers, the cousins, the tutors, or the agents of these patrician
borough-mongers. It is indeed deemed politic, now and then, to raise a very
ingenious, learned, and pious man to the MITRE; but seldom without contriving
to promote, at the same time, the grand business of corruption. This ingenious,
learned, and pious man, un eveque de la fortune, is highly satisfied with the
dignity and emolument of his office. What need has he of the patronage
appendant to it? In this age, it were a childish weakness, something similar to
the simplicity recommended in the gosgel, to give away good things to modest
merit. But, though he has no need of the patronage, there are those, to whom he
is bound, by every tie of gratitude, who want it all. He therefore understands
that the CURE OF SOULS is to be given to persons whom the prime minister may
recommend; as the Duke of Newcastle recommended Buroughs and Franklin, whom he
had never seen or known, to the patronage of the lord chancellor. A translation
may be impeded, if scruples of conscience should prevent an obsequious
compliance with a minister's conge d'elire. "As to fitness or ^nfitness,"
(cries the friend of corruption), "any man that can read is sufficient, for
both prayers and sermons are ready made; and even if it were supposable that a
man could not read, a parish, that pays the rector a thousand a year, may be
supplied with an ingenious curate for forty."

Formerly learning was scarce among the laity. The clergy engrossed what little
there was in the world, and made themselves necessary to the state, not only in
ecclesiastical, but political offices and employments. "Before the
Reformation," (says a learned writer), "the canon law was in great use and
esteem, and of great use; and while the laity were in general unlettered, or
employed in a military life, the king made use of clergymen, skilled in this
law, in the offices of the chancery, privy seal, secretary of state, in the
courts of justice, and in embassies. The king rewarded men thus qualified to do
him service, with benefices and other ecclesiastical preferments; and the LORD
CHANCELLOR or Lord Keeper, in particular, was furnished with many advowsons, to
which, as they became vacant, he might present worthy masters and clerks in
Chancery, who were then all clergymen; which advowsons still continue in his
gift, though the reason thereof has long ceased." But one reason having
ceased, others may have risen still more weighty. We have already remarked,
more than once, how that prime minister, the Duke of Newcastle, used the
advowsons in the gift of the Chancellor. We know how preferment is bestowed in
Ireland as well as England. We remember the old manner of appointment to the
provostship of Trinity-college, Dublin.

The excellent divine from whom the last quotation was taken, speaking of
clergymen honored and enriched with two cures of souls, proceeds thus: "I do
not deny but there are pluralists of great ecclesiastical merit; but I do deny
that in general pluralists have greater merit than unalists, or than many in
orders who have no living at all; or that pluralists in general, become
pluralists for their ecclesiastical merit.

"Read over the list of pluralists in England, and see whether this sort of
merit be universally, or generally, or COMMONLY, regarded in the dispensations
granted them to hold pluralities. See whether the judge of this sort of merit
has power, if he were ever so well inclined, to regard it universally, or
generally, or commonly: see whether the motive of the patron to present a clerk
to a second living, has, in one instance out of twenty, been his eminent
ecclesiastical merit; or whether the same favor would not have been bestowed on
the same person, had his merit been inferior; nay, in many cases, upon the same
person, although instead of merit there had been demerit; and very often also,
if not the more likely, if instead of want of a competence, there had been
affluence. See whether the MERIT, which has been sometimes considered in this
case, has not, instead of ecclesiastical merit, been political opinions,
serviceableness in elections, private treaties, domestic negociations, and
other mean offices, below the consideration and interposition of ecclesiastics,
and hurtful to the ecclesiastical character. With some patrons, there is not
one of these qualifications that is not a stronger motive than parts, and
learning, and piety, and prudence, and virtue put together." Thus said Dr.
Newton, the founder and head of a college in Oxford, at a time when the cure of
souls was not considered as so trifling a care as it has been by more recent
ministers, who have seemed ready to sacrifice both soul and body to the gaining
of a majority in the senate. The CHURCH once preserved her own dignity with a
noble independence; but now she must bow, like a lacquey, to the vilest
minister of state.

But what is this cura animarum, this office of watching over the spiritual
state of populous districts? Is it not, on the hypothesis that the Christian
religion is true, the most important office that can be undertaken by man on
this side the grave? Is not the power of appointing to that office a trust most
sacred, if there be any thing sacred here below? What is SACRILEGE? the
stealing of a cushion or silver chalice from a church? And is it no sacrilege
to steal the church itself, and all its emoluments, designed to prevent the
increase of corruption, in order to reward and to promote corruption? Is the
cura animarum to be the last consideration in the patron's mind, though the
first in the eye of reason and religion? And is all this injustice, sacrilege,
impiety, and blasphemy to be endured, because the gift of the stipend, the
endowment, the tithes, the fees, buy an elector, who swears, at the time of
giving his vote, that he has not received a bribe? Is it to be wondered, if,
under such abuses, religion should be on the decline? Do the writings of
infidels, or the venal practices of patrons, contribute most to exterminate
Christianity? What has a similar system in France effected, carried indeed to
still greater lengths, but still similar? The greedy rapaciousness of court
sycophants in England is doing the work of ANTICHRIST, and destroying civil
liberty.

But I am chiefly concerned at present to consider the using the church, or the
cure of souls, for the corruption of the state and the violation of the
constitution, as a POLITICAL enormity. It certainly contributes to the spirit
of despotism. It naturally tends to make all the youth in the nation, who enter
on this sacred profession, look up to court favor, and not to depend on their
own merit or exertions, for promotion. It prevents them from voting freely at
elections. It prevents them from preaching freely from the pulpit. Its natural
tendency is to make them what they ought particularly to avoid, adulators,
worldly wise, parasitical, and acceptors of men's persons for the sake of
advantage. They must know, under such a system, that if they vote according to
conscience, or preach or write according to the truth as it is in Jesus, they
must forego all those prospects of rising in their profession, which, if merit
were rewarded, are a stimulus to every thing that can benefit human nature.
Clerical men, infirm, like others, often sink under this temptation. Few can
renounce great temporal advantages for the sake of promoting public good,
especially when they are sure of persecution as well as neglect. Now, what must
be the consequence to liberty, of a whole national clergy rendered expectant on
the favor of a court, and a proud aristocracy? May we not hear again from the
pulpit, the doctrines of divine right and passive obedience; the same doctrines
in effect, under names less offensive to the people? Have we not lately heard
them?

There is no mode of promoting the purposes of corruption, and the
aggrandizement of those who already engross the pomp of grandeur, more
injurious to liberty, and more villanously base, than that of seizing the
appointments and rewards of piety and virtue, to bestow them on those, whose
worldly wisdom is their chief recommendation, and who seem ready to worship God
only in the second place, if they worship him at all.

The Tindals, the Collins's, the Bolingbrokes, the Humes, the Gibbons, the
Voltaires, the Volneys, the miscreant philosophers of France, never did so much
injury to the cause of Christianity, as those English ministers of state, who,
while they shed the blood of thousands for the sake of law, order, and
religion, prostitute the church and the CURE OF SOULS to the corruption of the
senate.

SECTION XXXIV. Of Mr Hume's idea, That absolute Monarchy is the easiest Death,
the Euthanasia of the British Constitution.
THE very ingenious speculatist, Mr. Hume, seems to wish as well as think, that
as death is unavoidable by the political as well as the animal body, the
British constitution may die in the arms of despotism. His words are, "I would
much rather wish to see an absolute monarch than a republic in this island.
Absolute monarchy is the easiest death, the true euthanasia of the British
constitution."

His opinion, that our free government will terminate in despotism, seems
founded on the following argument, which he has inserted in his Essay on the
British Government.

"The British spirit and love of liberty, however great, will never be able to
support itself against that immense property which is now lodged in the king,
and is still increasing. Upon a moderate computation, there are near three
millions annually at the disposal of the crown. The civil list amounts to near
a million; the collection of all taxes to another million; and the employments
in the army and navy, along with ecclesiastical preferments, to above a third
million. A monstrous sum! and what may fairly be computed to be more than a
thirtieth part of the whole income and labor of the kingdom. When we add to
this immense property the increasing luxury of the nation, our proneness to
corruption, along with the great power and prerogatives of the crown, and the
command of such numerous military forces, there is no one but must despair
without EXTRAORDINARY EFFORTS, of being able to support our free government
much longer under all these disadvantages."

But why should not ' extraordinary efforts' be made, when the object is
extraordinary -- no less than the preservation of human happiness, by the
preservation of civil liberty? No efforts should be declined in such a cause;
nor should MEN, sensible of their blessings, and desirous of handing them down
as they received them, sink, with dastardly indolence, into a state of despair.

Mr. Hume, with all his penetration, could not foresee the revolution in
France; and how much the establishment of liberty, in that extensive and
enlightened country, would contribute to defeat the purpose of despots in all
the nations of Europe. It is certain that the minds of the people in all
countries are opened to the light of truth, by the emancipation of four or five
and twenty millions of men, from the slavery of prejudice and arbitrary
dominion. There is now very little occasion for that despair of preserving the
freedom of the British government, if the people will but be true to their own
cause. Despotism, in its last struggles, may make great essorts; but even they
will exhaust its strengh, and accelerate its dissolution. Firmness and
perseverance in the people will ultimately triumph over the unnatural exertions
of despotism, driven to madness by despair.

The spirit of liberty, it has been said, is a spirit of jealousy. It ought to
be ever-waking and circumspect; for the spirit of despotism never slumbers, but
watches every opportunity to increase prerogative, and diminish popular
authority. During those late alarms which cowardly and selfish aristocracy
labored to diffuse, in its panic fear for its own privileges, many instances
occurred of men who would willingly have sacrificed all the boasted freedom of
Englishmen, to the security which they flattered themselves grandeur, titles,
and riches would enjoy under an absolute government. Their pride was stung to
the quick, by the idea of equality, while their avarice trembled for their
property, and their cowardice for their personal safety. They saw specter in
the shapes of Truth, Justice, and Liberty, triumphing over an enslaved and
deluded world; they knew that they had little interest or connection with such
personages, and shuddered at their fancied approach. They shrieked with terror;
and would gladly have hastened to the greatest despot on earth for protection.
England had no despot on the throne to afford them an asylum; and therefore
they placed all their hopes on the military arm. War was the cry; victory was
sure. Bastiles were already built in imagination, and chains fabricated for the
millions that people the provinces of Gaul

Had it been possible for these men to prevail, in the moment of their
consternation, the scepter of England would have been converted by them into an
iron rod, and its king into the grand monarque of the old French tyranny.
Despotism, expelled from France, would have crossed from Calais to Dover, and
been received with open arms by devoted vassals, the slavish alarmists of an
English aristocracy. The free government of England might have found at this
period, as Mr. Hume prophecies it will here after do, an easy death in absolute
monarchy.

But though the high church and king alarmists did not succeed at that time,
which seemed auspicious to their designs, yet still they continue on their
posts, watching opportunities to infringe on liberty, to seduce the people from
their love of it, and gradually to reconcile them to arbitrary rule.

Strange as it is, as a moral phenomenon, that men should wish to be slaves,
yet it is certain, that the tribe of persons devoted to the pomp and power of
uncontrolled royalty, whom I call Tories or Aristocrats, for want of a more
appropriate and precise appellation, are still extremely zealous to make our
KING a far superior pot^^tate than he is allowed to be by that REVOLUTION,
which gives him all the royal rights he possesses, and places him on the throne.

Many circumstances favor the wishes of these persons; and nothing opposes them
so much as the French revolution, and those liberal opinions on the rights and
happiness of man which begin to prevail, wherever courts and ministers have
little influence. Among the circumstances which flatter them most with the
extension of royal power, the elevation of themselves, and the depression of
the people, is the interest which almost every man and woman in the nation
possesses in the public funds, and which they are all taught to believe would
be depreciated, or even annihilated, if the parliament were reformed, the
people reinstated in their rights, and the influence of the crown diminished.
This has communicated the panic of the alarmists among multitudes too remote
from courts, and too inconsiderable in station, to be influenced by ministerial
bribes; who, otherwise, could not but have sided with the cause of justice and
humanity. The terror of anarchy, occasioned by the ill-judged, impolitic, as
well as cruel conduct of some among the first leaders of the emancipated
French, has increased the number of ministerial partisans and favorers of
extended power and prerogative.

Were it possible that a panic could be permanent, or falsehood and artifice
ultimately victorious over truth and justice, there might be reason to fear,
from the spirit which the alarmists diffused, that English liberty might soon
sicken, and at last die paralytic in the arms of despotism. But notwithstanding
a temporary lethargy, the mass of the people, those who are quite out of the
reach of courtiers and grandees, still retain the healthy vigor of their
fathers' virtue, and would rouse themselves effectually to prevent the
accomplishment of Mr. Hume's prediction. They must indeed be lulled with the
Circean cup of corruption to sleep on, and take their rest, when the giant
Despotism is at their doors, ready to ^rush, with his mace, all that renders
life valuable to MEN; to men who have learned to think that mere vegetation is
not life. But Circe's cup is not capacious enough to contain opiate for a whole
people. All the douceurs of a minister, all the patronage in the professions,
all the riches of the east and the west, are insufficient to bribe the obscure
millions, who constitute the base of the political fabric, into complete
acquiescence under the pressure of despotic power, or under the apprehension of
it. The light of reason and of learning is too widely diffused to be easily
extinguished. There is every reason to believe, that it will shine more and
more unto a perfect day.

But as popular commotion is always to be dreaded, because bad men always arise
to mislead its efforts, how desirable is it that it may be prevented, by
conciliatory measures, by a timely concession of rights, by redress of
grievances, by reformation of abuses, by convincing mankind tha^ governments
have no other object than faithfully to promote the comfort and security of
individuals, without sacrificing the solid happiness of living men to national
glory, or royal magnificence. True patriotism and true philosophy, unattached
to names of particular men, or even to parties, consider the happiness of man
as the first object of all rational governments; and, convinced that nothing is
more injurious to the happiness of man than the spirit of despotism, endeavor
to check its growth, at its first and slightest appearance.

If the free government of England evinces, by its conduct, that the happiness
of the people is its sole object, so far from dreading the late Mr. Hume's
prophecy, that it will die in the arms of despotism, we may venture to predict,
that it will never die. My orisons shall be offered for its perpetuity; for I,
and all who think with me, on this subject, are its true friends; while the
borough-mongers, under the cloak of loyalty, are enemies both to the king and
the people.

SECTION XXXV. The Permission of Lawyers by Profession, aspiring at Honors in
the Gift of the Crown, to have the greatest Influence in the Legislature, a
Circumstance unfavorable to Liberty.
WHEN advocates address each other at the bar, they always adopt the
appellation of learned brother. There certainly is a necessity for great
learning in the profession of the long robe. But of what kind is the learning
required? It is, undoubtedly of a kind very little connected with philosophy or
enlargement of the mind. It is, in its widest range, confined to local customs,
and the statutes of a single nation. It pores upon the letter of the law, and
scarcely dares to contemplate the spirit. It is for the most part employed in
minute disquisitions, in finding exceptions, in seeking subterfuges, and often
in making the great eternal rules of equity give way to the literal meaning of
a narrow and unjust statute, framed by ignorant men in times little removed
from barbarism, and certainly both slavish and superstitious.

Is the education of professional and practicing lawyers particularly
calculated to expand the intellect, or to fill the heart with sentiments of
peculiar honor and generosity; such sentiments as alone can constitute a worthy
lawgiver, and an all-accomplished statesman? Is it not confined to particular
and minute objects, instead of taking in the whole horizon of human
concernments? A few, and but a few, of those who have risen to the first honors
and emoluments, have had a truly liberal education. The rest have been trained
either in the office of an attorney, or in studies and exercises that
contribute no more to liberalize or improve the heart, than the copying of
instruments, the perusal of statutes, the knowledge of forms. Some of the
finest faculties of the human constitution, the imagination and sentimental
affections, have little room for play, where the eye and memory are chiefly
concerned; and where the mind is obliged to labor in the trammels of dismal
formalities, like the horse in harness, dragging a heavy vehicle in the
wheel-ruts made by those who have gone before, without the liberty of
deviation. A hard head, a cold unfeeling heart, with a tenacious memory, are
likely to succeed best in such toil, which requires less of speed than of
patient plodding perseverance.

A dull man, trained in this dull manner, may become a very useful lawyer, and
certainly deserving of all the fees and emoluments of his profession. But does
it follow, that he must be a statesman, a senator, a cabinet counselor, sitted
to determine on questions of peace and war, and to consult and promote the
happiness of human nature? A lawyer, by singular felicity of genius and
disposition, may be fit for the momentous task; and I only ask whether his
education, and the studies and employments of his profession, are such as to
render him pre-eminently a statesman, and director of the measures of
government? Because he may, for a fee, plead successfully on any side, conduct
a trial, and assist a jury in determining a question of meum and tuum or may be
able to expound a statute, is he therefore more likely than all others to frame
laws of the most beneficent kind, having a view, not to particular cases only,
but to the general welfare? All his studies of jurisprudence have been merely
for the sake of lucre, and not free and disinterested, like those of the
general scholar, the philosopher and philanthropist.

The lawyer has, however, better opportunities for displaying his knowledge and
abilities than the members of other professions. Men have recourse to him on
matters very dear to their hearts; matters of property. With the sagacity of a
very moderate intellect, and a knowledge acquired by dint of mere labor and
long practice, he may be able to transact their pecuniary business with skill
and success. He becomes, therefore, a favorite with men of property in the
nation, which, whenever corruption prevails, will contribute much to push any
aspirant up the ladder of promotion. He soon pants for rewards extraneous to
his profession. It is not enough to be a judge or chancellor: he must be a poor
of the realm, a a counselor of state, a chief director in the upper house. It
is painful to behold all the old nobility, educated, as they have been, at the
greatest expense, improved by private tutors and by travel, crouching to a man,
who has acquired effrontery in the courts below, and whose unblushing audacity
has been the chief cause of the elevation, at which himself is surprised.

Men like these, emboldened by success, and accustomed, from their earliest
entrance into active life, to browbeat and overbear, assume a right to guide
the opinions of the senate and the council in the most important measures of
state. They become, in fact, the rulers of the nation; but owing their
elevation to the favor of a court, and placing all their expectations of
farther honors on its continuance, they become devoted to its purposes. They
are, in fact, still ATTORNEYS AND SOLICITORS, ready to exert all their powers
of sophistry, and to exhaust all their stores of chicanery, to defend the
measures of the minister, by rendering law, as far as they can, a leaden rule.
The old peers sit in silent admiration; while men, furnished with all the
subtleties of practicing lawyers, long hackneyed and hardened in the paltry
business of private individuals, presume to dictate peace or war, to impede or
prevent salutary reform, and keep the church, the army, and the navy under
their supreme control. Such is their habitual volubility and confirmed
assurance, that men of more liberal minds, but of less self-conceit and less
notoriety, stand in awe of them, and suffer them, with abject acquiescence, to
domineer. But however they may oppose the people's right, and the happiness of
the public, they are sure to espouse the cause of those from whom comes their
promotion. They therefore contribute to diffuse the spirit of despotism, more
than any other profession.

"But" (says the minister) "we cannot do without them. We must have able men in
the House of Lords; therefore we must have new men; and they must be selected
from a profession accustomed to public business, and which gives those who
belong to it opportunities of making an open display of their abilities." This
is a sad compliment to the hereditary nobility; as it seems to argue that they
are totally unfit to conduct the business that comes before them, without
attorneys and solicitors from below, who are ennobled merely to save the credit
of the peerage. But the truth is, the minister wishes to have some sharp and
tractable tools, by which he may do his dirty work, uninterrupted by the
interference of those who, possessing a constitutional right to examine it,
would perhaps often censure it, if they were not overawed and overborne by
those who pretend to be initiated in the mysteries of law.

In consequence of this management, a whole profession, with few exceptions,
extremely busy both with tongue and pen, is constantly enlisted in the service
of a minister. A great number of altor^ies and solicitors, besides the
gentlemen afficially honored with those names, are constantly retained on the
side of the court, and consequently lean, for their own sakes, and with a hope
of making their families, to the extension of crown influence and prerogative.
A set of men, so subtle, so active, so attentive to interest, must serve any
cause which they choose to espouse; and there is no doubt but that they greatly
serve (in the hope of serving themselves) the cause of despotism.

Let anyone who is unacquainted with the pains taken by modern ministers to
retain the lawyers on the side of prerogative, inspect the court calendar, and
remark how great a portion of the modern peers have owed their coronets
entirely to their profession as lawyers, to their qualifications as mere men of
business in detail, with very scanty knowledge of any thing else, and with
small claims to excellence as patriots, philosophers, or philanthropists. Mere
men of business commonly fix their eyes on objects of private lucre or temporal
elevation alone. They are apt to laugh at the names of patriotism, liberty, and
disinterested virtue. They have commonly been too long hackneyed among the
lowest of mankind, not perhaps in rank only, but in spirit, knowledge,
liberality, to retain any very scrupulous delicacy in their own bosoms, or to
believe its existence in others. They consider the good things of the world as
a scramble, where every man is to get what he can by address, and bold
pretension, since the law will not allow the use of violence Certainly there
can be no hope of reform, or what the French call a regeneration of human
affairs, while men so versed in corruption, so enriched by it, and so well
pleased with it, bear sway in senates, and direct the councils of princes
Several of the Crown Lawyers concerned in the prosecution of Hardy, etc. in
which so much pains was taken to shed innocent blood, were put into Parliament
by PEERS or grandees, as their members or agents, contrary to law and the
constitution.

The Marquis of Bath nominates Sir JOHN SCOTT, (the Attorney General,) to
represent his Lordship in the House o^ Commons.

Lord Beverley nominates Sir JOHN MITFORD (the Solicitor General,) to represent
him.

Earl Fitzwilliam nominates SERGEANT ADAIR.

The Earl of Lonsdale nominates Mr. ANSTRUTHER.

Mr. Buller nominates Mr. BEARCRAFT.

See Petition presented to the House of Commons, 6th of May, 1793.


.

SECTION XXXVI. Poverty, when not extreme, favorable to all Virtue, public and
private, and consequently to the Happiness of human Nature; and enormous
Riches, without Virtue, the general Bane.
SUPERFLUITY of riches, like superfluity of food, causes sickness and debility.
Poverty, or mediocrity of fortune, is the nurse of many virtues; of modesty,
industry, sobriety. But, in this age, the very name of poverty is odious.
Poverty is a haggard phantom that appalls half the world, and drives them over
seas, into torrid zones, to disease and death! Life itself is thought by many a
gift fit to be thrown back again into the face of the Almighty Donor, if it is
not accompanied with the means of luxury, the means of making a figure beyond
others; in a word, the means of indulging the spirit of despotism. Things are
so managed, in a state of deep political corruption, that the honors due only
to virtue are paid exclusively to MONEY; and those who want not riches for the
sake of indulgence in pleasure, or from the love of money itself, grow complete
misers, in the hope of obtaining together with opulence. civil honors, seats in
the senate house, and ^OYAL FAVOR. They hope to make themselves of consequence
enough to be corrupted or rather purchased by the state.

What is the consequence to the people, the laborer, the manufacturer, the
retail trader, to poor families with many children, women with small
patrimonies, annuitants, dependents, and all the numerous train of persons who
are compelled to live, as the common phrase expresses it, from hand to mouth?
Their gains or means are fixed, and by no means rise with the rising price of
necessaries. But, in consequence of this rage for riches, the necessaries of
life become not only dearer, but worse in quality; less nourishing, less
commodious, and less durable. Landlords raise their rents to the utmost
possible extent; each determining to make his rent-roll as respectable as some
opulent neighbors favored by a lord lieutenant for his INFLUENCE. They will not
let their farms in little portions, to poor industrious tenants; but to some
overgrown monopolizer, who is in as much haste to grow rich as the landlord
himself; seeing that as he becomes rich he becomes a man of consequence in the
county, and that not only esquires, but even lords, take notice of him at the
approach of a general election. He is a wholesale farmer, and will breed but
few of the animals of the farm-yard, and those only for his own family
consumption. His children are too proud to carry the productions of the
hen-roost or dairy to the market. He scorns such little gains. He deals only in
a great way; and keeps up the price by withholding his stores when the market
is low. The neighboring rustics, who used to be respectable, though little
farmers, are now his day-laborers, begging to be employed by the great man who
has engrossed and consolidated half a dozen farms. The old farm-houses are
pulled down. One capital mansion is sufficient for a large territory of meadow
and arable land, which used to display smoking chimnies in every part of a
cheerful landscape, with a healthy progeny of children, and tribes of animals,
enlivening the happy scene. The tenant now reigns over the uninhabited glebe a
solitary despot; and something of the ancient vassalage of the feudal system is
restored, through the necessities of the surrounding cottagers, who live in
hovels with windows stopped up, hardly enjoying God's freest gifts, light and
air. A murmur will exclude them even from the HUT, compared with which the
neighboring dog-kennel is a palace.

The little tenants of former times were too numerous and too inconsiderable to
become objects of corruption. But the great tenant, the engrosser of farms,
feeling his consequence, grows as ambitious as his landlord. He may have sons,
cousins, and nephews, whom he wishes to provide for by places; and therefore it
becomes a part of his prudential plan, to side, in all county elections, and at
all public meetings, with the court party, the lord lieutenant, and the
aristocratical toad-eaters of the minister.

In like manner, the GREAT manufacturer, finding that riches tend to civil
HONORS and political consequence, as well as to plenty of all good things,
cannot be contented with the slow progress of his grandfathers, but must whip
and spur, in his career from the temple of Plutus to the temple of Honor. His
workmen therefore, are paid, not by the day, in which case they would endeavor
to do their work well, though slowly, but by the piece. The public, perhaps,
must of necessity purchase his commodity, however bad, and it is probably as
good as others fabricate, because all are pursuing the same glorious end, by
similar means. The materials, as well as the workmanship, are of inferior
quality. For, the great monopolizers and dealers can force a trade, and get
vent among the little retailers, by giving credit, and by various other
contrivances, for the most ordinary ware. The great man, whose forefathers felt
little else but avarice, now burns with AMBITION; and, as city honors and rural
dignities, senatorial consequence and even magistracy, are bestowed by
ministerial favor, he must be devoted to a minister, and carry all the little
traders and artisans to second the views of a court at the general election, or
at public meetings, appointed for the promotion of a minister's project to keep
himself in place.

These, and a thousand similar causes, visible enough in the various
departments of manufacture, commerce, and agriculture, are at this moment
urging on the great machine of corruption, and diffusing the spirit of
despotism. The revolution of France will indeed check it, throughout Europe, by
the influence of principles, favorable to the freedom and happiness of man; but
at present, even that event is used by short-sighted politicians, to i^^rease
aristocratical arrogance, to depres^ popular spirit, and to give unnatural
influence to the possession of MONEY, however acquired and however abused.

An indignant writer of ancient Rome exclaims: Nullum crimen abest, facinusque
libidinis ex quo PAUTERTAS ROMANA perit. Since Poverty, our guardian god, is
gone,
Pride, laziness, and all luxurious arts,
Pear like a deluge in from FOREIGN PARTS, Viz. The East Indies at present.
etc.
DRYDEN.


JUVENAL. Prima peregrinos obscoena PECUNIA mores,
Intulit et turpi fregerunt secula luxu,
Divitiae molles. --


The virtuous ancients, by the light of nature and the evidence of experience,
were taught that, when riches obtained a value and esteem beyond their proper
use, merely for the sake of splendour, ostentation, and aristocratic
opoppression, a fatal blow was given to liberty. The human race, they thought,
degenerated under the despotism of money. In such a corrupt system, there was
no encouragement given in the state to excel in virtue for its own sake: even
generals and admirals went on expeditions, not even for false and vainglory,
far less from motives of patriotism; but to fill their coffers with plunder,
and render war a cloak for pillage.

Cauponantes bellum, non belligerentes. They made a trade, and a sordid trade,
of legal bloodshed, not conducting it with the disinterested spirit of
soldiers, animated with the love of their country, but with the cunning and
avarice of Jew usurers in Duke's Place.

And have we had no instances of generals or admirals making war a trade, in
recent times, and in Christian nations; using the sword, to which the idea of
honor has been attached, as an implement of lucre, and rendering it far less
honorable than the knife of the butcher, exercising his trade in the market of
Leadenhall? If it should ever be true, that ships of war are made merchantmen
in the vilest merchandise, the barter of human blood for gold, will it not
prove, that the attaching honor to the possession of money, is destroying, not
only the national virtue, but its honor and defense? Have towns in the East
Indies never been given up to plunder, contrary to the law of nations, as well
as justice and humanity, to make the fortune of European officers?

It is a noble and virtuous struggle, to stand up in defense of the rights of
nature, true honor, liberty and truth, against the overbearing dominion of
pecuniary influence. MAN will shine forth in his genuine luster; when money can
no longer gild the base metal of folly, knavery, pride, and cruelty. While the
corrupt Ganges slows into the Thames, it will contaminate its waters, and
infect the atmosphere of freedom. When British freeholders, yeomen, merchants,
manufacturers, generals, admirals, and senators, become slaves to pelf only,
forgetting or despising the very name of public virtue and disinterested
exertion, nothing can oppose the spirit of despotism but the spirit of the
common people. That spirit, indeed, may at once rescue human nature from
misery, and perpetuate the blessings of a pure and free constitution. But when
they who fatten on the blood of their fellow creatures, are also permitted to
domineer by the influence of their ill-gotten MONEY, over free countries, to
command majorities at elections, and drive all opposition before them, what
chance of happiness can remain to virtuous independence? What, in such
circumstances, can preserve liberty, but a convulsive struggle, attended,
perhaps, with the horrors of the first French revolution, which God, in his
mercy, avert!

SECTION XXXVII. On the natural Tendency of making Judges and Crown Lawyers,
Peers; of translating Bishops and annexing Preferments to Bishoprics, in what
is called, commendam.
IF there is any part of the constitution of England, in the praise of which
eloquence may employ her most glowing colors, without entrenching upon the
consines of truth, it is the JUDICIAL part of it. The purity of public justice
in England, is unequalled in any country which the sun illuminates in his
diurnal progress. The reason is obvious. The verdict is given by juries of men
usually beyond the reach of corruption. No ministerial influence can descend to
all the individuals, in middle and humble life, who may be called upon to sit
in judgment, and ultimately decide, as jurors, on the property, the fame, and
the life, of their fellow-citizens. We have lately had a most glorious instance
of the virtue of private citizens, exercising this most important office. The
verdicts given in the state trials, in one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-four, do more honor to the British character, than all the military
exploits in the reign of George the Third. Such verdicts make our constitution
truly enviable to the nations of Europe. Twelve honest men, on each of these
trials, proved to the world, that no power, no authority, no terror, nor even
the factitious rage of aristocratical principles, which had been artfully
fostered, could lead them to swerve from the right line of justice. They feared
God, but not man; and posterity will honor them, when the names of subtle
politicians, clothed with a brief but lucrative authority, if mentioned at all,
shall be mentioned with detestation. It was well observed by a zealous and
honest advocate on the occasion, that he could not despair of the case, when it
was brought from the corrupt to the incorrupt part of the constitution. The
days of acquittal were the jubilees of truth, the triumphs of virtue; and, in a
time of dejection, revived the hopes of patriotism and philanthropy.

Official judges, not having the final determination of the cause, but feeling
the check of the JURIES, commonly conduct themselves, even in state trials,
with some degree of candor and moderation. Indeed, we are so happy as to see
men appointed to this office, in our time, whose tried integrity gives reason
to believe, that, if they were not thus wisely checked, they would, with few
exceptions, preserve impartiality.

Nevertheless, though much has been said on the independence of judges, and
though great praise is due to our king, who placed them in their offices for
life, and not removable at his pleasure, yet it must be confessed, that there
still remain temptations, which might have great influence on men less virtuous
than our present judges are. It is observed, that PEERAGES, in modern times,
have been bestowed, with peculiar bounty, on lawyers; and some have ventered to
say, that the expectation of this splendid reward may frustrate all endeavors
to secure, especially in state trials, the perfect independence of the judges
who preside. It is not enough that they do not fear removal from their
dignified office. Their hopes may influence, more than their fears. They may
hope to add to opulence the dignity of family distinction, escutcheons,
coronets, and hereditary seats in the legislature. If themselves have seen too
much of the vanity and folly of worldly pomp to admire it, (which, however, is
not often the case with men who may be great lawyers, without any philosophy or
religion,) yet they may have sons, wives, daughters, relatives, and friends, to
whom the splendour of life, (as they have, possibly, little solid merit,) is
valuable in the highest degree. A peerage is therefore, for the most part, a
very powerful allurement, I will not say, to disguise the truth or pervert the
law, but obsequiously to seek ministerial favor.

When peerages are lavished on lawyers high in place, it is a circumstance
viewed with some degree of jealousy by those who are willing to guard
constitutional liberty with unwinking vigilance. Perhaps it might afford
satisfaction to such men, if judges were by law excluded from all higher
elevation; if they were indeed most amply paid and most respectfully revered;
but, for the sake of preventing the possibility of a wrong bias, where the
happiness of the people is most intimately concerned, were prevented from
viewing a brilliant dazzling coronet, suspended as their reward, over the
scales of justice.

But here an objector will urge, with serious solicitude, that, as the House of
Lords is a court of judicature, in the last resort, a court of appeal from
every court in the kingdom, it is necessary that it should be well supplied
with lawyers of eminence.

On this subject Mr. PALEY says; "There appears to be nothing in the
constitution of the House of Lords; in the education, habits, character, or
professions of the members who compose it; in the mode of their appointment, or
the right by which they succeed to their places in it, that should qualify them
for their arduous office; except, perhaps, that the elevation of their rank and
fortune affords a security against the offer and influence of SMALL bribes.
Officers of the army and navy, courtiers, ecclesiastics; young men who have
just attained the age of twenty-one, and who have passed their youth in the
dissipation and pursuits which commonly accompany the possession or inheritance
of great fortunes; country gentlemen, occupied in the management of their
estates, or in the care of their domestic concerns and family interests; the
GREATER part of the assembly born to their station, that is, placed in it by
CHANCE; most of the rest advanced to the peerage for services and from motives
utterly unconnected with legal erudition; -- these men compose the tribunal to
which the constitution entrusts the interpretation of her laws, and the
ultimate decision of every dispute between her subjects!"

From this very degrading representation of the House of Lords, the Reverend
Archdeacon proceeds to justify the practice of constantly placing in it, some
of the most eminent and experienced lawyers in the kingdom. He would, I think,
with more propriety have argued against rendering one part of the legislature a
court of justice, designed both to make and execute the laws; because every
solid politician has agreed in the propriety of keeping the legislative and
judicial powers as separate and as distant from each other as it is possible.

I leave this point for the discussion of future political writers, and satisfy
myself with suggesting, that it is necessary to the perfect contentment of a
people jealous of their liberty and the purity of judicial proceedings, that
all temptations whatever should be removed from the sight of frail human
beings, sitting in the seat of judgment, which may lead them to court the favor
of ruling powers at the expense of justice. It is not MONEY alone which BRIBES.
Title and rank have more influence on the universal passion, vanity; especially
when avarice has been already gratified with ample salaries and the emoluments
of a lucrative profession.

The consideration of the possible rewards which may diminish the independence
of judges, naturally leads to the consideration of those which may secularize
the bishops, and injure the cause of religion, for which alone episcopacy
itself could be established.

But, as this is a subject of some delicacy, I shall use the authority and
words of Dr. Watson, the present Bishop of Llandaff, who, having been in the
minority at the time he wrote upon it, ventured to speak the whole truth, with
that freedom which becomes an honest man in every rank, and is particularly
expected from a Christian bishop.

"I know," says Bishop Watson, "That many will be startled. I beg them not to
be offended, at the surmise of the bishops not being independent in the House
of Lords; and it would be easy enough to weave a logical cobweb, large enough
and strong enough to cover and protect the conduct of the Right Reverend Bench
from the attacks of those who dislike episcopacy. This, I say, would be an easy
task; but it is far above my ability to eradicate from the minds of others (who
are, notwithstanding, as well attached to the church establishment as
ourselves,) a SUSPICION THAT THE PROSPECT OF BEING TRANSLATED influences the
minds of the BISHOPS too powerfully, and induces them to pay too great an
attention to the BECK of a minister. The suspicion, whether well or ill
founded, is disreputable to our order; and, what is of worse consequence, it
hinders us from doing that good which we otherwise might do; for the laity,
while they entertain such a suspicion concerning us, will accuse us of avarice
and ambition, of making a gain of godliness, of bartering the dignity of our
office for the chance of a TRANSLATION.

"Instead then, (proceeds the Bishop), of quibbling and disputing against the
existence of ministers influence over us, or recriminating and retorting the
petulance of those who accuse us on that account, let us endeavor to remove the
evil; or, if it must not be admitted that this evil has any real existence, let
us endeavor to ^emove the appearance of it.

"The disparity of income and pat^onage might be made so small, or so
apportioned to the labors, that few bishops would be disposed to wish for
translations; and consequently the bishops would, in appearance as well as in
reality, be INDEPENDENT.

"But, in rendering the bishops independent, you will reduce the power of the
crown in the House of Lords. -- I do not mean to deny this charge; nay, I am
willing to admit it in it is full extent. -- The influence of the crown, when
exerted by the cabinet over the public counselors of the king, is a
circumstance so far from being to be wished by his true friends, that it is as
dangerous to the real interests and honor of the crown itself, as it is odious
to the people, and DESTRUCTIVE OF PUBLIC LIBERTY.

"It may contribute to keep a prime minister in his place, contrary to the
sense of the wisest and best part of the community; it may contribute to keep
the king himself unacquainted with his people's wishes, but it cannot do the
king or the state any service. To maintain the contrary is to satirize his
majesty's government; it is to infinuate, that his views and interests are so
disjoined from those of his people, that they cannot be effectuated by the
uninfluenced concurrence of honest men.

"I cannot admit the circumstance of the bishops being rendered independent in
the House of Lords, as any real objection to the plan proposed; on the
contrary, I think it a very strong argument in its favor; so strong an one
that, if there was no other, it would be sufficient to sanctify the measure."

The corruption of the church for the purpose of corrupting the legislature, is
an offense far more injurious to the general happiness of mankind and the
interests of a Christian community, than any of those which have banished the
offenders to Botany Bay, or confined them for years within the walls of the
prisonhouse. Both the corruptors and the corrupted, in this case, are more
injurious to Christianity than all the tribe of skeptics and infidels; than
Tindal, Toland, Bolingbroke, Hume, Rousseau, Voltaire, and Gibbon. The common
people do not read them, and perhaps could scarcely understand them. But the
common people do read the newspapers daily, and see the names and qualities of
those who divide in the senate house, on questions of the last importance. They
must therefore entertain a SUSPICION, as the Bishop of Llandaff expresses it,
that religion itself, as well as its official, opulent, dignified supporters,
is but an instrument of state, a tool in the hand of a minister. They must
naturally consider venalty as doubly base, when clothed in the sanctified robes
of religion. What has happened in France, in consequence of the corruptions of
the church by the state, ought to afford a striking admonition.

I wish to point out, in these times, writings of LIVING BISHOPS in favor of
Christianity, because they would be opposed with the best grace against the
writings of LIVING INFIDELS. But, to the reproach of my want of intelligence, I
know not the names of the majority, till I find them in the COURT CALENDAR. The
printed works of even this majority I cannot find, either in the shops or the
libraries: the few I do find, even of the minority, are not adapted to the
wants of the people at large. Their occasional sermons, after they have served
their day become, like almanacks, out of date: a collection of old court
calendars would be nearly as edifying and more entertaining to the multitude.

It is indeed certain, that the archiepiscopal mitres received more luster than
they gave, from the sermons of Dr. Tillotson and Dr. Seeker. It would give me
pleasure to place the sermons of LIVING ARCHBISHOPS by their side; and I would
mention them had they come to my knowledge. The sermons, however, of the few
living bishops who are known at all to the PUBLIC will, I hope, prove to
mankind, that some among the bishops, in this happy isle, do not think it a
sufficient return for princely revenues, to vote always with a minister, or to
increase, with lawn sleeves, the pageantry of a birthday. To perform the
occasional duties of ordination, confirmation, and ^isitation, cannot satisfy
the minds of men who receive the honors and emoluments of Durham, WINCHESTER,
York, or Canterbury. That it is so, is happy; for if ever the prelatical clergy
should be SUSPECTED of becoming merely ministerial instruments; if, for
instance, they should ever be supposed so far secularized, as to concede to the
minister that made them bishops, the right of nominating to all the most
valuable preferments in their gift, in order to enable him the better to
corrupt that parliament in which themselves also have engaged to give a VENAL
VOTE; from that time, they would contribute more to the downfall of the church,
than all the writings of all the unbelievers, from Frederic, late King of
Prussia, to the American Republican, Thomas Pain. The sin of simony in a
private man, who pays a fair price for a profitable appointment, with his own
money, honestly earned by virtuous industry, and does the duties of it, is as
nothing when compared to the simony of him who buys a high and important
station, greatly lucrative, with a corrupt VOTE and a base dereliction of those
rights of pa^ronage, which were intended to encourage merit only, and to
prevent that very corruption which he feeds and cherishes, to gratify his own
sordid avarice and childish vanity.

The bishops, in their charges, are now founding an alarm. They very justly
affirm, that the existence of Christianity is now in danger. They wisely urge
the INFERIOR clergy to the most vigilant activity. Thus far they certainly do
honor to the episcopal function. But still while the public SUSPECTS the bare
possibility of the bench being, as Bp. Watson says, at the book of the
minister, they will consider all this ^eal as little better than that of
Demetrius, who made silver shrines for Dian^.

When indeed we add to the probable effect of translations from a poorer to a
richer bishop^^^, the holding of rich pluralities with bishop^^es, under the
name of COMMENDAMS, it is difficult not to (...) with Bishop Watson, that
episcopal independence is endangered, and that we must look rather i^
cathedrals, than in the House of Lords, for episcopal integrity. Conscientious
dissenters are shocked, and libertines and infidels laugh, when they view the
bench, as if they were specta^ors of a solemn mummery, or a mock-heroic farce.
All this danger, offense, and reproach, might possibly be prevented, if
translations and comm^ndams were utterly prohibited.

But, setting aside the ^ffect of translations and commendams on the state of
religion, let us seriously consider them as they operate on the increase of
prerogative and the spirit of despotism. These things influence not only those
who have attained mitres, but a numerous tribe of expectants; and those
expectants POSSESS THE EAR OF THE PEOPLE. Is it reasonable to suppose that the
doctrines of the pulpit will not, under these circumstances, be fashioned to
the inclinations of the minister? What can contribute more to diffuse the
spirit of despotism, than the employment of many thousand pulpits, at least
once in each week, in obliquely preaching doctrines, that favor its prevalence,
under the sanction of DIVINE AUTHORITY?

SECTION XXXVIII. That all Opposition to the Spirit of Despotism should be
conducted with the most scrupulous Regard to the existing Laws, and to the
Preservation of public Peace and good Order.
THE frailty of human nature is one of the commonest of common-places. The
wisest and best of men are desirous of palliating their errors, by claiming a
share, as MEN, in human infirmity. One of the infirmities most acknowledged and
lamented is, a tendency to rush from one extreme to another; a proneness to
fall into a vice, in the desire of escaping an error. Thus the detestation of
despotion and the love of liberty, both of them rational and laudable, have led
many to factious and violent conduct, which neither the occasion justified, nor
prudence would precipitately adopt, even if the occasion might appear to
justify them.

From faction and violence in the cause of liberty, which disgrace the cause
itself, and give advantage to the favorers of arbitrary power, I most anxiously
dissuade all who love mankind and their country. Faction and violence are
despotic in the extreme. They bring all evils of tyranny, without any
consolation, but that they are usually transient; whereas tyranny is durable.
They destroy themselves, or are destroyed by force in the hands of a superior
power. In either case, much is lost to the cause of liberty; because the
persons who have been betrayed by their passions into excesses, were probably
sincere; and if they had been also discreet and moderate would have been
effectual as well as zealous promoters of the public good. It is certain, that
very honest men are very apt to be betrayed into violence by their warmth of
temper. They mean good, and do ill. They become the instruments of
dispassionate knaves; and are often led into extravagances by the very party
against whom they act, in order that they may be exposed, and become obnoxious
to censure.

Wisdom is gentle, deliberate, cautious. Nothing violent is durable. I hope the
lovers of liberty will show the sincerity of their attachment by the wisdom of
their conduct. Tumultuary proceedings always exhibit some appearance of
insanity. A blow struck with blind violence may inslic^ a wound or a bruise,
but it may fall in the wrong place; it may even injure the hand that gives it,
by its own ill-directed force.

Man being a reasonable creature, will always submit to reason, if you give
time for his passions to cool, and wait for the mollia tempora fandi, the
proper opportunities of addressing him. A FEW, in the great mass of mankind,
may be corrupted by views of interest, by expectations of preferment, by
bribes, and by titles. But there are not rewards enough of this kind to corrupt
the whole body of any people. The great body of the people will follow that
which appears to them right, and just, and true. Let it be clearly laid before
them, and left for their calm consideration. If it should so happen, which is
very unlikely, that they should not adopt it, after understanding it, and duly
weighing its importance, then they must be left to the error of their ways. Si
populus vult decipi, decipiatur. If the people will be deluded, they must be
so. Force cannot eradicate error, though it may destroy life. Riot, tumult,
turbulence may do great mischief, but they carry no conviction.

Inflammatory language at popular meetings is to be avoided; and, indeed,
multitudes of the lowest of the people are not to be wantonly convened. Without
in the least impeaching their rights, it must be allowed that their passions
are too violent, when heated by collision with each other, and their judgments
too weak, when not previously informed by reading and education, to act wisely
when met in a large body, without authorized guides, and without strict
regulation. A man who is a sincere patriot, and not a mere demagogue for
sinister purposes, will be cautious of assembling crowds of the lowest of the
people. Lord George Gordon's unfortnate conduct has left a lasting lesson. He,
I firmly believe, intended none of that mischief which ensued; but who can say
to the waves of a troubled sea, "thus far shall ye go, and no farther?" I know,
and have already commented on, the advantage taken from those riots by the
friends of high-prerogative docrines, for disparaging the people at large,
notwithstanding the people certainly had no concern in them.

Though decidedly a friend to the reform of the House of Commons, I cannot
agree with the Duke of Richmond in the propriety of universal suffrage. I think
his idea perfectly Utopian. Sir Thomas More never wrote any thing more
visionary in his celebrated fiction; Sir Robert Filmer nothing more adverse to
real liberty. Universal suffrage, I fear, would cause universal confusion; and
the friends of mankind would be inclined to fly for temporary refuge even to
the throne of a DESPOT. Persons in a state of servitude could never be expected
to give a free vote; and vagabonds and paupers would use their liberty for a
cloak of maliciousness. I wish the right of suffrage to be extended as far as
it possibly can, without endangering public order and tranquillity; but extreme
ignorance and extreme penury cannot with prudence be trusted with a power which
both requires knowledge and commands property.

But whatever politicians may determine upon this point, I think it certain,
that debates upon it connot be held in very large assemblies, into which, not
only the lowest but the vilest of mankind are allowed admission, and all the
privileges of counselors, de summa rerum, on matters of the highest
importance, without extreme danger of violating law, and disturbing that order
which is necssary to comfort and security.

I wish, therefore, that all preliminary consultation on this point, and all
points like this, may be conducted by writing, by appeals to reason in the
closet, and that a considerable time may be allowed to cool all intemperate
heats; and give solidity to the materials of the intended repair. At county
meetings or associations, I would have the civil power in full force; but never
the military. The staff of the constable should be more coercive than the sabre
of the dragoon; for the constitution admits the one as its own, but certainly
looks at the other with horror. Every tumult, productive of mischief, gives the
friends of arbitrary power an opportunity for introducing the military, of
arguing against all popular interference in that very government which the
people support by their industry, and which, according to the law of God,
nature, and reason, they have a right to control by their supreme authority.
There may be cases of the last necessity, which I shudder to think of, in which
nothing but the power of the people, acting by force, can maintain or recover
their usurped rights. Such must occur but seldom. May our country never
experience them!

There can be no good reason assigned why government should not be, like every
thing else, continually advancing to all the perfection of which it is capable.
Indeed, as the happiness of mankind depends more upon well-regulated and
well-administered government, than on any thing subordinate in life or in arts,
there is every reason for bestowing all the time which every passing generation
can bestow, in bringing government to its utmost point of attainable
perfection. It is the business and the duty of those who now live, as they
value their own happiness and the happiness of their posterity, to labor in the
reform of abuses, and the farther improvement of every improveable advantage.
Would any man be listened to with patience who should say, that any useful art
or manufacture ought not to be improved by ingenious projectors, because it
does tolerably in its present state, satisfies those who are ignorant of the
excellence of which it is susceptible, and cannot be altered, even for the
better, without causing some trouble, for a time, among those who have been
accustomed to the present imperfect and erroneous methods of conducting it? No;
encouragements are held out for improvement in all arts and sciences, conducive
to the comfort and accommodation of human life. What, then, in the first art,
the art of diffusing happiness throughout nations, shall he who attempts
improvement be stigmatized as an innovator, prosecuted as a seditious
intermeddler, and persecuted with the resentment of those who find their
advantage in the continuance of error, and the diffusion of abuse and
corruption? However courtiers may patronize silly establishments, which claim a
prescriptive right to folly, inutility, and even mischievous consequences, the
common sense of mankind will revolt against them, join in demanding reform, and
in saying of old customs, when become nuisances by alteration of circumstances,
that instead of being sanctified by long duration, they are now more honored in
the breach than the observance.

But let the reformation be gentle, though firm; wise, though bold; len^ent to
persons erring, though severe against error. Let her not alarm the friend of
LIBERTY by sudden violence, but invite all to the cause of truth and justice,
by showing that she is herself guarded, not only by truth and justice, but by
MERCY. Let us show ourselves, in seeking political reformation, what we profess
to be, a nation of Christians, if not philosophers; and let not a groan be
heard amid the acclamations of triumphant liberty, nor one drop of blood sadden
the glorious victory of philosophy and Christianity over PRIDE.

SECTION XXXIX. The Christian Religion favorable to Civil Liberty, and likewise
to EQUALITY rightly understood.
YOU seldom meet with infidelity in a cottage. You find evil and misery there,
as in palaces; but you do not find infidelity. The poor love the name and
religion of Jesus Christ. And they have reason to love them, if they only
considered the obligations they are under to them for worldly comfort, for
liberty, for instruction, for a due consideration in civil society.

The rights of man, to mention which is almost criminal in the eyes of
despotical sycophants, are plainly and irresistibly established in the gospel.
There is no doubt but that all his creatures are dear to the Creator and
Redeemer; but yet, from motives of mercy and compassion, there is an evident
predilection for the POOR, manifested in our Savior's preaching and ministry.
These are very striking words: "The blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk; the l^pers are cleansed, and the deaf hear; the dead are raised up, and
the POOR HAVE THE GOSPEL PREACHED TO THEM." The instruction, the consolation,
the enlightening of the POOR, are placed with the greatest of his miracles, the
recuscitation of extinguished life. Who, indeed, did trouble themselves to care
for the poor, till JESUS CHRIST set the glorious example? It was a miraculous
thing, in the eye of the world, that a divine teacher should address himself
particularly to those who could not reward him with a worldly recompense! But
he came to destroy that INEQUALITY among mankind, which enabled the rich and
great to treat the poor as beasts of burden. He himself chose the condition of
poverty, to show the rich and proud of how little estimation are the trifles
they dote upon, in the eye of him who made them, and who can destroy them at
his pleasure.

Let us hear HIM open his divine commission. The words are very comfortable,
especially after reading the histories of the tyrants who have br^ised ^^ankind
with their rods of iron. We find them in the fourth chapter of St. Luke.

" And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias; and when he
had opened the book, he found the place wherein it was written:

"THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD IS UPON ME, BECAUSE HE HAS APPOINTED ME TO PREACH THE
GOSPEL TO THE POOR; HE HAS SENT ME TO HEAL THE BROKENHEARTED, TO PREACH
DELIVERANCE TO THE CAPTIVES, AND RECOVERY OF SIGHT TO THE BLIND; TO SET AT
LIBERTY THEM THAT ARE BRUISED;

"TO PREACH THE ACCEPTABLE YEAR OF THE LORD.

"And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down,
and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.

"And he began to say unto them, This day is the scripture fulfilled in your
ears.

"And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded
out of his mouth: and they said, IS NOT THIS JOSEPH's SON?"

-- And soon after, "All they in the synagogue were filled with wrath, and rose
up, and thrust him out of ^^e city, and led him unto the brow of the hill,
(whereon their city was built), that they might cast him down headlong."

Thus their aristocratical prejudices prevailed over the first strong feelings
of gratitude and grace. The spirit of aristocracy displayed itself here its in
its genuine colors; in pride, cruelty, and violence. Many of the scribes (the
lawyers) and pharisees were probably in the synagogue, and their influence soon
prevailed on the people to show their impotent malice against their best friend
and benefactor. In all ages, something of the same kind is observable. The
proud supporters of tyranny, in which they hope to partake, have always used
false alarms, false plots, cunningly-contrived nicknames and watchwords, to set
the unthinking people against those who were promoting their greatest good.

When Christ began to preach, we read, in the seventh chapter of St. Luke, that
the multitude and the publicans heard him; but the scribes and the pharisees
rejected the counsel of God toward them. They, like all persons of similar
temper and rank, flourishing by abuses, could not bear innovation.

The most powerful argument they used against him was this question: -- HAVE
ANY OF THE RULERS AND THE PHARISEES BELIEVED IN HIM? In modern times the
question would have been, Have any persons of fashion and distinction given
countenance to him? Does my lord -- or my lady -- or Sir Harry go to hear him
preach? -- Or is he somebody whom nobody knows? -- Such is the language of the
spirit of despotism, in all times and countries.

THREE HUNDRED YEARS elapsed, in consequence of these prejudices, before the
gospel was recognized and received at COURT. And I am sorry to say that the
COURT soon corrupted its simplicity. The pride of life, always prevalent among
those who assume to themselves good things enough to support and comfort
thousands of individuals equally deserving, could never brook the doctrines of
Christ, which favored liberty and equality. It therefore seduced the Christians
to a participation of power and grandeur; and the poor, with their rights, were
often forgotten, in the most splendid periods of ecclesiastical prosperity.
Many nominal Christians have been, and are, as aristocratical as Herod and the
chief priests and pharisees of Judea.

But the authority of Jesus Christ himself must have more weight with
Christians, than all the pomp and parade of the most absolute despots in
Europe, at the head of the finest troops in the universe. He taught us, when we
pray, to say, Our Father. This alone is sufficient to establish, on an
immovable basis, the equality of human beings. All are bound to call upon and
consider God as their Father, if they are Christians; and, as there are no
rights of primogeniture in Heaven, all are equal brothers and sisters, coheirs,
if they do not forfeit their hopes, of a blessed immortality. But these are
doctrines which the great and proud cannot admit. This world is theirs, and
they cannot bear that the beggar, the servant, the slave, should be their
equal. We can hardly suppose, in imagination, the Empress of Russia, the King
of Prussia, the Emperor of Germany, or any grandee with a riband, a garter, or
a star, kneeling down, and from his heart acknowledging, in his prayer, a poor
private in a marching regiment, a poor wretch in a workhouse, or the servant
that rides behind his carriage, a brother. So void of reason and religion is a
poor helpless mortal, when dressed in a little brief authority by the folly of
those who submit to be trampled under foot by their equal; a man born of a
woman, like themselves, and doomed like themselves after strutting on the stage
a few years, to the grave. Our Savior, with a wisdom far above all the
resinement of philosophy, frequently inculcated the vanity of riches and power,
and the real pre-eminence of virtue.

And what say the apostles? Do they favor those who usurp an unnatural and
unreasonable power over their fellow-mortals, for the sake of gratifying their
own selfish vanity and avarice? Let us hear them.

St. Paul, in the first chapter of the First Epistle to the Co^^^thians, says,
"You see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
(worldly-wise men,) not many mighty, not many noble are called."

In the second chapter of she Epistle of St. James, we read,

"Has not God chosen the poor of this world to be heirs of his kingdom?" To
which is added,

"The RICH MEN blaspheme that worthy name by which ye are called."

These passages afford a very strong argument of the truth and divinity of the
Christian religion, for they contain the very doctrines which were foretold
several hundred years before the appearance of Christianity. ISAIAH, in his
twenty-ninth chapter, speaking of the gospel, and its doctrines and effects,
expressly says,

"The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord; and the POOR AMONG MEN SHALL
REJOICE IN THE HOLY ONE OF ISRAEL."

The inference I would draw from all that has preceded, is, that the middle
ranks and the poor, that is, the great majority of mankind, should place a due
value on the gospel, not only for its religious, but also its civil and
political advantages. It is the GRAND CHARTER OF THEIR FREEDOM, their
independence, their equality. All the subtilty of lawyers, all the sophistry of
ministerial orators, all the power of all the despots and aristocrats in the
world, cannot annihilate RIGHTS, given, indeed by Nature, but plainly confirmed
by the Gospel. The words already cited, are too clear and explicit to admit of
misconstruction. JESUS CHRIST came to put an end to unjust inequality in this
world, while he revealed the prospect of another, where the wicked cease from
troubling, and the weary are at rest. O ye people, give not the tyrants such an
advantage as to part with your gospel. Preserve it, watch over it, as the pearl
of great price. It is your security for present and future felicity. Other
Herod's, other Neros may arise, who will rejoice to see you voluntarily renounce
a system which militates against their diabolical rule; rejoice to see you give
up that which all the persecution of the ancient Herod's and Neros in vain
attempted to abolish by shedding blood.

I think it may be depended on as indisputable, that men who endeavor to
suppress all works in favor of truth " That make a man an offender for a WORD."
ISAIAH, xxix. 21.
, liberty, and the happiness of the middle and poor classes of the people,
would, if they had lived about one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five years
ago, have joined with the high priests and rulers to crucify JESUS CHRIST. They
would have prosecuted and persecuted him for sedition and high treason. They
would have despised and rejected the friend of Lazarus; and taken the part of
Dives, even in hell. The spirit of pride is of the devil, and those who are
actuated by that spirit, in all their conduct, would have fallen down and
worshipped him, if he would have put them on the pinnanacle of the temple, and
promised them the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

SECTION XL. The Pride which produces the Spirit of Despotism conspicuous even
on the Tombstone. It might be treated with total Neglect, if it did not tend to
the Oppression of the Poor, and to Bloodshed and Plunder.
DEATH is the great teacher and censor of human vanity; but even death cannot
repress the pride of aristocracy, or the insolence of riches, endeavoring to
make wealth and grandeur triumph over the law of nature, and outshine others
even from the coffin and the grave. If we look into the churches and
churchyards, we see the most insignificant of mankind honored with the most
magnificent monuments of marble, the proudest trophies, sculptured urns, a
flattering inscription, and a gilded lie. The walls of the fanctuary are hung
with banners, escutcheons, helmets, and spurs, which display the emptiness of
that preeminence which they are intended to emblazon. The poor body, which all
this paint and finery attends, lies mouldering in the vault; and give it but a
tongue to speak, would exclaim, at the gaudy sight, "Vanity of vanities! Mock
not my humiliated condition with the contemptible pageantry that misguided my
feet from the path of reason and happiness, during my mortal existence." The
only means of being honorably distinguished, is to promote most effectually the
general happiness of human nature, and to seek private good in public
beneficence.

The spirit of despotism is remarkably visible in the mausolcum. There are
families who seem to think that their precious bones would be contaminated,
even if deposited in the consecrated cemeteries of the church, where plebeians
sleep, and therefore they erect proud temples in their private domains, where
their fathers may rot in state, unapproached by the vulgar. If they were
illustrious inventors of arts and benefactors to mankind, the distinction might
be a just compliment to their memory, and a useful incentive to emulation. But
the persons thus magnificently interred are usually the most insignificant of
the human race; whose very names would not be known a year after their decease
if they were not deeply engraven on the marble.

Many an alderman, notorious for the meanest avarice, as little distinguished
for beneficence as abilities, is decorated with the most sumptuous memorials
which the stone-cutter can raise for money; while Milton the glory of the
nation, a man elevated above the rank of common humanity, had no monumental
marble. But all that the herald's office can effect, all that can be done by
painting, gilding, and marble, cannot ennoble the greatest favorite of a court,
the most successful adventurer in the Fast Indies, or the most opulent
contractor and money-lender, like a Paradise Lost. The nabobs find their
influence cannot secure the esteem of a few contemporaries, though it may
command their votes, much less of whole nations, and of late posterity. Money,
the only god which worldlings worship, loses its omnipotence after the death of
its possessor; and even the inheritor often despises the man who acquired it.
The undertaker, the escutcheon painter, and the sculptor, are however employed
to keep up the false pageantry of insignificant opulence; and a hearse, covered
over with coats of arms, is used for the purpose of impressing the vulgar with
a veneration for rank and riches, while, in the minds of men of sense, it
excites ridicule, and converts a funeral into a farce.

Indeed the empty parade of pride, and the self-importance of despotism itself,
might furnish a laughable entertainment, if it were not productive of mischief,
misery, and bloodshed. To support the vanity, exclusive privileges, and high
pretensions of those who have little personal merit or services to recommend
them to society, it is necessary to have recourse to military force and
corruption. A system of terror and coercion can alone keep down the people, and
compel a tame acquiescence under usurped power, abused for the purposes of
oppression.

Standing armies are therefore the glory and delight of all who are actuated by
the spirit of despotism. They would have no great objection to military
government and martial law, while power is in their own hands, or in the hands
of their patrons. The implicit submission of an army, the doctrine, which the
military system favors, that men in subaltern stations are to act as they are
bidden, and never to deliberate on the propriety of the command, is perfectly
congenial with the spirit of despotism. The glitter, the pomp, the parade and
ostentation of war are also highly pleasing to minds that prefer splendour and
pageantry to solid and substantial comfort. The happiness, which must ever
depend on the tranquillity of the people, is little regarded, when set in
competition with the gratification of personal vanity. Plumes, lace, shining
arms, and other habiliments of war, set off the person to great advantage; and
as to the wretches who are slain or wounded, plunged into captivity and
disease, in order to support this finery, are they not paid for it? Besides,
they are, for the most part, in the lowest class, and those whom nobody knows.

Such is the love of standing armies, in some countries, that attempts are made
to render even the national militia little different from a standing army. This
circumstance alone is a symptom of the spirit of despotism. A militia of
mercenary substitutes, under officers entirely devoted to a minister, must add
greatly to a standing army, from which, in fact, it would differ only in name.
Should the people be entirely disarmed, and scarcely a musket and bayonet in
the country but under the management of a minister, through the agency of
servile lords lieutenant and venal magistrates, what defense would remain, in
extremeties, either for the king or the people?

The love of pomp and finery, though ridiculous in itself, may thus become
injurious to liberty, and therefore to happiness, by increasing the military
order in the time of peace, and when ministerial arts have contributed to
render that order devoted to purposes of selfish aggrandizement or borough
influence. Minds, capable of being captivated with the silly parade of war, are
of too soft a texture to grasp the manly principles of true patriotism. They
will usually prefer the favor of a court, which has many shining ornaments to
bestow, to the esteem of the people. A heart deeply infected with the spirit of
despotism, despises the people too much to be in the least solicitous to obtain
popular applause. Praise is but breath; and often, like the wind, veers about
inconstantly; and certainly will desert a man, who has deserted the virtuous
and benevolent conduct which first excited it. But ribands, stars, garters,
places, pensions, usually last for life; and titles descend to the latest
posterity. Honor, once gained by royal smiles, is a part of the family goods
and chattels, and goes down, from generation to generation, without requiring
to the day of doom, any painful exertion, any meritorious services, but leaving
its happy possessors to the free enjoyment of idleness and luxury. No wonder,
therefore, that where the selfish spirit of despotism prevails, a bauble
bestowed by a court shall outweigh a whole people's plaudits. A coat of arms
makes a figure on the escutcheon and the tombstone; but not a scrap of gilded
and painted silk -- not even a bloody hand, can be bestowed by the most cordial
esteem of the low multitude.

Heraldry itself, though a childish, is a harmless vanity; but, but, as
conducing very much to the spirit of despotism, it becomes not only ridiculous,
but mischievous. It makes a distinction, on which men plume themselves, without
merit and without services. Satisfied with such a distinction, they will be
less inclined to acquire merit and to render services. They can inherit a coat
of arms; or they can buy one; or, which is more compendious still, they can
borrow or invent one. It is enough that they are separated from the canaille.
The coach, the hall, the church, is crowded with their achievements; there is
no occasion for arduous exertion. They are now raised above the vulgar. The
work is done. Their name is up; they may slumber in the repose of useless
insignificance, or move in the restlessness of mischievous activity. The coat
of arms is at once a shield for folly, and a banner in the triumph of pride.

But both pride and folly should be permitted for me to enjoy their baubles
unmolested, if they did not lead to CRUELTY. But pride and folly are the causes
of war; therefore I hate them from my soul. They glory in destruction; and
among the most frequent ornaments, even of our churches, (the very houses of
peace,) are hung up on high trophies of war. Dead men (themselves subdued by
the universal conqueror) are represented, by their surviving friends, as
rejoicing, even in their graves, in the implements of manslaughter. Helmets,
swords, and blood-stained flags hang over the grave, together with the
escutcheons and marble monuments, emblematical of human ferocity; of those
actions and passions which Christianity repudiates; for as well might oil and
vinegar coalesce, as War and Christianity.

Spirit of Despotism! I would laugh at all thy extravagances, thy solemn
mummery, thy baby baubles, thy airs of insolence, thy finery and frippery, thy
impotent insults over virtue, genius, and all personal merit, thy strutting,
self-pleasing mien and language! I would consider them all with the eye of a
Democritus, as affording a constant farce, an inexhaustible fund of merriment,
did they not lead to the malevolent passions, which, in their effects, forge
chains for men born free, plunder the poor of their property, and shed the
blood of innocence.

SECTION XLI. CONCLUSION.
TO meliorate the condition of human nature, can be the only rational end of
government. It cannot be designed to favor one description of men, a MINORITY
of men, at the expense of all others; who, having received life from him who
alone can give it, received at the same time a right to enjoy it in liberty and
security. This was the charter of God and nature; which no mortal, however
elevated by conquest or inheritance, can annul or violate without impiety. All
government which makes not the advancement of human happiness, and the comfort
of the individuals who are subject to its control, the prime purpose of its
operations, partakes of despotism: and I have always thought that, in
governments which boast of a free constitution, the views, even of statesmen
and politicians who espoused the cause of liberty, have been too circumscribed.
They have been attached to names and families. They seem not to have opened
either their eyes or hearts to objects truly great, and affections sincerely
catholic and philanthropic. I hate to hear public men, who certainly can have
no right to their pre-eminence but for the public good, professing themselves
of the Rockingham Party, the Shelburne Party, the Portland Party, and appearing
to forget, in their zeal for a few distinguished houses, the great mass of the
People, the PARTY of human nature. The majority of men are poor and obscure. To
them all party attachments to names and families, little known as public
benefactors, must appear at once absurd and injurious. They are the persons who
stand in most need of protection and assistance from the powerful. The rich,
under all governments, have a thousand means of procuring either comfort or
defense. It is the mass, the poor and middling ranks, unknown to, and unknowing
courts or kings, who require all the alleviation which men enlightened by
knowledge, furnished with opulence, elevated by rank, can afford to lessen the
natural evils of life, aggravated by the moral and artificial. Government
possesses the power of alleviating, and sometimes of removing, that moral and
physical evil which embitters existence. How deplorable, when government
becomes so perverted, as to increase the evil it was designed to cure. Yet this
has been, and is now the case on a great part of the globe; insomuch that the
learned and judicious Dr. Prideaux, whose integrity is as well known as his
ability, used to say, "That it was a doubt with him, whether the benefit which
the world receives from government, was sufficient to make amends for the
calamities which it suffers from the follies, mistakes, and mal-administration
of those who manage it."

When it is considered how little the most boasted governments have been able
or inclined to prevent the greatest calamity of the world, the frequent
recurrence of WAR, it is natural to conclude, that there has been some radical
defect or error in all government, hitherto instituted on the face of the
earth. Violence may be used where there is no government. Governments pretend
to direct human affairs by reason; but war is a dereliction of reason, a
renunciation of all that refines and improves human nature, and an appeal to
brute force. Man descends from the heights to which philosophers and
legislators had raised him in society; takes the sword, and surpasses the
beasts of the forest in ferocity. Yet, so far from thinking himself culpable,
he deems his destructive employment the most honorable of all human
occupations, because governments have politically contrived to throw a glossy
mantle, covered with tinsel and spangles, over the horrors of bloodshed and
devastation. If governments, with all their riches and power, all their vaunted
arts and sciences, all the mysteerious policy of cabinets, all the wisdom and
eloquence of deliberating senates, are unable to preserve the blessing of
peace, uninterrupted, during the short space of twenty years together, they
must be dreadfully faulty, either in their constitution or their
administration. In what consists the fault? I think in the selfish spirit of
despotism, pursuing the sordid or vainglorious purposes of the governors, with
little regard to the real, substantial happiness of the governed. Despotism, in
some mode or degree, has transformed the shepherds of the flock into wolves;
has appropriated the fleeces, shed the blood of the innoxious animals, tore
down the fences of the sheepfold, and laid waste the pasture.

Where is the government that has distributed property so equitably, as that
none to whom existence has been given should want the necessaries of existence;
and where helpless age and infirmity, as well as helpless infancy, should find
a pillow to repose on, and plenty to nourish it, without supplicating a MAN,
equal by nature, for the cold scanty relief of eleemosynary charity? The truth
is, power gradually engrosses property; and the selfish spirit of despotism is
ever striving to appropriate all the good, of every kind, which the earth is
able to produce.

The truth is, national glory, the trappings of a court, the parade of armies,
the finery of external appearance, have been the silly objects of state
solicitude; while MAN was left to bewail, in the recesses of want and
obscurity, that his mother had brought him into a world of woe, without means
of comfort or support, with little other prospect than to labor without
ceasing, to fight those who never injured him, and to die prematurely, unknown,
and unlamented. All his wretchedness has been aggravated by the insults of
unfeeling pride; the neglect of aristocratic grandeur, which, under the spirit
of despotism, mocked by the false pageantry of life, those who were doomed to
feel its real misery. The vain pomp and glory of the world, held out the finger
of scorn to that wretchedness which itself contributed to create, and would not
relieve.

Three score years and ten, and those often full of labor and sorrow,
constitute the space allotted to the life of man in a venerable volume, full of
beauty as well as instruction, and worthy of great attention independently of
the high authority attributed to it by the religion established by the laws of
this country. Few and evil are our days, even when they proceed to their
natural extent, and are attended with the common portion of health and
prosperity. Yet, as if a super^^uity of years and happiness were lavished on
men, the chief business of the greatest part of governments on the whole earth
has been to abbreviate life, to poison and embitter its sweetest pleasures, and
add new pungency to its anguish. Yet see the false glitter of happiness, the
pomp and parade which such governments assume; observe the gravity and
insolence of superiority which their ministers, their statesmen, and their
warriors, assume, and you would imagine them a commissioned regency, lord
li^utenants sent by Heaven to rule this lower world, and to rectify all
disorders which had escaped the vigilance of the Deity. The time has been when
they have ^ctually claimed the title of God's vicegerents, and have been
literally worshipped as gods by the servile crew of courtiers; men gradually
bowed down by despotism from the erect port of native dignity, and driven by
fear to crouch under the most degrading of all superstition, the political
idolatry of a base fellow creature.

After all the language of court adulation, the praises of poets and orators,
the statues and monuments erected to their fame, the malignant consequences of
their actions prove them to have been no other than conspirators against the
improvement and happiness of the human race. What were their means of
conducting their governments, of exercising this office of Heaven's
vicegerents? Crafty, dishonest arts, oppression, extortion, and above all FIRE
and SWORD. They dared to ape the thunder and lightning of Heaven, and, assisted
by the machinations of the Grand Adversary of man, rendered their imitative
contrivances for destruction more terrible and deadly than the original. Their
imperial robe derived its deep crimson color from human blood; and the gold and
diamonds of their diadems were accumulated treasures wrung from the famished
bowels of the poor, born only to toil for others, to be robbed, to be wounded,
to be trodden under foot and forgotten in an early grave. How few, in
comparison, have reached the age of three score and ten, and yet, in the midst
of youth and health, their days have been full of labor and sorrow. Heaven's
vicegerents seldom bestowed a thought upon them, except when it was necessary
either to inveigle or to force them to take the sword and march to slaughter.
Where God caused the sun to shine gaily, and seattered plenty over the land,
his vicegerents diffused famine and solitude. The valley which laughed with
scorn, they watered with the tear of artificial hunger and distress, the plain
that was bright with verdure, and gay with flowrets, they dyed red with gore.
They operated on the world as the blast of an east wind, as a pestilence, as a
deluge, as a conflagration. And have they yet ceased from the earth? Cast your
eyes over the plains of Russia, Poland, a great part of Europe, the wilds of
Africa, and the gardens of A^IA, European despotism has united with oriental,
to unparadise the provinces of India.

Thus, if God, in his wisdom, has thought fit to allot us a few evils for the
purpose of discipline, the OREAT ONES of the world have endeavored to make the
whole of lire an evil to the despised and neglected MILLION. The world is now
old, and may profit by the lessons of Experience. SHE has decisively declared,
that despotism is the grand source of human misfortune, the Pandora's box out
of which every curse has issued, and scarcely left even Hope behind. Despotism,
in its extreme, is satal to human happiness, and, in all its degrees and
modifications, injurious. The spirit of it ought therefore to be suppressed on
the first and slightest appearance. It should be the endeavor of every good
man, pro virili, as sar as his best abilities will extend, to extirpate all
arbitrary government from the globe. It should be swept from the earth, or
trampled under foot, from China to Peru. But no power is capable of crushing
the Hydra, less than the Herculean arm of a whole PEOPLE.

I lay it down as an incontrovertible axiom, that all who are born into the
world have a right to be happy in it as the unavoidable evils of nature, and
their own disordered passions, will allow. The grand object of all good
government, of all government that is not an usurpation, must be to promote
this happiness, to assist every individual in its attainment and security. A
government chiefly anxious about the emoluments of office, chiefly employed in
augmenting its own power and aggrandizing its obsequious instruments, while it
neglects the comfort and safety of individuals in middle or low life, is
despotic and a nuisance. It is founded on folly as well as wickedness, and,
like the freaks of insanity, deals mischief and misery around, without being
able to ascertain or limit its extent and duration. If it should not be
punished as criminal, let it be coerced as dangerous. Let the straight
waistcoat be applied; but let MEN, judging fellow men, always spare the axe.

For what ^ational purpose could we enter into life? To vex, torment, and flay
each other with the sword? To be and to make miserable? No, by the sweet mercy
of Heaven! I firmly believe, that the great King of Kings, intended every son
and daughter of Adam to be as happy as the eternal laws of Nature, under his
control, permit them to be in this sublunary state. Execrated and exploded be
all those politics, with Machiavel, or the Evil Being, their author, which
introduce systems of government and manners among the great, inconsistent with
the happiness of the majority. Must real tragedies be forever acting on the
stage of human life? Must men go on forever to be tormentors and executioners
of men? Is the world never to profit by the experience of ages? Must not even
attempts be made to improve the happiness of life, to improve government,
though all arts and sciences are encouraged in their progress to perfection?
Must the grand art, the sublimest science, that of meliorating the condition of
human nature, be stationary? No; forbid it reason, virtue, benevolence,
religion! Let the world be made more and more comfortable, to all who are
allowed the glorious privilege of seeing the sun and breathing the liberal air.
Our forefathers were duped by priests and despots, and, through the timidity of
superstition and the blindness of ignorance, submitted to be made artificially
miserable. Let us explode that folly which we see; and let every mortal under
the cope of heaven enjoy existence, as long as nature will allow the feast to
continue, without any restraints on liberty but such as the majority of
uncorrupted guests unite in agreeing to be salutary, and therefore conducive to
the general festivity. Men are too serious in pursuing toys, money, titles,
stars, ribands, triumphs, any thing that gives a momentary distinction, and
gratifies an unmanly pride. They have embraced a cloud for a goddess. Let them
dispel the mist, raised by false policy and cruel despotism. Let them at last
distinguish real good, from its delusive appearance. Let them value duly, and
pursue diligently, solid comfort, health, cheerfulness, contentment, universal
benevolence, and learn to relish the sweets of nature and simplicity. They will
then see happiness in something besides the possession of gold; besides those
external marks of superiority which raise them to notice, and distinguish them
from their equals without a difference. Strife and wars will cease, when men
perceive that their highest happiness is most easily attainable in a state of
contented tranquillity; their guide, nature, and their guard, innocence.

The principal objects of all rational government, such as is intended to
promote human happiness, are two; to preserve peace, and to diffuse plenty.
Such government will seldom tax the necessaries of life. It will avoid WARS;
and, by such humane and wise policy, render taxes on necessaries totally
superfluous. Taxes on necessaries are usually caused by war. The poor, however,
are not easily excited to insurrection. It is a base calumny which accuses
them. They are naturally quiescent; inclined to submission by their habits, and
willing to reverence all their superiors who behave to them justly and kindly.
They deserve to be used well. They deserve confidence. But oppression and
persecution may teach them to lift their gigantic arm, and then vain will be
resistance. Let not wars then be wantonly undertaken, which besides their
injustice and inhumanity, tend more than any thing else, by increasing taxes,
to compel insurrection. The poor man hears great praises bestowed on the
government he lives under, and perpetual panegyrics on the constitution. He
knows little of general politics. He judges from the effects he FEELS. He knows
that malt, I heard a great borough-monger of eleven or twelve thousand a year
assert, while he held a glass of Madeira in his hand to wash down a plentiful
dinner, that malt could not be reckoned among the necessaries of the poor
laborer, because he might drink water, which is very wholesome.
leather, candles, soap, salt, and windows, without which he cannot exist in
comfort, are so heavily t^^ed as sometimes to exclude him from obtaining the
scanty portion he would require. In return for the defalcations from malt,
leather, candles, soap, salt, and windows; he sees pensions, places, rich
contractors, disgraceful, ruinous, and bloody wars. Yet he rises up early, and
goes forth to his work and his labor, with cheerfulness. Is he not a worthy,
respectable member of society, and deserving of every indulgence? Ought he to
be insulted by approbrious appellations, considered as of no political
consequence, as possessing no rights, and little removed from the cattle?
Suppose millions of such men in a country, ought not their wishes to be
consulted, and a regard for their comfort and security to stop the sword, while
emerging from its scabbard at the command of a MINISTER?

Great reforms usually come from the people. They are slow to anger, and submit
in patience. But grievances may become intolerable; and then their energy
displays itself like a torrent, that has long lain still and placid within the
dam, which opposed its course to a certain point, but could resist no longer.

If ever any people should be roused to take their own affairs into their own
hands, I hope they will refute the calumnies of the proud, by acting with
justice and mercy. All human creatures are weak and fallible; kings and
ministers have exhibited remarkable instances of this common imbecility. Great
allowances should therefore be made for their errors and even crimes, which,
probably, originated in error. I wish to see the British government made as
perfect as human ingenuity and virtue can render it; but I would effect reform
in it, without injuring the person or destroying the life of the most obnoxious
individual. I would pardon much to human infirmity. Not one drop of blood
should be shed, nor a single mite of property violated. No injustice whatever
should disgrace the wisdom of the people. Compensations should be made by the
public to all individuals, of all parties and persuasions, when compelled to
relinquish possessions or privileges lawfully inherited, or honestly acquired.
The most liberal, expanded generosity should vindicate the honor of human
nature, too long insulted. Ministers and grandees, who form the aristocracy,
either of opulence or nobility, however tyrannical and insolent in the day of
their prosperity, should live out the little space allotted to man, in a state
of ease and affluence adapted to their habits and education. I would show them
how truly noble and glorious it is to forgive. And they could not be formidable
against an united people. For how weak, how transitory is man? Death, natural,
unprecipitated death, will soon tame the haughtiest spirit that ever swelled
the fancied importance of a crown; and the infirmities attending the approach
of death, the gradual decays of age, will usually teach a lesson of unfeigned
humility.

The people, at present, appear to be sunk in a political lethargy. But let not
ministers confide too much in the symptoms. A calm precedes a storm. Long
continued abuses, heavy burdens, and severe grievances, without a dream of
hope, may awaken the lion. Then, I think, those who have shown an inclination
to set up a power unknown to constitutional freedom, and to render government
hostile to the people, may justly fear.

And who, it may be asked, are they? I am happy in the opportunity of declaring
it my opinion, that the KING is not among them. They are men to whom neither
the King nor the people are dear. They are, in a word, the oligarchy of
borough-mongers, whose power is founded on an usurpation; and whose assumed
SOVEREIGNTY is no less inconsistent with the real freedom of a king than of a
people. A most respectable society, not long ago, asserted in a petition to the
House of Commons, and offered to prove it at the bar, that one hundred and
fifty-four men nominate and appoint a majority of the House. Has it not been
suspected, that a WAR might have been made and supported, to preve^t the
annihilation of this oligarchy; by turning the attention of the people from a
reform of parliament, and endeavoring to give a deadly stab to liberty. If the
suspicion be well founded, this very circumstance is the strongest argument for
reform which has ever been produced. Oceans of blood, and treasure enough to
relieve all the poor in the nation for many years, lavished to establish a
despotism, inimical to the King, the people, and to human nature! We have now
reached the source of the evil, a source not so concealed as the fountain of
the Nile. It is the corruption of boroughs, and the interference of ministers,
peers, placemen, pensioners, and expectants, in parliamentary elections, which
causes the spirit of despotism to increase; for nature, reason, and
self-interest too, if they were not counteracted by corrupt influence, would
revolt at it. The egg would be instantly crushed, if it were not constantly
guarded and fostered in the warm, well-fortified nest of borough-influence,
directing all measures and disposing of all patronage.

But they are all honorable men, who are concerned in this influence. They may
no^ be morally worse or better than others in their situation. Their situation
renders them politically iniquitous. The world is (...) by men, and men by
their passions, and their supposed interest. But it is the business of laws to
restrain them. The people are bound to watch the conduct of all whose conduct
is iufluential on their welfare. Unlimited confidence should be given to no
man, when the happiness of millions is concerned in the consequences of his
actions or counsels.

"The common people," says a sensible author, "generally think that great men
have great minds, and scorn base actions; which judgment is so false, that the
basest and worst of all actions have been done by great men. They have often
disturbed, deceived and pillaged the world; and he who is capable of the
highest mischief is capable of the MEANEST. He who plunders a country of a
million of money would, in suitable circumstances, steal a silver spoon; and a
conqueror, who stands and pillages a kingdom, would, in an humbler situation,
rifle a portmanteau." I should not, therefore, choose to expose my watch or
purse in a crowd, to those men who have plundered Poland, if, instead of
possessing a crown of jewels, and the pocket of submissive nations, they had
been in the circumstances of a Barrington. Nor, though men should be called
honorable, will it be safe to trust our liberties to their honor, without some
collateral security; especially when we see them interfering with and
controlling elections, contrary to express laws, and contrary not only to the
dictates of honor, but of common honesty. They usurp a power for the
gratification of pride and avarice, which they cannot hold but to the injury of
the lawful and right owners. How differs this in a moral view, from robbery? It
differs, in a political view indeed, inasmuch as it is infinitely more
injurious to society.

The opposers of reform, the invaders of the people's rights, are no less blind
and shortsighted than meanly selfish. Let them pour their venom on the people,
and dispute popular claims to natural right, as much as they please; the people
must at last triumph, and liberty will in time flourish all over Europe. Court
parasites, and selfish grandees, will do right to use a little foresight; to
consider what revolutions may be, by viewing what have been; and not to
exasperate mankind too much, lest the irritation should produce, what God
avert, sanguinary vengeance.

I take my leave on this occasion, recommending, from the bottom of my heart,
to men in power, measures of CONCILIATION. Let them come among us with healing
in their wings. Let them concede with cheerfulness, whatever cannot be denied
without injustice. Let them show themselves real friends to liberty and man.
The English nation is remarkable for generosity and goodnature. All their
mistakes will be forgiven. There will he no leading into captivity, and no
complaining in our streets. Mercy and truth shall meet together; and
righteousness and peace kiss each other. In a word; let parliament be reformed.
This measure will remove all grievances, and satisfy all demands. It will at
once give permanency to the throne, and happiness to to the people. Kings will
be republicans, in the true sense of that term; and the spirit of despotism
become the spirit of philanthropy.

THE END

