AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE IN NEWPORT, JULY 4, A. D.
1795. ON THE CELEBRATION OF THE NINETEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY WILLIAM HUNTER.

NEWPORT: PRINTED BY HENRY BARBER, AND SOLD AT THE POST OFFICE. 1795.

At a Meeting of the ARTILLERY COMPANY of the Town of Newport, 7th July, 1795,
VOTED,
THAT Francis Malbone, Walter Channing, and Frederick Crary, be a Committee to
wait on William Hunter, Esquire and present the Thanks of this Company, for the
pertinent and elegant ORATION, delivered by him on the Anniversary of American
Independence; and request the Favor of a Copy, for the Press.

A true Copy: WILLIAM TILLINGHAST, Clerk

TO THE MEMBERS OF THE NEWPORT ARTILLERY COMPANY, THIS ORATION, PRONOUNCED AND
PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST, IS, WITH EVERY SENTIMENT OF ESTEEM AND RESPECT,
INSCRIBED BY THEIR BROTHER SOLDIER,

THE AUTHOR.

Ergo insolentis corruit Imperi
Insana Molis! occidit Urbium
Regina victrix nec subacto
Effera jam dominatur orbi!
Fa^^us Tyranni contudit impios
JEHOVA VINDEX, sceptroque ferreae
Qui verbere ^aud unquam remisso
Fregit atrox populos gementes.
LOWTH PRAE. 28.273.
Fellow-Citizens, and Brother-Soldiers!
WE are assembled to commemorate an event, which gave freedom and happiness to
our country. -- An event which emancipated three millions of people from a
cruel bondage; and advanced them, from an unnatural and degraded state of
colonial subjugation, to complete national Independency. The same unconquerable
spirit of freedom, which impelled our ancestors to fly from their country* and
relinquish every charm and comfort of civilized society, -- that spirit which
made them willing, and even solicitous, to brave every difficulty and encounter
every danger, to escape from oppression, -- animated their posterity, when they
rose up with bold strength and invigorated effort, to resist the false, haughty
and arrogant pretensions of Britain. -- The people of this country had ever
regarded Liberty, as their chief good and highest blessing, as their undoubted
birthright and most valuable inheritance. -- As an inheritance too, not to be
idly wasted or neglected, but to be enlarged and improved.

THE great and fundamental principles of all free governments, -- That the
people are the only legitimate source of all power. -- That rulers are
accountable to them for the abuse of their delegated trust; and that they, the
people, have a right to resume that trust, when either neglected or abused,
were truths so early taught, so fully understood, so universally diffused, that
when our ancestors examined their own bosoms, they could hardly discern whether
these principles were implanted by nature, or impressed by education. -- They
rather thought them the inherent dictates, and unerring sensations of nature,
as truths written by the finger of GOD on the fleshy tablets of the Heart. The
people of this country felt the benefit, and acknowledged the existence, of a
sort of implied, but never accurately defined compact: by which Great Britain
possessed the exclusive monopoly and enjoyment, of our external commerce, as a
fair price for her protection against foreign hostilities, and as a reasonable
recognition of her parental and superintending authority. For this protection
See Lord Chatham's Speech, Parliamentary Debates, A. D. 1777.
they were willing to continue the nerve of her strength, the fountain of her
wealth, the nursery and basis of her naval power. But they knew and understood
the difference between external duties for the regulation of trade, and
internal taxes for the purpose of exacting Revenue. And when that Parliament,
in which there was no member to speak with their voice, to represent their
grievances, to protect or promote their interests, to compassionate or relieve
their sufferings, contrary to the principles of their own boasted Constitution;
relying on the meek affection, and unsuspecting confidence of the Colonies,
dared to impose a Stamp Act; the people vigorously resisted its authority, and
with a foreseeing spirit, a cool and philosophic calculation, anticipated the
unjust and enormous usurpations, to which an acquiescence, in such a measure
would have subjected them. To the various, unjust and before unthought of
usurpations of England; they, for a time, opposed cool but intrepid wisdom,
moderate, but dignified discussion -- To obstinate assertion and
unaccommodating sternness they opposed a steady perseverance, a sober and
enlightened care. -- They explained their rights, detailed their grievances,
they thronged round the throne, the minister, the parliament, with petitions,
with memorials and remonstrances, with offers of constitutional submission, and
of immediate obedience to their rightful authority. They asked for the old
principles of connection, the old habits of their former harmonious
intercourse. The uniform answer was the haughty assertion, that parliament had
a right to bind this country in all cases whatever; and that the only method to
obtain mercy and forgiveness, was unconditional submission. -- That mercy and
forgiveness the virtuous and well-instructed people of this country disdained
and rejected. Their short-sighted opponents did not know the character of the
people with whom they were treating. The oppressions of Britain roused and
embodied the inhabitants of this extensive continent, collected and concentered
their widely-dispersed forces, and soon enabled them to exhibit the formidable
aspect of an armed and disciplined nation. It was not 'till they were dispoiled
of every right, 'till neglect, insult, insolence and contempt, were added to
reiterated injury and unremitted oppression, that our countrymen could expel
from their bosoms, their old attachments, their honest and hereditary
prejudices. It was not 'till their towns were burnt, 'till their country was
ravaged and desolated. -- It was not 'till Britain had vilely condescended to
associate to her arms, the mercenary aid of German plunderers and assassins;
and had goaded the Savages of our frontiers to wage their barbarous and
merciless warfare, that the Congress of 1776, appealing to Heaven for the
rectitude of their intentions, declared these States free, sovereign, and
Independent; and for the maintenance of that Independence so declared, pledged
to each other their lives, their properties, and sacred honors. In the full
enjoyment of peaceful prosperity and political harmony, the fruits of their
determined efforts, and inflexible patriotism, we can at this day form but a
faint conception of the bold vigor and sublime energy of character, necessary
to effect that glorious and important event, which fixed the fate and fortune
of America. It proceeded from a conviction that such violations of the laws of
nature and of nations, such gross outrages on humanity, such a total
dereliction of all the principles of honor and virtue: legalized resistance,
justified and rendered meritorious bold enterprise and dangerous experiment. It
proceeded from a calm confidence, from an inspiring hope, that Heaven would
smile upon their efforts, and that its vindictive justice would be directed
against their impious and infatuated foes. Independence was declared when our
dangers were imminent, and our destruction seemed almost inevitable. -- Clouds
and darkness rested upon the political horizon, and the tempest of civil war,
threatened us with wreck and annihilation. But the people of this country, and
their Representatives in Congress, the organs of their will, and the express
image of their feelings, were neither alarmed or intimidated. They bore up with
undaunted fortitude; their efforts increased with their difficulties; and, like
a well-constructed arch* the greater the burdens which pressed upon them* the
greater their massy strength, and immovable solidity. -- Independence was
declared, when our temporary resources were expended, and the hasty levies of
our troops daily dispersing, when we were driven to the last extremity, and all
prospect of success was removed at an immeasurable distance. But the spirit of
freedom cheered and sustained our countrymen, in this awful crisis of danger
and calamity. They disdained to purchase a delusive quiet, and deceitful
security, by any base submission, or dastardly compromise. They disdained the
acquisition of an imperfect and conceded freedom. They disdained its being
bestowed as a favor, and claimed as a right; as a right inalienable and
imprescriptible, which GOD and nature gave, and which man could not give away.
They soared above that narrow and pernicious policy, which, contented with the
acquisition of temporary relief, exposes the dearest interests of society; and
abandons, in hasty desperation, all those grand and animating objects, which it
is the duty, and should be the effort of freemen, to preserve and protect. Our
country at this moment, presented the most awful and magnificent scene, which
ever arrested the attention, alarmed or interested the hopes and fears of
mankind. The voice of freedom rousing her sons to combat, and to glory, was
heard across the Atlantic. The nations of Europe looked with horror and
astonishment at a great people, who themselves boasted the invaluable
possession of a free Constitution, struggling with mighty strength, and impious
effort, to rivet the chains of slavery on their own Colonies, but lately
connected with them by every tie of honor and affection; and who were now
spilling their blood in defense of inherited freedom, and in conformity to
principles of resistance learned from the history of their Mother Country. --
They regarded with eyes of hope and tenderness the exertions of a young and
virtuous nation determined to be free, and who risqued every thing in the
contest. But they supposed their hopes and their fears to be equally
unavailing. They could form no conception of the incalculable force of a
people, impelled by the spirit of freedom, and driving at the completion of a
distant, doubtful, and animating object. It surprised the timid and cautious
statesmen of Europe, outran the speculations of their boldest philosophers, and
surpassed the warmest wishes of our most sanguine admirers. This spirit,
directed by the wisdom and integrity of Congress; by the prudent intrepidity of
Washington; the bold military genius of Green; the honest enthusiasm of La
Fayettee; and, aided by the seasonable Alliance of France, crowned our efforts
with success. -- And England, after having sacrificed an hundred thousand lives
in the contest, and added an hundred and thirty-four millions sterling to her
national debt, was reluctantly obliged by the Treaty of 1783, to acknowledge
and confirm our Independence.

SUCH, Fellow-Citizens, is a rapid, concise, but imperfect sketch, of the
manners, the principles, the feelings, and passions, which originated, which
attended in its progress, and which finally effected the Revolution, and
consummated our Independence. They were the manners of "social equality," and
stern integrity, the principles of incorruptible virtue, and inflexible
patriotism, the feelings of men keenly attached to the freedom of their
country, and determined at whatever hazard to preserve, protect, adorn,
strengthen, and secure it. The passions of noble and generous minds, inflamed
and almost maddened by the insults, injuries and oppressions, inflicted on
their country. -- Manners, I hope, still retained in their native purity, in
the bosoms of our families; principles, which our country still calls upon us
to preserve inviolate; feelings such as on this day especially, fill and occupy
every bosom; passions, from which fortunately our situation exempts us; but
which have since convulsed, purified, and regenerated France, and promise the
overthrow of despotism, and the establishment of a free Republic, in the midst
of Europe. -- Now occurs a serious and important question, How has this
inestimable acquisition been used, and improved? Has it been perverted to base
and dishonorable purposes? Have we neglected the enviable opportunity of
establishing a government uniting liberty with order? Have we failed in
contributing our important part, to the general felicity of the human race? The
answer to these serious and solemn questions, is the highest eulogium which can
be pronounced on the political character of America. These are questions which
her sons, glowing with virtuous national pride, exult to answer.

HOWEVER we may regret, it would be false and deceptive to deny, that our
radiant course to glory, was darkened and delayed. Too true it is, that after
the Peace of 1783, these States exhibited a mournful picture of depression and
distress; of disgraceful disorder, and humiliating imbecility. Our Friends eyed
our progress with alarmed fears, and painful solicitude. Our enemies, with
hasty and malicious assertion, declared, we were verifying their predictions;
and that already factious, jarring, unsettled, and unbalanced Republics, we
should, in the violence of conflict and collision, dash each other to pieces.
They declared, but too truly, that we were discontented at home, disrespected
abroad, that our frontiers were unprotected, and our credit unsupported. But we
are never to despair of a free, and consequently of a moral and enlightened
nation. Deeply impressed, but not dejected, at the prospect of impending ruin,
the people of this country, with a firm, erect, and manly spirit; with a
perseverance which no dangers could subdue; with a serene dignity, and
ceaseless activity of inquiry, which no misfortunes could disturb or impede,
applied themselves to investigate the cause, and the cure of these calamities.
A stable, efficient national government was soon asked for, from one end of the
continent to the other. We discovered that the merely advisory system of our
old confederation was insufficient and injurious, ill-suited to the quiet and
ordinary state of society, when we were no longer animated and united by the
same common object, when advice was no longer Law* and when State Legislatures,
instead of anticipating federal requisition, fruitlessly discussed, or
designedly delayed them; and too frequently, from the mean motives of local
interest, or party prejudice, destroyed the noblest plans, which genius or
virtue could frame, for the security or prosperity of the Union.

TO form a free government for any people, however thin their population or
confined their territory, though their habits are uniform and their feelings
congenial; to temper together the opposite elements of liberty and restraint,
fitly to combine in one consistent work, the seemingly contradictory principles
of the right to resist, and the obligation to obey, requires the highest
exertions of the human faculties; requires minds enlightened and enriched by
all that ancient wisdom, or modern ingenuity has suggested, on the science of
government. But to form a free, federal Constitution, for a vast continent; to
bind and strongly cement together, fifteen different States; to remove their
ill-grounded prejudices; to reconcile their discordant opinions; to assimilate
their various local interests; not only required minds, rarely gifted, and
richly endowed, but a prudence, a forbearance, a discretion, too seldom
bestowed on Mortals. -- It almost required men to be like the God of the
Stoics, all Intellect, and no Passion.

HAPPY is it for us, that the Members of the Convention, of 1787, were
impressed with the difficulty, the danger, the magnitude, and necessity of the
task. Happy is it for us, that they were men, of enlarged and liberalized
ideas, of minds elevated to the height of their momentous duty. Happy is it for
us, that, "a luminous spirit of wisdom, disembroiled their embarrassments; that
a spirit of conciliation compromised all interests and opinions." The result of
their collected and deliberative wisdom is our present federal Constitution. --
Which has been pronounced by impartial European statesmen, to be a fabric of
government, the most simple, solid, and sublime, ever erected by human
ingenuity, on the broad basis of freedom and equal rights. It is not propped up
by the gothic pillar of church establishments; it is not encumbered with the
brilliant burden of a Crown; it boasts not what Mr. Burke, in the delirium of
his eloquence, has styled, Nobility; the corinthian capital of polished
society. The framers of this Constitution rather thought, with Mr. Burke's
ablest Mackintosh.
opponent, "That such gothic ornaments deform and encumber the fabric of
society: That the massy doric, which sustains it, is labor; and the splendid
varieties of arts and talents, which solace and embellish life, form the
decorations of its corinthian and ionic capitals."

THE principles of our Constitution are truly and severely republican. That the
people are the fountain of all power is its vital and seminal principle. This
great truth which by pretended philosophers has been declared to be a notion
merely specious, or entirely delusive, which they have asserted, shines fairly
on the smooth page of utopean system, but which shrinks from practice and
eludes the grasp of experiment, is in our country in daily, actual, practical
existence -- It blends with all the operations of our government* it harmonizes
with all its movements, it superintends all its minute and diversified
arrangements.

THE powers granted by our Constitution are by an admirable system of check and
control guarded from neglect, abuse, or violation. Little room is left for the
exercise of a dangerous discretionary authority, and the absurd and blasphemous
idea of the omnipotence of Legislatures is entirely abrogated. Every thing is
defined, every thing is limited. The House of Representatives elected by the
free and uncorrupted suffrages of the people at large, are intimately
acquainted with their rights; connected and identified with their interests.
The Senate, appointed by the State Legislatures, represent and guard the State
Sovereignties, and being men of maturer years and more experienced wisdom, are
a body well suited to correct the errors, check the passions or enthusiasm, or
resist any unconstitutional assumption of power, into which the other House
might be mislead or betrayed. The President himself by a mode of appointment,
singular, original, and altogether unexampled, in the history of any age or
nation, is elected by, and from the People, without any of the evils of a
popular election. It is a mode which forbids faction, expels intrigue, and
excludes corruption. He is not like the Kings of Europe, seated in sullen
grandeur on a solitary eminence of power. He is connected with the People, and
elevated by them to the highest point of Authority in the State, only that he
may have a more commanding view of his duty. He is placed on the highest watch
tower, that he may the earlier descry the dangers which threaten to impede our
prosperity or invade our liberties, and be himself the first to sound the
alarm bell throughout the nation.

SUCH is a rapid enumeration of the origin, the principles, and powers, of the
Federal Constitution. The ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT formed under it, is such
as must necessarily result from the unrestrained operation of such a
Constitution.

HOWEVER close may be our investigation, or however severe our scrutiny, of its
various departments. -- Whether of judicial or financial system; of foreign
intercourse, or military arrangements; we shall find it uniformly to have been
conducted with prudence, dignity and effect. -- The Administration of Justice
is that part of Government by which the People most generally form their
opinion. It diffuses more perceptibly the blessings of order and domestic
quiet. -- It brings the benefits of government more directly home to the
feelings and bosoms of every man. The Federal Courts have given us security
under the law. Foreigners resort to them with confidence, and there have been
pacifically discussed and legally determined by them, claims, involving the
Sovereignties of States, which in other countries could only have been settled
by the Sword. They have engendered a reasonable hope that the period is not far
distant, when by gradual alteration and silent improvement, we may form an
independent system of jurisprudence, or at least one entirely disencumbered of
the feudal absurdities, the disgraceful subtleties, the quibbling chicaneries,
which too much deform and deface the otherwise beautiful system of Common Law
we have wisely adopted from England. It is to be hoped, that under their
influence, a larger portion of good American Common Sense will be infused into
it, and that it will be thereby rendered, Such was the wish of Mr. Cappe --
piously expressed by him in a sermon preached in England, during our
Revolutionary War.
more just and simple in its principles; less intricate, dubious and dilatory,
in its proceedings; more mild and equitable in its sanctions; more easy and
more certain in its execution. Then indeed we may be allowed to exclaim with
the pious and judicious Hooker, -- That of LAW no less can be acknowledged,
than that her seat is the Bosom of God, her voice the harmony of the world, all
things in heaven and earth do her homage, the very least as feeling her care,
and the greatest as not exempted from her power.

A REVIEW of the history of our finances would afford a continued panegyric on
that great and celebrated character, who first raised them from their chaos,
settled them into system, and combined them into order. It would afford a
continued display of the vast and accumulated opulence of that mind, which by
undivided attention, and indefatigable research, has possessed itself of all
the various financial systems, and by its own native resources and energies,
has improved and perfected all. The late Secretary of the Treasury at his very
outset grounded himself on the solid principles of strict attention to public
credit, and undeviating adherence to our pledged faith and avowed engagements.
He insisted on the observance of good faith, as the basis of credit, as a
measure he commended by the strongest inducements of political expediency, and
as enforced by considerations of still greater authority. See his first report,
relative to a provision for Public Credit, A. D. 1790.
"There are arguments for it, he says, which rest on the immutable precepts of
moral obligation. And in proportion as the mind is disposed to contemplate, in
the order of Providence, an intimate connection between public virtue and
public happiness, will be its repugnancy to a violation of those principles."

WITHOUT derogating from the merit of the other great characters of our
country, we may fairly say, that it is in a great measure to his plans we may
attribute it, that so suddenly after the adoption of the New Constitution,
Credit was established, Industry inspirited, Commerce invigorated, and
Agriculture encouraged. To his plans it may be attributed, that the immense
mass of wealth which this country already possessed, but which till this
period, had lain dormant and unprofitable, was quickened into life and
productiveness; and that our gigantic, but hitherto untried strength, was
brought out into unrestrained exercise and action. To his plans we may
attribute it, that a rapid, steady, and fertilizing stream of wealth, was
circulated throughout the continent, which again turned round the wheel of
commerce, and set to work its various and complicated machinery. We owe it, in
a great measure, to him, perhaps, that enterprise has enlarged its sphere, and
explored new regions of profit, that our country, every where presents the
charms of creative cultivation and diffusive opulence. He has insisted on the
true principle of all good finance See his report, containing a plan for the
further support of Public Credit, January 1795.
, that the creation of debt should be always accompanied with the means of its
extinguishment. A principle awfully enforced by the present situation of
European Nations, who multiply their expenses while their resources are
diminishing, and who seem to act in the full persuasion of the truth of the
principle, that they acquire new strength and elasticity, in proportion as new
burdens are imposed. Engaged in the tumults of wars, elevated or depressed by
alternate triumph or defeat, amused by adventurous project and magnificent
enterprise, delighted and deluded by the glare and splendor of present
prosperity, they cannot with a steady and undazzled eye look the dangers which
threaten them, full in the face. They attempt no desperate effort to escape
from ruin. They seem willing to fall down, crushed by the load of debt, the
devoted and unthinking victims of their fate. They remind one of the Elder
Pliny, who with careless indifference, and criminal security, took notes from
Livy, and pursued his classical amusements, while the earth shook under him,
and Vesuvius thundered in his ears.

THE commotions of Europe have of late rendered our intercourse with foreign
Powers, a delicate, dangerous, and interesting concern. It seems to have
engaged and engrossed all our attention. The ridiculously inhuman attempt of
England to starve twenty-five millions of people possessed of the most fertile
soil and genial climate of Europe, has lead her into designed violations of the
laws of nations, and aggravated spoliations on our commerce. And even the
impe^^ous necessities of the French Republic, during the distresses of her
revolutionary conflicts, have driven her to acts defensible only by those
necessities. In such a situation our government has acted* with that cautious
wisdom and foresight, with that dignified forbearance and wise neutrality, as
to have secured to us the blessings of Peace; without wounding that quick sense
of honor, or impairing that virtuous resentment against unprovoked injury,
which are the characteristics of generous and high-minded Americans. -- Our
intrepid moderation, and calm resoluteness of conduct, have added to the
respectability of our national character -- and statesmen begin to find, they
must no longer confine their calculations to the balance of Power in Europe;
but take into their estimation, the balance of Power in the World.

THE military arrangements of the United States are those only which are
suited, to the genius and temper of a republican government. They consist of a
well-regulated militia* and of independent companies, voluntarily associated,
and legally incorporated. In spite of the specious reasonings of Turgot, and
the ingenious calculations of Adam Smith, Americans are not yet convinced of
the propriety of raising one class of men above society; and separating them
from it, by the force of peculiar habits, by principles of false honor, and
the cruelty of a degrading and brutalizing discipline. --

BROTHER-SOLDIERS -- Of the military system of the United States, we form a
part. It ought to be impressed upon us, that we also are parties in the great
order and arrangements of government; and although but individual companies, of
an individual State, we too have duties to perform, and efforts to contribute,
essential to the general security and happiness of our country. We are minute
links of that connected chain, which binds into strength and unity, our Federal
Government. Our institution owes its origin, and its continuance, to that
unalterable, and incontrovertible principle of all free governments, that as it
is the right, so it is the duty of every man to bear arms in defense of his
country. And we believe it repugnant to the spirit of that principle, that any
official dignity, any petty, paltry, professional immunities, should exempt any
man from the highest, and most sacred duty he owes his country.

WE hope our institution affords a practical exemplification of this principle.
-- We hope and trust that it has renovated the military spirit, infused fresh
life and vigor, and afforded youthful patriotism, a mean to render itself
useful. We rejoice in an institution, in which, without losing the rights, or
forgetting the duties of citizens, we acquire the skill and discipline of
soldiers. We rejoice in an institution, which inseparably connects us, not by
the force of a rigid despotic discipline, but by principles of honorable
attachment, and the ties of private and endeared friendship. We rejoice in an
institution, founded on broad and liberal principles, and which in its
operation, actually displays the image of our Constitution. Our officers are
elected by ourselves. We arm them with Power, because we think them worthy of
it. We choose those men, whom we would obey, because we respect them; and whom
we would follow, wherever they might lead us, from friendship. We do not aspire
to the character of upright, moving machines, the definition of a Soldier, as
given by the last Despot of Prussia. We do not pretend, as the poet has
expressed it, to the pride, the pomp, and circumstance of glorious war. We hope
that, in the hour of contest, and crisis of danger, we would not shrink -- we
hope we would possess a bravery which the spirit of freedom engenders and
supports. That we would stand a phalanx of patriots, and a band of brothers,
never to lay down our arms, but with our lives.

"Since all must life resign,
"Those sweet rewards, which decorate the brave,
"'It Is folly to decline,
"And steal inglorious to the silent grave."
TO suppress insurrections, and repel invasions, are the duties, which by the
meaning of our Charters, and the express words of the Constitution, we are
obligated to fulfill. That insurrections should ever exist, in a free country,
where the constitution is the work of the people themselves, and the rulers who
administer the government, men of their uninfluenced choice, seems a solecism
in terms, and is an irreconcilable paradox in politics. It is not to be
accounted for, unless we refer it to the wild, absurd and lawless
eccentricities of the human mind, which at particular periods, breaks through
all the restraints it has in its happier moments, imposed upon itself, and is
fatally and irresistibly impelled to the violation of moral order, and the
overthrow of political justice. Even in our country, it may be, that
insurrections will happen, like the great calamaties of nature, an earthquake,
an hurricane, or a pestilence, once during the course of centuries. If such a
disaster should fall on our times: If a wicked, deluded, and desperate
Minority, should so far forget, what they owe to themselves, and their country,
as to appeal to arms; and rashly endeavor to force their measures and opinions
on a fair and undisputed Majority, however odious or melancholy the task, it
would be our duty, Brother-Soldiers, when called upon, to resist their claims
with the points of our bayonets. -- We must gather round the Constitution of
our country, and guard it as the palladium of freedom, and the sanctuary of the
rights of men. But why should I for a moment dwell, on such an idea. The late
unhappy attempt of the Insurgents of Pennsylvania, will remain a deep and
impressive lesson for ages to come. There was a time, says one of the most
eloquent men of our own country, "When that insurrection was truly formidable,
it rose like a waterspout, threatening to annihilate gravity, and throw the
ocean to the heavens; but as that, by the force of the general principle of
attraction, returns again to its former level, and mixes with the surrounding
waters, so this civil tumult has been overcome by the energy of the Laws." See
Mr. Dexter's Speech, November, 1794.
-- Foreign war, although not an evil so dreadful, we hope is one equally
distant. It is fortunate indeed for us, that separated from Europe, we cannot
be drawn into the rapid vortex of her tumultuous politics. Peace is the maxim
of our government, a rule of its administration. But if we must be driven to
hostilities, ours would not be a war of timid operation, or protracted effort,
-- By the justice of our cause, we should take care to deserve, and by
measures, rapid, vigorous, and decisive, take care to ensure success.

IN either of these great emergencies, we should be associated, with that
illustrious body of heroes and patriots, who have already fought the battles,
and are already crowned with the honors of their country. Who can doubt that
at such times, the respectable Society of the Cincinnati Who this year
celebrated the anniversary of Independence at Newport, and were present when
this Oration was pronounced.
would suffer themselves any longer to recline on the bosom of that dignified
retirement they have chosen. Would not their former sentiments be revived,
their former emotions be awakened? Would they not offer themselves to curb our
furious rashness, to guide and temper our inexperienced valor? Should such a
crisis arise near the present period, we can easily foresee an emulous conflict
between the old and the young patriots. The old determined to prove that time,
has not abated their energy, or chilled their feelings. The young while they
imitated, endeavoring to surpass them. We hope that such united and virtuous
exertions, aided by the spirit and the patriotism of the citizens at large,
would preserve our country free from foreign subjugation, and shield our
Constitution from the attacks of domestic faction and usurpation.

FELLOW-CITIZENS -- It was said by Lord Chatham, in the midst of a venal
Assembly who were dismayed by the vehement boldness of the expression, that "he
rejoiced America had resisted." Reviewing our past history, contemplating our
present glory and prosperity, may we not with philosophic propriety declare,
that we rejoice Great Britain did oppress. -- For had she not roused us to cut
asunder the bands which connected us, we must have been at this day but a
splendid appendage of her monarchy, the prop of her old age, the support of her
declining glory, and a source to supply her spendthrift extravagance. We must
have been obliged to have been actors in all her follies, and in all her crimes.

OUGHT we, Fellow-Citizens, in this day, the sabbath of freedom, and the
festival of reason, selfishly to confine our contemplations, exclusively to the
benefits we ourselves have derived from our revolution. Ought we to forget that
it was from us, France first caught the hope of freedom -- that soon after our
success she started up, after the repose of ages, from the tomb of despotism,
and with the strength of a giant refreshed after that repose, "broke her chains
on the heads of her oppressors." -- Ought we not on this day to rejoice that
she is emerging from that bloody state of commotion, calamity, and carnage,
into which she was plunged by the infernal confederacy of Kings; a confederacy
which steeled the heart, and maddened the brain, of all France; and drove her
in her desperate frenzy to the commission of deeds disgraceful to Freedom, and
destructive to herself. -- Ought we not to rejoice that this confederacy has
met with disappointment, defeat and ruin -- a ruin which our countrymen,
enlightened by experience, long ago foretold. They knew it was an impossible
attempt to extinguish thought, imprison feeling, or massacre opinion. They knew
that when once Freedom is kindled in the "bosom of man, it remains an
imperishable flame, which though time may smother, eternity cannot extinguish.
An eloquent expression of Gerald's in a speech delivered at a meeting of the
London Corresponding Society;
"

OUGHT we not to mingle with our congratulations some emotions of compassion
and regret for the present disasterous state of Poland. That country which but
a few months ago was alive with the joyful acclamations of freedom, and which
was thronged with millions of contented and emancipated people; now presents
one wide-spread scene of undistinguished devastation. Crushed by the iron hand
of military despotism, there reigns throughout that country, the silence of
night -- the solitude of death. -- Ought we to forget that Kousiasko once
fought our battles, and endured for us toil, danger, and distress. For that
very cause, his attachment to Liberty, which embalms him in our memories, and
endears him in our affections, he is now languishing amid the damps and
darkness of a Prussian dungeon -- deprived of the last consolalation of noble
minds -- that of being permitted, to die on the bosom of his country, or to
perish in battle fighting for her Liberties!

FELLOW-CITIZENS, it is indeed a consolatory truth, that if we remain true to
ouselves, no foreign foe can wrest from us our Liberties. And as for the idea
that we shall ever be allured, tamely to surrender them to a domestic usurper,
it would be an indignity to the good sense of my countrymen to suppose it.
Before that can happen, we must be degraded and debased, to the lowest point of
corruption -- degeneracy, and servility. -- We must be driven to the commission
of political Suicide.

IT affords too a subject of high congratulation, that our unrivalled
prosperity still continues to be, as it has been, uninteruptedly progressive. A
prosperity which exceeds all hope, and mocks all calculation. -- A prosperity
which goes on like the unceasing power of vernal vegetation, whose silent but
rapid progress, no eye can distinctly trace, nor any human powers arrest; but
which proceeds onward by the eternal, and invariable laws of nature, to spread
the earth with verdure and fertility. Let then the nations of Europe try all
their arts of mean exclusion and jealous monopoly -- let them endeavor by
undeserved and aggravated injuries, to precipitate us into wars, and by
specious pretentions of insidious friendship, to entangle us with Treaties --
all their efforts will be impotent, as they are malicious, at once detected and
resisted, by a sagacious, reflecting, forbearing, but high-spirited people,
possessed of untried resources, and of a country as yet, of unexplored extent.
A people who do not mean to endanger their national felicity and union, by
unnecessary contests; who do not mean to reject the fair friendship of any
nation; but who can exist great and glorious, in spite of the enmity, and
independent of the friendship of any nation.

FELLOW-CITIZENS, let the conviction of these great political truths mingle
with, and add new charms to our private enjoyments -- let them refine and
spiritualize the pleasures of this day -- let them "diffuse a gaity over the
severe brow of moral Freedom." -- Our pleasures to day, are those which expand
the heart, and enlarge the mind -- pleasures permitted by reason, and enobled
by sentiment.

FINIS.

