Mr. Kirkland's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, IN
BOSTON, JUNE 1, 1795, BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY JOHN THORNTON KIRKLAND, Minister of the New South Church in Boston.

PRINTED AT THE APOLLO PRESS, IN BOSTON, BY JOSEPH BELKNAP No. 8, Dock Square.
MDCCXCV.

AN ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.
PSALM LXXVI. 10. SURELY THE WRATH OF MAN SHALL PRAISE THEE: THE REMAINDER OF
WRATH SHALL THOU RESTRAIN.
IN all the events of the world, the wise and good direction of God is to be
acknowledged and adored. The voice of reason accords with the voice of
revelation, in proclaiming him the disposer and governor, as well as the
contriver and former, of the system which we behold. The stupendous and minute,
the beneficial and destructive operations and effects of natural objects, call
our reverent attention to him, as their great first cause. The successive and
interesting changes of the moral and religious, the political and social aspect
of mankind, refer us to him, as their almighty and all-wise superintendent. In
surveying these occurrences, we ought to possess a firm conviction, that God
has not forsaken any part of his world, nor left to chance the condition of any
one of his creatures; that he presides, in every place and period, to guide by
his wisdom, bless by his goodness, enliven by his energy, and control by his
power. In all our reflections on this administration of the universe, we ought
to entertain a full persuasion, that he permits nothing unfit to be permitted,
and effects nothing unfit to be effected; that he connects and regulates
events, apparently most disconnected and irregular; and so overrules and
disposes them, that confusion issues in order, tumult in tranquillity, and
suffering in enjoyment. By such a perpetual and devout acknowledgment of the
Supreme Being in all that takes place, we show a becoming sense of his
authority, and learn his nature and perfections, the rules of his government,
and the duty and interest of his rational offspring. Our hearts are impressed
with reverence and humility, and expanded with admiration and joy. The murmurs
of discontent are hushed; the alarms of fear are quieted; the gloom, which
often gathers over this disordered state, is dispersed; and luster is shed upon
the face of the world.

In contemplating the wicked passions and conduct of mankind, we derive
consolation and improvement from the doctrine of a wise and benevolent
Providence. When we see that their heart is set in them to do evil, and the
work of violence is in their hand, a dark veil is drawn over the divine
proceedings, and men seem to exist, that they may deform the world, and afflict
each other. But these gloomy appearances vanish, and light breaks forth, when
the declaration of the sacred volume is fully considered and believed: SURELY
THE WRATH OF MAN SHALL PRAISE GOD: THE REMAINDER OF WRATH SHALL HE RESTRAIN.
The pride and selfishness of men are subject to his control and direction, and
converted to purposes of benevolence and wisdom. Their disregard and contempt
of his perfections, laws, and government, and their hatred, oppression, and
abuse of one another, ever have been, are, and will be superintended by
Almighty God, rendered subservient to his glory and the general good, and
limited, in their degree and extent, according to his appointment.

This doctrine of an overruling Providence, asserted in the text, might be
particularly applied to all the moral disorders in human nature and human
society: but it will be more suitable to the occasion to take a more confined
range, and illustrate it with respect to the disposition to war ever found in
mankind; its sources, operation, and effects. We shudder with horror and sigh
with grief, when we consider the state of hostility, to which societies have
been incident from their formation; in consequence of which the sword has been
the measure of justice, and the weak have been the prey of the strong; man,
designed for a blessing, has often proved a curse to man, and killing and
destroying been studied as indispensable arts, and pursued as glorious
employments. But our feelings will not be destitute of relief, nor our minds of
instruction, in the contemplation of this melancholy picture of human
depravity, folly, and misery, if we have a settled belief in a presiding Deity,
and see a rational prospect of the gradual restraint and ultimate termination
of the violence of men.

In order to furnish this relief and instruction from these sources, it will be
attempted in the following part of this discourse,

I. To show in what respect war is an evil.

II. To prove, though it be in many respects an evil, yet that it is, under the
conduct of divine Providence, in known and unknown ways, made productive of
good.

III. To represent, that as, by the influence of christianity, of arts and
civilization, the horrors of war have been mitigated; so we have reason to
believe, that, by the increase of this influence, and the progress of knowledge
and liberty, a period will be put to contentions by force, and the world be
blessed with universal and perpetual peace.

These topics being slightly discussed, an application of the discourse to the
state of our country and the present occasion, will be subjoined.

I. In what respects is war an evil?

War is an evil in respect to its causes, effects, and extent. What are its
CAUSES, but odious and disgraceful passions; ungoverned ambition, avarice,
pride and revenge? In self-defence do a people often arm, commence and
prosecute war: their motive is just* and their conduct praiseworthy. But as
the necessity of self-defence is created by the intended or actual invasion of
their rights; the inordinate passions, the unjust claims, the violent
proceedings of the invader, are strictly the cause of every such war; and in no
case, except in that of involuntary mistake, which is rare, could there be a
resort to arms by two powers, were not one disposed to injure the other, and
compass an end by the violation of his rights. To extend territory and
commerce, and increase power; to keep what they have no right to possess, and
gain what they have no right to pursue; to gratify resentment, build up a
faction, or establish the tyrannical claims of family connexions; to feed a
passion for ideal glory, or vent a turbulent and restless spirit; are
aggressors in wars prompted to sacrifice the lives, and lay waste the
possessions of themselves and their adversaries. Actuated by these
unjustifiable and unworthy views, do sovereigns and nations begin or compel
those, whom they insult and oppress, to begin contests, which, maintained with
blood and rapine, give a horrid and mournful aspect to human affairs. Since
persecutions on account of religion have been often carried on with shocking
cruelty and immense destruction, it may be thought by some that religion should
be mentioned among the causes of war. But little attention is requisite, to
convince a candid mind, that it has not much conduced to this calamity; for
there have been few conscientious persecutors; Paley's Evidences, Part iii. chapter
vii.
the greatest number have acted from the lust of gain and dominion, like
tyrants and conquerors in general. The wars called religious have been commonly
political, and a desire of gaining and keeping influence, not of promoting
piety, has originated and maintained them.

What mingled grief and indignation are excited in our bosoms by the
consideration of these causes of war? Most of them passions, which disgrace our
nature, destroy our tranquillity, and ally us to brutal and infernal beings; all
of them, how insufficient, alas! to justify the production of such complicated
and extensive misery! Ye princes and statesmen! who, appointed by Providence
the protectors, become the destroyers of mankind, who wade to empire through
blood, and water your conquests with the tears of millions: ye popular leaders!
who employ your art and eloquence, to deceive and inflame the multitude; and to
compass your views of faction or ambition, plunge your country into unnecessary
and desolating war; pause in your mad career, consider the enormity of your
conduct, and know, that if secure from the avenging arm of man, ye cannot
escape the tribunal of Eternal Justice.

To estimate its evil, from the CAUSES, we proceed to the EFFECTS of war. Lives
destroyed, which are the flower and strength of a nation, and the soul of
industry; cities, the seats of opulence and splendour, laid in ruins; fertile
and pleasant fields changed to dreary tracts of desolation; inhabitants
diverted from their useful employments; the channels of commerce obstructed or
stopped; the means of subsistence rendered difficult or impossible to be
obtained; enormous public exactions; and diminished or exhausted resources;
form one assemblage of its calamities. See it next mingle bitterness in the cup
of domestic joy; sow hatred and dissension in the bosom of families; dissolve
the ties, and wound the sensibilities of nature; rob the aged parent of his
solace, the affectionate wife of her companion, the helpless child of its
supporter. But its civil and domestic are outweighed by its moral evils. By the
collection of men into armies, and the nature of military life, they are
rendered dissolute in principles and manners. By the interruption of legal
proceedings, iniquity, being secure from detection and punishment, abounds; and
by the fluctuation of property, and the violation of public and private
contracts attendant on war, the sentiments and habits of justice are unsettled.
The perpetual exercise of the hostile passions, creates a temper of hatred and
revenge; and familiarity with scenes of blood, imparts a ferocious and cruel
cast to the character. Lastly, in consequence of this state of disunion and
hostility in which nations exist, the rights of all, except the strongest, are
insecure; possessions are unstable, and intercourse is damped by an ever
wakeful jealousy. Peace, not superseding a constant readiness for war, is
scarce less expensive than war itself; the vindication of rights often causes
more loss than their surrender; entering into treaties is almost useless,
whilst there is no security for their observance; avoiding contentions of our
own ensures not tranquillity, whilst we are exposed to the frequent necessity
of taking part in the contentions of others. The energy of nations is expended
in the defense, rather than the improvement of their possessions; and the
blessings bestowed on them by God and nature are unused or wasted.

The EXTENT of war is as great, as its CAUSES and EFFECTS are destructive. In
what period has it not sounded its alarms? In what region has it not spread its
desolations? From the first age to the present, from the northern to the
southern zone, from the rude pagan of America to the polished christian of
Europe, the resort to force has prevailed. At this moment we behold the
greatest portion of the civilized world in hostile commotion, and the ancient
continent a field of battle.

Such is the picture of distress and ruin, which war in general presents. Is
the mind oppressed with gloom and horror on beholding it? Let it be cheered and
instructed by considering, what is the second topic of discourse,

II. That though war be in many respects an evil, yet it is, under the conduct
of divine Providence, in known and unknown ways, made productive of good.

God's superintendence over human affairs is declared in the scriptures in
various and pointed terms. "Of him, through him, and to him, are all things.
Shall there be evil in the city and the Lord has not done it? Who rules in
the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom soever he will; puts down one and
sets up another; makes peace and creates evil;" who says to the wrathful
tyrant, "I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips; for this
cause have I raised thee up, to show in thee my power." Let not out inability
to comprehend the manner, induce us to doubt the reality of this divine
administration. Who will presume to deny that the Almighty Lord of the universe
is both able and disposed to exercise it? He is able, because he possesses
universal knowledge, perfect wisdom, and infinite power. Endowed with these
perfections, he may, by originally establishing such laws in the natural and
moral world, as would produce the precise effects, and no other, which he
chooses to have occur, or by occasional interpositions, regulate all events. Is
it objected that the freedom of the human will proves the events depending on
that will incapable of regulation? We reply that this faculty is the gift of
God, to whom, when he bestowed it, all its possible operations were known;
therefore it operates nothing which he did not determine to admit into his
world. Besides, how entirely may be control its determinations, without
destroying its freedom. If a wise man, by addresing motives to the mind of a
person, can in many instances precisely influence his conduct, without
infringing his agency; we must ascribe a similar power in far higher measure to
God, the being, whose understanding is infinite, and whose presence is
universal; who has access to the most delicate springs and latent movements of
our souls; and holds all nature in his hand, from a planet to an atom, from a
system to a worm. To prove that he is disposed, as well as able, to conduct the
affairs of his world, if it be not irreverent to talk of proving so bright a
truth, we need only observe, that God made the world for some end; and unless
he control occurrences, this end may be frustrated; and that he is good,
delighting in the happiness of his creatures; therefore does not resign them to
chance, nor bind them in fate; but limits and guides actions and events, as the
purposes of goodness dictate.

Assured, therefore, that the commencement, the continuance, and the
termination of war, the most unjust and cruel, is in all cases under the
conduct of divine Providence; we are also assured, that evil as it is, in
unknown as well as known ways, it is made productive of good. By abstract
reasonings, on the character of God, by the prevailing tendency of his works,
and by the discoveries of revelation, we are compelled to believe that the
Author of the universe is good, as well as powerful and wise. Therefore, seeing
he is a perfect being, a perfect system will be produced by him; and no events
be directed or permitted to take place in it, which are not consistent with the
greatest good of the whole. Though we discern not how natural and moral evil is
rendered subservient to good; yet we ought not to doubt it; nor deny that that
is the best of all possible systems, in which much evil is mingled; whilst we
see it evidently answering important ends, essential to a state of moral
discipline, giving scope to great and improving exertion, and often issuing in
enjoyment. This reasoning on evil in general, must be applied to the evil of
war in particular. When ready to inquire, why war has been suffered to rage in
every period, clime and nation, why the weak and inoffensive have been
subjected to the injustice and violence of the powerful and ambitious, and have
been forced to seek refuge from the calamities of oppression in the calamities
of resistance; let us reflect on that divine administration, which in
numberless undiscernible methods, brings order and happiness out of this
disorder and misery; let us reflect on that human ignorance, which forbids
censure, complaint, or distrust; and let our reliance on this almighty and
benevolent superintendence be strengthened by considering some instances, in
which good is made to result from war, however unjustifiable may be its
authors, or destructive its general and direct effects.

In sacred history, we behold the violence and hostility of man, from the first
unnatural murder to the crucifixion of the Savior instumental of important
purposes, by displaying the divine perfections; by rewarding the good,
punishing the bad and reclaiming the devious; by aiding and accomplishing the
dispensations of heaven for the instruction and salvation of mankind.

Viewing society in the glass of general history, we find this destroying
scourge in several respects a blessing to man, as it relates to the improvement
of his character and condition, to liberty and science.

It rouses men in the savage state from their stupidity. Their intellect buried
under the grossness of appetite, and their powers exerted only at the calls of
sense, they naturally sink into brutal self-indulgence, and listless inaction.
The desire of a better state, it is observed, has less influence in exciting
human efforts than the fear of a worse. Therefore, impending danger, aided by
strong desires of revenge and glory, kindles the ardor, and stimulates the
activity of barbarians, when nothing else would do it. They are thus preserved
from the degradation of a mere animal life; their faculties are invigorated by
exercise; for purposes of offense and defense they invent and employ arts, from
which, extended and advanced, peace derives its convenience, and life its most
valuable improvements. Priestley's lectures on history.


War calls forth some of the noblest and best energies of the soul, for which
the calm of peace does not afford such favorable opportunities. The
magnanimity, which contemns difficulty, the courage which defies danger, the
humanity which relents over a vanquished foe, the ingenuity which devises and
the vigor which executes, are brought into illustrious display in military
contests; and spread a glory over the character of the warrior.

To the violent attempts of tyrants to retard and crush liberty, are we to
ascribe in some instances its rapid progress and complete trtumph. The cruel
oppression or wanton destruction of one or more asserters of it has, by
interesting public compassion in their favor, increased the adherents of their
cause; and by rousing the general indignation, inspirited the united resistance
of the sufferers, and effected the sudden overthrow of usurpation and despotism.

Truth, especially religious truth, must be acknowledged to have been in some
measure promoted by the violence of its enemies. The unrelenting persecution of
the first teachers of christianity, by warming their zeal and animating their
exertions; by putting it in their power to give convincing proof of their
sincerity by extraordinary patience and resolution; and by awaking sympathy
with them as injured persons, contributed indirectly to extend and establish
the system.

What consolation have we amid the horror and execration of war, and what
gratitude and trust are due to the Supreme Disposer, when we consider some of
the advantages flowing to science and art from this unexpected source. History
shows that public commotions, by obliging men of learning to retreat from the
seat of war into quiet countries, have brought to them valuable accessions of
knowledge; that barbarous nations conquered by civilized, have received arts
with masters; that by conquest a communication has been opened between regions
before separated from each other; and the empire of commerce and refinement
been greatly enlarged. But in another view it has been observed to serve the
cause of human improvement. A military contest, particularly of a free people
in defense of freedom, creates a ferment of mind, sets the faculties to work,
expands the views, and invigorates the active principles. Hence in a time of
public commotion, ingenious and important discoveries and inventions often
appear; and soon after the close of a successful struggle for their liberties
by a nation, rapid progress is made in the arts and sciences. Our country
exemplifies the truth of this observation, which amid the tumult of a
revolution estabalished academies of sciences, and made great advances in
speculative and practical knowledge; and which, since the return of peace, has
exhibited singular exertions of genius and enterprise, accomplished in a few
years what the boldness of conjecture had not presumed to date within half a
century; and by that force of character which overcame our invaders, is
overcoming nature.

These are some of the known ways, in which war, however evil in its causes and
effects, has been observed, under the conduct of divine Providence, to be
productive of good. What admiration, gratitude, and joy should be raised in our
hearts by the consideration of this Providence, which makes the contentions,
which we lament, the means of our improvement, and educes important blessings
from dreadful calamities. Yet, notwithstanding these consoling circumstances
attendant on war, its ruin and distress are so extensive and mournful, as to
make the benevolent exult in the idea --

III. That as by the influence of christianity, and the advancement of arts and
civilization, the horrors of war have been mitigated among many nations, so we
have reason to believe, that by the increase of this influence, and the
progress of knowledge and liberty, a period will be put to contentions by
force, and the world be blessed with universal and perpetual peace.

In those nations, who have received the NAME of CHRISTIAN, though national
disputes are decided by force; yet this is done with less frequency, cruelty,
and destruction, than marked such decisions among ancient and heathen States.
The mild and gentle tenets of the gospel, and the view it gives of the perfect
equality of man, as partakers of a common nature, duty, and hope, and children
of a common parent, have had a mighty effect, notwithstanding the great and
general perversion of its doctrines, and disregard of its precepts, to soften
the animosities, remove the prejudices, and promote the union of public bodies.
The abolition of polytheism and human sacrifices, of domestic slavery, the
exposure of infants, and other shocking vices practiced and vindicated in the
most refined ages of the most refined nations of antiquity, the diffusion of a
spirit of mildness and charity into the intercourse of private life, and the
introduction of humane maxims into war, the observance of which strips it of
half its torrors, are among the effects of the christian religion. To this
source they are unavoidably traced, because they naturally flowed from it; they
existed with it; and they are not found, where it has not reached. This
religion was not without its influence even on the barbarous invaders of the
Roman empire, after their settlement in it. It laid some restraint on the
ferocity of private quarrels in the dark ages; and it mingled its gentleness
and humanity, with barbarian fierceness and cruelty, in chivalry. So much
respect to its principles do the present nations of Christendom render, as to
acknowledge the unlawfulness of offensive war, by prefacing their declarations
of hostilities with arguments to show, that they are not the aggressors.
Winthrop's Systematic Arrangement of Prophecies.
In battle all are commonly spared who cease to resist. Captives are not led in
ostentatious triumph, reduced to slavery, or slain on the altars of
superstition. The inhabitants of conquered countries are not transplanted from
their native soil; but allowed their possessions, laws, and religion. If civil
wars have not been equally divested of their cruelty and horror as foreign
wars, th^^^ aspect is softened; and if the present contest in Europe has a
character of ferocity; it should be remembered that it is a peculiar contest;
it is a struggle for existence; it is the collected energy of despotism,
combating the desperate enthusiasm of liberty.

The advancement of ARTS has concurred with the principles of our benign
religion in lessening the evils of war, by opening another field for enterprise
than the performance of martial exploits, softening the character, and creating
in men such an incapacity for war or aversion to it, that the number destined
to arms in modern, bears no proportion to that of ancient times.

We ought to acknowledge with gratitude the benefits of the destructive
invention of GUNPOWDER. In consequence of its use in fighting, it has been
observed, war is changed from a matter of strength to a matter of calculation;
nations are placed more upon a level; the frequency of appeals to arms is
diminished; and the mode of fighting is so altered, and the combatants are so
secured by distance and fortifications, that fewer lives are destroyed in a
modern war of years, than fell in former ages in a single battle.

By such methods, and in such measure, have the horrors of war been mitigated
among a large portion of mankind. Is it an illusion to believe, that by the
increase of the influence of the christian religion, and by the progress of
knowledge and liberty, a period will be put to contentions by force, and the
world be blessed with universal and perpetual peace?

By a comparison of the past with the present, it appears probable that human
affairs are graddually advancing to perfection. Though they have seemed to
revolve, alternately ascending to a certain point of elevation; and returning
to a correspondent point of depression; and it may be supposed will continue
revolving in this manner to the end of time; yet evident is it, that the effect
of every total revolution has been a better State than existed before it; that
the second point of elevation has been higher than the first; the third, than
the second. The Grecian glory was brighter than the Persian; the Roman,
brighter than the Grecian; and the glory of this age exceeds that of the
brighest preceding. In learning and arts, in government and religion, in
personal liberty and security, in convenience and agreeableness of living, and
in mildness and humanity of manners, in all that exalts and blesses society,
our superiority to the greatest and happiest nations of antiquity is striking
and incontestable. None can deny the greater humanity displayed in the conduct
of modern wars. As wise and benevolent principles have prevailed to mitigate,
why may they not further prevail to terminate our hostilities? As one step has
been taken from the state of nature by the social state of individuals, why may
not another step be taken by the social State of nations? It is agreed that it
would promote their true interest to substitute arbitration for the appeal to
arms, when disputes are to be decided; to cultivate each his own teritory,
maintain commerce free, and direct their energy to the arts of peace. It may be
thought that they will not apprehend or pursue this interest hereafter, because
they have not apprehended or pursued it heretofore. Why have they not always
discerned and sought it? Because kings, and the minions of kings, the most
ignorant and profligate of their species, have managed the conconcerns of
civilized states, who, strangers to the maxims of sound policy and equity,
influenced by contracted views, weak thirst for dominion, or mistaken honor,
have refused to concur in any pacific system; because the people, shrouded, in
ignorance, and chained in servitude, have neither known nor asserted their
rights, and could be controled by despots and deluded by demagogues.

But a new era is commencing in human affairs, and new features are forming in
the human character. Light is pouring in upon a benighted world, and the shades
of error and ignorance are beginning to retire before it. The American
revolution has taken the film from the eyes of nations; and enabled them to
read the eternal truths, inscribed by God on the heart of every human being;
which declare, that men have equal rights, and that government is formed solely
to secure them. With this progress of KNOWLEDGE will be joined the equal
progress of her inseparable companion, LIBERTY. It is established in our
country, it is, we trust, beginning to be established in more than one country
in Europe. Whilst the contention of the greatest nation of the old world for
this invaluable blessing is marked by all the atrocities and disorders, which
can be expect to ensue, from the intoxication of freedom, the removal of
accustomed restraints, and the resentment and despair excited by a wanton and
combined invasion of the enemies of their cause among a numerous people,
hardened by oppression, untaught in first principles, and debased and corrupted
by the foul vices of atheism and superstition; whilst it is disgraced by
outrages, at which reason and religion weep, and humanity recoils, it is
maintained with an undaunted resolution, and a resistless energy, which
encourage the hope of its happy issue in the establishment of a free
government. This spirit will probably run on and kindle the flames of
resistance in every country enslaved, and and introduce a new order of things.
If the civil and ecclesiastical oppressors of the earth, alarmed at the
spreading contagion, add double weight to the chains of their subjects, their
intemperate tyranny will serve only to force a quicker conviction of injury
into the hearts of the oppressed; and hasten the time, and aggravate the
horrors of their fall. In this way, a way beset with difficulty, extravagances,
and sorrows, will liberty, the soul of improvement, the support of virtue, and
the blessing of existence, finally triumph through the world.

If nations become enlightened and free, they will, at the same time, become
solicitous to preserve mutual peace; because they will see peace to be their
interest, and their interest they will mainly pursue. Though well informed
republicans may, by the influence of powerful men, the eloquence of
incendiaries, the intrigues of the factious, and sudden passion, be drawn into
some erroneous measures; yet the maxims of sound policy will guide their
general counsels. Man tends to his own happiness as bodies tend to their
center. His mistake of the means, not his unconcern about the end, occasions
his not obtaining it. By experience he discovers these means; and when this
unerring instructor shall teach free and independent nations, that they lose
wealth, population, glory, and happiness by a state of hostility, will they not
mutually cultivate peace? Will they not decline contentions by force, except in
cases of imperious necessity; and respect the rights, that they may enjoy the
friendship of each other?

The hope inspired by these considerations is raised to assurance by the
evidence furnished by reason and the sacred predictions, that christianity will
be finally embraced by all mankind. Those whose faith and expectation rest on
this system, as on the rock of ages, cannot be persuaded, triumphant as
unbelief may be, that it will fail of its just influence over mankind in due
time. They see in its grand discoveries, benign spirit, pure precepts, and
noble intention, all that is conducive to the consolation and improvement of
individuals, the order and happiness of society; and they cherish the pleasing
belief, that sooner or later its charms will be displayed to mankind in that
just and impresive view, which will engage their admiration and love. Does the
past inefficacy foretell the future rejection of this divine system? By no
means: for men have been hitherto from various causes more incapacitated and
more indisposed to receive it, than we trust they will be in future. In almost
every country, it has been made an engine of tyrannical power, and a support of
civil abuses. It has been concealed under the rubbish, which barbarous ages
have heaped upon it. It has been misrepresented by the interested or absurd
constructions; and dishonored by the loose, the uncharitable, and worldly
practices of its teachers. And men have beheld in christianity not the majestic
and beautiful structure raised by Christ and his apostles; but a misshapen and
deformed edifice of human contrivance. It being represented in this false and
distorted view, by men not daring through fear, or not desiring through
interest, or not capacitated through ignorance and prejudice to represent it in
a more just and fair one, men of free minds, beholding it only in this
representation, have been unable to respect, have been compelled to contemn it.
When stripped of every human appendage, it shall stand forth in its genuine
form; when, by the diffusion of light superstition and bigotry shall wear away;
and by the experience of their enormous evils, irreligion and skepticism shall
appear as they are, the poison of human peace and happiness; men will be
prompted to seek a retreat from the darkness of doubt, and the tempests of
passion, in this light and serene temple of God.

But the immovable foundation of our faith, in the final and complete success
of the christian religion, is laid in those predictions of the sacred writings,
the accomplishment of a part of which is a pledge of the completion of the
whole. These point our enraptured view to a time, when "Jesus Christ shall have
the heathen for his inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession. The knowledge of God shall cover the earth, as the waters fill the
seas: The saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom; and the greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints
of the Most High. The people shall be all righteous, and not hurt nor destroy.
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation; but they shall beat their swords
into plough shares and their spears into pruning hooks, and learn war no more:"
Thus the universal prevalence of christian principles will secure and
perpetuate universal peace. Among nations, warmed by that charity, which
seeks not her own, and embraces all men as brethren; and guided by that
equity, which renders to all their dues; disputes as injuries will be rare; and
when they arise, will be peaceably adjusted by acknowledged principles or a
common tribunal. The efforts, now expended in the defense, will be employed in
the improvement of countries; and the gifts of nature, now unused or destroyed,
will be made to yield all their resources to public and private happiness. In
the intercourse of independent communities, harmony will take place of
dissension, beneficence of unkindness, sincerity of deceit, and unsuspicious
security of jealous fear.

We have now finished the discusion of the proposed topics of this discourse;
and have endeavored to show, that great and unquestionable an evil as war is,
it is ever superintended by a wise and benevolent Providence, and made
productive of good in several important instances; that its horrors have been
mitigated by the mildness of the christian spirit and the advancement of arts;
and we have reason to believe, that by the increased and extended influence of
this spirit and the progress of light and freedom, the practice of deciding
natural disputes by force will be abolished, and universal and perpetual peace
bless the world.

A few reflections arising from the subject, and adapted to the state of our
country and the present occasion, will be added.

Vice, we have seen, is rendered in many respects productive of good; but let
it not therefore be less detested. It is odious in its nature, and destructive
in its direct consequences; and if suffered to take its unrestrained course,
would spread ruin and disorder through the world. When the irreligious are made
without intention to promote religion, the tyrannical freedom, and the cruel
humanity, let us abhor the instruments, whilst we approve the ends, and lament
the causes, whilst we rejoice in the effects. Inundations and tempests excite
grief and terror, though they fertilize the earth, or purify the air.

Are we assured that all events are subject to the wise and good direction of
God; that partial evil is general good; and that ambition, pride, revenge, and
impiety are made in unnumbered ways to issue in advantage to the system of
rational and sensitive being; hushed be our complaints, composed be our fears.
"The Lord reigns; let the earth rejoice. Though clouds and darkness are round
about him, righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne."

What emotions of pious gratitude and pleasing wonder should we feel, when we
consider that peace has been the general lot of our country; that from the
favorable character and circumstances, of the American people, our revolution
was unattended by that desolation and horror, convulsion and distress, which
mark that of a great European nation; that we are flowing in the wealth and
prosperity of peace and neutrality, whilst the old world is suffering the havoc
and devastation of as extensive, as furious, and as calamitous a war, as ever
afflicted and disgraced mankind; and lastly, that the genius of our government,
the good sense and virtue of our citizens, and the remoteness of our situation
from the cabals of Europe, afford us the fairest prospect of the continued and
perpertual enjoyment of peace, which ever shone on any nation of the earth.

But such is the versatility of human affairs, such the violence of human
passions, and such the disordered state of the world in general, that none
could be surprised, were this prospect suddenly obscured. The clouds have
scarce disappeared, which lately darkened our political sky; God only knows how
soon they may again collect and thicken to a tempest. Every possible motive
urges our government to foster, and our citizens to cultivate the military art.
Whatever hope we may entertain of the future prevalence of pacific principles
among nations, we know that this age will not enjoy its completion; that
strength is now the only safe guard of right; and that to be obliged to fight
for our liberties and laws, or surrender them, is no improbable alternative in
this period of convulsion. It becomes us to be prepared to show ourselves not
unworthy of these blessings, by our skill and valor in their defense. Should
the unhallowed hand of foreign or domestic violence attempt to wrest them from
us, to be ready to protect them with our lives and fortunes, is a duty we owe
to heaven and to earth; to the cause of liberty in all countries, which looks
to us for direction and encouragement; to our fathers, who bestowed, and to our
children who will receive the fair inheritance, whose execrations we shall
richly merit, if it be not transmitted to them undiminished; to the sages and
heroes, who paid the price of our freedom with their counsels, labors, wounds,
and death; to that God, who fought our battles and ordained our triumph, who
has set us on an eminence, a "lesson to the oppressor, or, an example to the
oppressed," a sublime and instructive spectacle to the world.

To the Gentlemen, who compose the Ancient and Honorable Company, whose
anniversary Election gives brilliancy to this day, these considerations need
not an elaborate display. The past utility and respectability of their
institution; the attention paid them by the Supreme Executive of the
commonwealth; and the military, civil, and moral worth of character, which they
possess, are so many pledges to their country, that they will pursue, with
steadiness and vigor, the objects of their association, and will continue it a
nursery of martial skill and spirit.

May we all remember that we are engaged in a warfare, in which the contention
is not for an earthly republic, that will pass away, but for a heavenly
kingdom, that will endure forever. Death will soon release us from the service;
and introduce us to our Divine Commander, whose plaudit or censure we shall
then receive. Where are the thousands, who in a long succession of years, have
joined in the devotion of this house on the present anniversary, and rejoiced
like us on the cheerful occasion. They have fallen by the stroke of the great
destroyer, and lie mouldering dust, in the dark chambers of the caverned earth.
Happy they, who amid powerful enemies, have maintained with resolution the
christian warfare, and secured the conquest. The voice of the arch angel and
the trump of God will wake to life the slumbering atoms; and the Captain of
their salvation will adorn their victorious brows with the garland of
immortality.

FINIS

