MR. M'CLURE's SERMON, AT THE INSTALLATION OF VILLAGE LODGE.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE INSTALLATION OF VILLAGE LODGE, OF Free Masons, IN
SIMSBURY, CONNECTICUT, October 7th, 1794.

BY DAVID M'CLURE, A. M. Minister of the first Church in East-Windsor.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. MDCCXCV.

To Major Reuben Humphreys, master of Village Lodge, and to the Brethren of
said Lodge, the following Discourse is respectfully inscribed, by

The Author.

Solomon and Hiram; or Jews and Gentiles united, in building the Church of God.
AS a christian minister invited to address you on this occasion, allow me to
ask your consideration to some important truths, which by the divine assistance
will be suggested for your moral and religious improvement, from that passage
of the inspired writings, recorded, 1 KINGS, v.12. And the Lord gave Solomon
wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and
they two made a league together.



THESE words call our attention to an important period in the ancient history
of the providence of God, toward the church and world. What is humbly proposed
by the preacher, is to offer some preliminary observations to elucidate the
part of sacred history, with which the words now read, have a connection, --
and from the example the happy peace and mutual friendship and esteem, which
existed between the ancient monarchs Solomon and Hiram, to explain the nature
and recommend the obligations of brotherly love -- and to make such
application, as may be suitable to the subject and occasion.

That the knowledge of the one true God, the creator of the universe, and of
his will to mankind as the rule of duty, might not be lost amidst the moral
darkness and polytheism which overspread the nations of the earth; it had
pleased God to select the numerous descendants of the patriarch Abraham, to be
the depositary of this sacred betrustment.

A succession of enlightened leaders under the divine direction, had conducted
the nation of Israel, through perils from surrounding enemies, whom God had
commanded them to extirpate, as unworthy longer to live, and planted them in
peace and happiness, in the promised land.

Among those heroes and servants of the Most High, David the father of Solomon,
shone with distinguished luster, as a pious patriot, and an accomplished
soldier. His victorious arms had subdued the nations all around the borders of
Palestine. To his successor, he left the peaceable possession of an extensive
kingdom, bounded by the Euphrates -- by Arabia -- by the Mediterranean -- by
Egypt, and by Tire.

Solomon was worthy in all respects, to succeed so illustrious a father, and to
ascend the throne of a powerful kingdom.

Tributary nations were to be held in subjection, factions to be crushed, and
the people long habituated to bloody wars, and the triumphs of victory, to be
formed to peaceable and industrious citizens; and the civil polity and
ecclesiastic government, required an arrangement accommodated to the new order
of things.

In so critical a situation the young monarch needed wisdom, to preside with
dignity, and be a blessing to his people. "And gave him wisdom as he promised
him." As the many signal interpositions of heaven, in favor of the nation of
Israel were intended principally with a view to the preservation of the true
religion, it was necessary that there should be a common center of union; and
Jerusalem was chosen. And at that early period, when men were less accustomed
to the labor of rational investigation of divine truths, and most struck with
the glare of sensible objects, that the place and rites of their religious
homage, should be magnificent and splendid.

The great Jehovah, ever condescendent to the wants and weakness of his
creatures, commanded Solomon to build him a house, for the manifestation of his
glorious visible presence.

The building arose, and the world admired the richness and splendour of the
structure, the earthly palace, and throne of the God of Israel. It corresponded
to the great idea of Solomon, the pattern of which had been divinely
communicated. With pious joy, he contemplated the dome, and consecrated it to
God. He asked wisdom, and God gave him wisdom. His uncommon wisdom appears in
the salutary maxims and laws, and the orderly and equitable administration of
his government; attended with a long, peaceable and glorious reign; but
principally in his ardent piety to God, and righteousness to men.

His natural genius was set off to great advantage by early piety. When young
and tender his parents taught him the lessons of wisdom and virtue. His early
instruction was watered with heavenly grace. His manners were adorned with the
most accomplished education that a royal court could give, and where the
simplicity of piety and virtue, and every manly virtue dwelt. God was pleased
to give him a wisdom more than human in government, and in the arts and
sciences, and in subjects of philosophy and theology, and questions agitated in
his day; and which the wisest of his cotemporaries could not explain.

Egypt had long been celebrated as the school of science; but Solomon excelled
her wisest philosophers, Heman and Ethan, Calcol and Darda. Monarchs heard the
same of his wisdom, and came to be instructed, or honored his court by splendid
embassies. Among these is particularly mentioned the illustrious queen of
Sheba, now the ancient kingdom of Abysinia, in the interior parts of Africa.
The people there still observe many jewish rites in their religious worship;
and their monarchs boast their descent from that celebrated queen. The city and
kingdom of Tire bordered upon Israel; and Hiram a wise and religious monarch,
sat upon the throne. He had been the friend and ally of the father of Solomon,
and upon the accession of the son, he sent to congratulate him. Hiram, though
king over an idolatrous people, yet acknowledges, and worships the true God.
Probably he was one of the numerous Gentile proselytes who received the
knowledge of God from the Jews. And from the same source are derived, those
right notions of God and duty, which are found in the writings of the
philosophers of Greece and Rome; and which are much extoled by modern infidels,
while they affect to despise the divine fountain, from which they were derived.
The souls of these two monarchs were formed for mutual friendship and esteem.
Hiram was the lover of David, and the friend and lover of his son. And there
was peace between them. He in whose hands are the hearts of kings, brought this
about, to accomplish the purposes of his mercy to the church and world. The
friendship and assistance of Hiram was necessary to Solomon, to accomplish the
vast work assigned him. Neighboring kings are usually hostile, because they
stand in the way of each other's designs of worldly grandeur. But those two
royal brothers possessed souls too great and good to embrace the little and
unjust projects of kings.

Solomon was the friend of Hiram through life, and found him worthy of his
regard. And probably had him in view, when he penned that excellent proverb,
worthy of perpetual remembrance, "Thine own friend and thy father's friend,
forsake not."

Tire lay upon the Mediterranean sea, and was the most flourishing trading city
in the world. Navigation and commerce, of which they were the inventors,
elevated them to great opulence and power. They were the first who carried the
art of ship building to any degree of perfection, and navigated to foreign
climes. Though ignorant of the polar properties of the magnet, and guided only
by the stars and shores, yet were they very adventurous arid enterprizing. They
had established a regular commerce to the East Indies by the Red sea, and to
the streights of Gibraltar. They were the mart of nations -- the crowning city,
whose merchants were princes, and the honorable of the earth. By their wealth
and industry they had arrived at the height of excellence, in the various arts
which embellished life, and particularly in architecture.

Solomon requested Hiram to send him some of his architects, and acknowledges
their skill in building, and all mechanic arts to be greatly superior to his
own people. And the Tyrian monarch most readily complied with his desire.

The magnificent temple of Jehovah was eight years in building. Two hundred
thousand Jews and Tyrians labored in the work. Precious marbles were sought for
among the quarries, and hewed and polished with the nicest art; and Lebanon
furnished the choicest timber. Jews and Gentiles in perfect harmony, built the
house of God. Lively emblem of the gospel church, built up by nations of all
languages, where charity is the bond of perfection and peace.

The temple was erected three thousand years from the creation, and a thousand
before the incarnation.

To teach us that perfection is not the lot of mortality, the fall of the wise
and good Solomon is recorded. He arose glorious, as the sun after a night of
storms, and long continued his joyful course: but a dark cloud obscured his
beams, from which however, through the divine mercy he emerged, and bitterly
laments his folly in the pursuits of happiness, in the gaiety and grandeurs of
life, and pleasures of sense; pronouncing vanity and vexation upon them. His
marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh, then the most powerful monarch of the
East, and with other wives taken from the royal courts of neighboring princes,
though steps of policy to secure the peace and glory of his reign, yet were the
unhappy occasion of plunging him into idolatry and misery. For this, and the
sin of poligamy, once suffered for the hardness of men's hearts, though a
violation of the original institution; Solomon and the nation were severely
punished, by the rebellion of his children, and the insurrection of his
subjects, and the division of the kingdom. God the supreme governor of nations,
prospers a people who obey his immutatable laws, but frowns upon and casts off
those who despise his authority.

While on this part of sacred history, suffer me to add, what is most worthy of
our solemn consideration, as individuals, and as members of the great
community; That prevailing wickedness, the effect of great worldly prosperty
and of human depravity, are the alone cause of the desolation and ruin of a
people.

Where is now Jerusalem, the holy city and the holy temples, the admiration of
ages? Where is Tire the opulent, the mart of nations? Lo, the bosom of
destruction has passed over them! Behold, the beloved city trodden down by the
Gentiles! Barbarous Turks and Saracens possess the once fertile land, the
glorious holy mount, and theater of God's wondrous works in former ages, --
the birth place of the divine Savior; -- that witnessed his miracles -- that
heard his sublime and heavenly discourses -- that saw him expire without the
gates, upon the cross, to make atonement and reconciliation -- that beheld his
glorious resurrection, and triumphant translation to the celestial regions, and
from whence the glad tidings of salvation have gone forth into all lands. But
now alas, it suffers the curse of barrenness and barbarians, for the wickedness
of them who once dwelt therein. And in its present desolation it will remain,
until the times of the Gentiles is fulfilled. But glorious things are spoken of
thee, O Jerusalem, thou city of the living God! of which we wait for the
accomplishment, when the daughters also of Tire shall be there, and nations
come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.

For some wonderful designs of providence, the people of the Hebrews are
continued as a remarkable exception from all other people, separated and
unmixed, though mixed and scattered, over the earth, and aliens among the
nations. Times and seasons are in the hands of God, whose wonder working
providence will accomplish the purposes of his righteousness, in due time. Some
great events relative to the church and the world, we are ready to conjecture,
art about to take place, from the present unprecedented convulsions, amazement
and revolutions, among the nations of the earth. Hasten, O Lord, thy works of
grace in this disordered world* in the midst of the years make known thy mercy!
We will wait for thy salvation, O Lord.

Sin has also overthrown the once famous city Tire. Extreme opulence, the fruit
of their extensive commerce, abused to promote the vices of luxury, pride,
effeminacy and oppression, brought upon them perpetual desolation.

Tire was an island adjoining the continent. They shall, says the prophet
Ezekiel, destroy the walls of Tire, and break down her towers; I will also
scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. It shall be a
place for the spreading of nets, in the midst of the sea, and it shall become a
spoil to the nations. The present state of Tire remarkably verifies this
ancient prediction. As you sail along the desolate coast, you see a few
scattering huts, and poor fishermen spreading their nets upon the sun burnt
rocks and ruins, or hauling them to the shores. Let us, sirs, guard against
those private and public sins and vices, which have drawn down judgments upon a
sinful people, and let us love and practice that universal righteousness and
virtue, which exalts a nation.

2. From the example of that happy peace, and mutual friendship and esteem,
which existed between King Solomon and Hiram, I shall take occasion to explain
the nature, and recommend the obligations of brotherly love. There was peace
between them, and they two made a league together.

How good and pleasant is it for brethren to dwell in unity together! Where
mutual brotherly love reigns in a society, there peace, contentment and every
moral and social virtue dwell. Where hatred reigns, the bands of society are
burst asunder, the fire brands and arrows of contention are scattered around,
and death with ghastly smiles sits upon the ruins. But love cements mankind
together, as brethren, and society is as a strong and beautiful edifice.

Mankind are made for society. It is not good for man to be alone. And virtuous
friendship is the foundation on which society rests.

"Celestial happiness, when'er she stoops
"To visit earth, one shrine the goddess finds,
"And one alone, to make her sweet amends
"For absent heaven, -- the bosom of a friend.
YOUNG. The obligations of brotherly love, charity and kindness, are derived
from the mutual dependence of mankind, for the preservation of life and the
acquisition of the means of a comfortable existence. Man is weak and wretched
in solitude, but powerful and happy in society.

This mutual love in our social state, the christian's master and Lord, has
taught us to put into practice, from higher considerations than mere humane
principles, even from love to God, and to the Redeemer of men; that we should
love our fellow men, as the creatures of God and children of our universal
father.

The divine law which commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves, and to do
to others as we would that others should do to us, is a most safe,
disinterested and benevolent rule; intelligible to every capacity, and
calculated for our daily use.

Christianity teaches us that with the same sincerity and zeal, with which we
pursue our own interest and happiness, we should pursue also that of our fellow
men. Our own self-love is made the rule and square of our love to others.

Do we enter zealously into the defense of our reputation from the tongue of
slander, and establish our innocence, through love to ourselves? With the same
zeal, are we to vindicate the reputation of others. Do we overlook and pardon
our own infirmities through love to ourselves? So should we overlook and pardon
the infirmities and failings of our fellow men, through love to them. Do we
labor to enjoy peace and comfort in this life, and to secure immortal
happiness beyond the grave? With the same sincerity and zeal should we labor to
promote the temporal and eternal happiness of our fellow men.

In these things essentially consists genuine brotherly love, upon evangelic
principles. O, sirs, what happiness would ensue were this divine law in
universal practice! Of this law, the divine philanthropist, who came down from
heaven to unite himself to us, as our elder brother, has given us the
illustrious example. Brethren, if God has thus loved us, we ought to love me
another.

"Blessed Redeemer, inspire our souls with a portion of that celestial charity
which thou have shown for us!" Then would universal gladness abound, and peace
and happiness reign. All selfishness, fraud and violence cease; and justice,
charity and kindness prevail. Then would be realized the golden age, which
ancient prophets have foretold, and poets often sung.

The wise author of our existence has here placed us in such a condition, that
our many and various connections and dependencies, may give us abundant
opportunities and occasions, for the exercise of the moral and social virtues;
that our life may be filled up with usefulness, and our character as men and
christians, supported with reputation. And by divine grace assisting, we may be
preparing for a more perfect society in the regions of immortality, where the
universal principle is, mutual love.

Let it be our daily care to cultivate this most worthy principle, since it
lives and reigns in that pure celestial society, to which the wise and good
only are united, and where no malevolent, envious or unmerciful disposition,
will be admitted. A present reward attends the exercise of charity. It relieves
and comforts the mind. A generous mind feels more pleasure in doing a kindness,
than receiving one. It is, says our Lord, more blessed to give than to receive.
He who gives you an opportunity to do good is your benefactor. And he who
bestows a needed charity is more obliged, than he who receives. To do good
then, sirs, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased.

What sacred pleasure does the generous breast feel, who by sympathy and
kindness, dries up the tears of anguish, and drives before him mourning and
woe, and lights up joy and gladness in the heart oppressed with grief? It is as
the serene light of the morning, arising upon the weary and lost traveller, or
the shipwrecked mariner, after a night of storms and darkness. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall find mercy.

Some Reflections will conclude.

1. My brethren, let grateful sentiments arise to God, by whose disposing
providence, we are placed in that favorable condition, in which we may enjoy
all the profits and pleasures, of the social and friendly connections, which
consist with this state of our mortality. We live in a land of quietness and
plenty, and heaven showers down upon us, innumerable mercies, temporal and
spiritual.

Let us improve them to glorify our father in heaven, in the ways of piety and
benevolence, and to do good to mankind by the usefulness of our lives. And may
we escape those evils which an ungrateful abuse of the divine mercies bring
upon men.

2. Our subject presents to every social institution, as well as to
individuals, the sacred obligations of brotherly love.

The society now to be formed, professes this, as the ground of their
institution. And to take as their pattern in peace and social affection, the
two royal brothers and master builders, Hiram and Solomon. Between them there
was peace, and they two made a league together. A treaty of national friendship
and alliance and of a free trade and commerce, was probably formed and
ratified, for the mutual benefit of Judea and Tire; and a personal friendship
and correspondence also established, between the two monarchs.

An institution founded for the promotion of mutual edification and brotherly
love is useful and laudable. It appears from the history of operative masonry,
that regular societies or lodges, were formed in Europe in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. And the circumstances which led to this originated from
one of the most wonderful events which the world had ever witnessed.

After a long night of ignorance and moral darkness, had overspread the
nations, two or three millions of people in different crusades, led on by
kings, princes and priests, and armed with enthusiastic ardor, marched from the
extremities of Europe into Asia, to recover the holy city Jerusalem from the
hands of infidel Saracens. They performed prodigies of valor and violence, and
with the loss of thousands of lives, got possession of Jerusalem. In their
progress they marched through Constantinople, then the capital of the Grecian or
eastern Roman empire, where the arts and sciences were still cultivated. The
Europeans were barbarians compared with the people of the East. They were
astonished at the magnificence which they saw every where; and especially at
the noble and magnificent buildings, contrasted with the thatched and smoaky
huts, in which they lived in Europe. They were inspired with a new taste for
architecture. Skilful masons and builders were invited from Asia, and splendid
palaces, churches and edifices arose, as it were by magic. The builders found
the secrets of their art profitable. They became opulent and powerful. Kings
and barons were desirous to be initiated into the mysteries of the geometrical
proportions of masonry and architecture, and were admitted. Other
sister-mechanic arts at the same time arose, and held within themselves the
secrets or mysteries of their respective trades. And something of this custom
remains to the present day. We hence see a deserved respect paid to a useful,
mechanical, ancient and honorable profession.

Brethren and friends of this ancient and honorable order:

Accept a word addressed to you, the dictate of benevolence, and an earnest
desire for your usefulness and reputation in life, and happiness beyond the
grave.

For good and sufficient reasons, a society may retain within themselves, the
knowledge of some things, which would be an advantage neither to the world, or
themselves, to reveal. Man is naturally inquisitive. He wishes to know every
thing. It may be useful policy to keep alive this curiosity. I presume not to
explain the mysteries, so called, of masonry. And I suppose I should not, if I
knew them.

To diffuse useful knowledge, and increase in wisdom -- to extend charity and
relief to those whom misfortunes have reduced -- to cultivate the endearments
of friendship and brotherly love -- and to enjoy the innocent pleasures of
society as a relaxation from the fatigues of business; I would charitably hope,
are some of the most important secrets of your society. These are things
pleasing and profitable. The public laws of your fraternity are good. They
exclude the immoral and vicious. They demand that your members be examplary in
their lives and worthy citizens. They require more than this; even the
acknowledgement and worship of God, a belief in divine revelation and reverence
for the institutions of our holy religion.

If you act up to your principles, the influence of your social combinations
will never be used to serve the interests of a party; neither to sow the seeds
of faction in the community, or to advance to places of public trust, the
unqualified. But while you pay the deserved respect to the worthy of your own
community, you will not exclude others, equally deserving your confidence. In
your individual and social character* ever act with integrity and impartiality;
and pursue such a line of conduct as shall silence the objections of those, who
may express their fears, that your society may have an undue influence, in any
respect. Act worthily as men and professed masons, and let me add as
christians. Follow peace with all men. And may a happy rural simplicity of
innocent and virtuous manners be ever characteristic of the members of the
VILLAGE LODGE.

Though your laws do not admit into your fraternity, the fair and lovely
daughters of Eve, because the labors of the trowel were not intended for them,
and the lillies toil not; yet every true mason is by profession, the protector
and friend of the virtuous fair. The emblematic badges of your orders, strike
the mind of an uninitiated brother as very significant and happily designed.

Imitate, brethren the SUN, in the diffusion of goodness and useful knowledge
all around you. He shines upon the evil and the good, and scatters joy and
gladness wherever his light and heat come.

Observe the shining STARS, their regular and harmonious revolutions. Like them
be persevering in all useful labor. Take the COMPASS of propriety of behavior;
the SQUARE of rectitude, in all your conversation. The PLUMLINE, and LEVEL of
unshaken justice. The SWORD of fortitude in duty, and the TROWEL of diligence
in business, cementing all labor with brotherly love; and daub not with
untempered mortar, but be ambitious to excel in every noble and useful work.
Let your life be uniform, like a finished and well proportioned EDIFICE,
supported by the comely PILLARS of virtue, benevolence, truth and friendship.
Let wisdom and integrity be the base, and charity the principle; and strength
and beauty will adorn the structure.

Bear the HOD of patience in the necessary labors and sufferings of life, and
ascend the LADDER of honorable promotion, and be worthy of a seat in SOLOMON's
chair. And let the white and fair APRON, be truly significant of your innocence
and purity of character, and fidelity in all business. Take the HIVE of
industrious bees, may you gather knowledge and virtue from the wide fields of
nature and revelation, and your labors benefit others as well as yourselves.
And in all your professions and actions, may the naked HEART, be descriptive of
your sincerity and brotherly love. And see the naked SWORD of justice, pointed
to punish all falsehood and wickedness there. Ever live under the solemn,
impressive sense of the OMNISCIENT EYE of Jehovah, which sees your secret
thoughts, your public and private ways. O may you approve yourselves to him,
who is greater than your heart and knows all things.

As the glorious STAR guided the sages of the East, to the infant Jesus, so my
the blessed gospel, sins, lead you to the divine Redeemer, our ARK of safety.
And may you secure the ANCHOR of a good hope, and be supported on the
boisterous sea of life, and in the storm of death.

These moral and emblematic figures, respected friends, calling you to virtue
and to God, receive additional force from the solemn shroud and COFFIN, which
terminate all earthly scenes and remind you of the shortness of your abode on
earth.

May your remembrance live as the sprig of EVER-GREEN, when the grass growing
over your graves shall wave to the whispering winds! May you live and flourish
in the bright climes of immortality!

It is God who forms us for social joys, and gives us the blessings of
friendship. Let our innocent recreations, and convivial comforts, be
consecrated to him.

May the love and fear of God, now and ever reign in all our hearts, that we
offend not that high and holy being, who is the constant witness of all our
secret purposes, and public actions, and will be our righteous Judge. To whom
be ascribed dominion, salvation and glory, now and evermore.

AMEN.

