MR. LEE's ELECTION SERMON, MAY 14th, 1795.

THE origin and ends of civil Government: with reflections on the distinguised
happiness of the United States.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY, Samuel Huntington, Esquire, L.L.D.
GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 14, 1975.

By ANDREW LEE, A.M. PASTOR OF THE NORTH CHURCH IN LISBON.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. MDCCXCV.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A.D. 1795.
ORDERED, that the Honorable WILLIAM HILLHOUSE, and SAMUEL LOVETT. ESQUIRES,
return the thanks of this Assembly to the Rev. Mr. ANDREW LEE, for his Sermon
delivered before his Assembly at the General Election, on the 14th, inst. and
desire a Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, By GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.


ELECTION SERMON.
II. CHRONICLES IX.8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to
set thee on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved
Israel to eStablish them forever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do
judgment and justice.
GOVERNMENT is from God. It may be traced to the first visit he made to our
world after the aposstacy. * But no particular form has an exclusive claim to
be of devine origin. The first form was patriarchal. This naturally arose from
the then state of the world. For a time it was sufficient. It probably
continued till the deluge; but was found too weak even before that event. The
"earth was filled with violence." When the world was repeopled, and the life of
man reduced, government gradually put on other forms.

The only political system expressly instituted by heaven was that of the
Hebrews, which was a republican theocracy; a form in many respects diverse from
every other, and to the nations in general impracticable. The change which took
place in their constitution, which in process of time became a monarchy, was of
themselves; permitted indeed, but no approved of God. It was reckoned of him
among their rebellions.

THERE are circumstances in which monarchy may be requisite; and from the
beginning the nations have been permitted of God to mould civil government into
what form they pleased, in order to suit it to their state. Nor was it any part
of Christ's design to make changes in the civil establishments of the nations.
Christianity was intended to be the religion of the world. The time is coming
when it will embrace all nations. What may then be their political state does
not yet appear.

DEEP depravity involves the principles of servitude. No people sunk in by
utalizing vice can long be free. Such was the state of the Romans at the
beginning of the gospel day. Civil liberty, the pride and glory of their
ancestors, had expired: It Is dying struggles had been violent. They had turned
a large of the habitable globe into a field of blood. In defense of liberty,
noble, but ineffectual had been the exertions of virtuous individuals.
Arbitrary power was established. The gracious design of heaven then opening of
the world, required for some ages, the continuance of the empire, in all its
vast extensions, that Syria in particular should remain a province of it.

THESE considerations enable us to account for subjection to the Roman
government enjoined on the first Christians, without our thence infering the
divine right of kings. From temper and circumstances of every people the genius
of their government naturally arises.

"THE MOST HIGH rules in the kingdom of men." This is intimated in the text.
When the queen Sheba had seen the order and equity of Solomon's administration;
and the happiness of his people, she thus proclaimed her admiration of the
providence of God in the elevation of so wise a prince. Blessed be the Lord,
thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee is throne, to be king for the Lord
thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore
made be thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.

THAT all power belongs to God, and is derived from him, is doubted only by
those "who say in their hearts there is no God. Psalm. xiv.1.
He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth; none can stay his hand." Dan. iv.35.
He makes use, however, of creatures in the government of the moral world, as
he does of second causes in the natural. Men are his vicegerents in the
government of one another. But who shall hold the reins, and in what manner
they shall be committed into their hands, is ordered by God's counsel and
providence. Natural causes concur and are made the means of raising up one and
putting down another; especially of placing such in authority, as are fitted to
answer the designs of the MOST HIGH, whether of mercy or judgment, but all are
overruled of him. Without infringing on human liberty his design are
accomplished, and his purposes stand. Second causes subserve the views of the
great first cause, and eventually fulfill his pleasure. The supreme ruler makes
use of what instruments he pleases. In the government of nations be often
employs the most abandoned of mankind. The perfection of divine wisdom in the
providential government of the world will ultimately appear in overruling the
wickedness of men, especially of princes, to subserve God's wise and holy
purposes.

THE ways of providence often appear to us dark and confused, "We may wonder
with great admiration." But why? They are only some small detached parts of the
divine scheme which fall under our inspection; and of those our knowledge is
partial and quite imperfect. But in God there is no darkness. With him all is
order and harmony. When the mystery of God is finishied, we shall see that
there is no error in his administration.

FARTHER: Good civil government is a token of God's love to a people: Because
thy God loved Israel, therefore made be thee king over them.

IN the language of Scripture a king often signifies a form of government, or
the polity of a nation. The requisites to good government are principally a
good constitution and a good administration.

OF all national blessings none is more valuable than the establishment of a
good constitution. Government has generally been the result of necessity. A
little attention is sufficient to show its origin; why the regal form has been
the most common; and how it has almost universally become oppressive.

WHEN, from the brevity of life and increase of population, patriarchical
authority was found too weak to restrain the lusts and regulate the jarring
interests of mankind, other measures for seccurity became necessary. Then the
weak took shelter under the protection of the strong. Every one found it
necessary to attach himself to, and make a common interest with, some powerful
leader -- unless where numbers had the precaution to unite for mutual safety,
electing their chiefs, and agreeing in some general rules and regulations for
the common advantage. This produced republics. But few took precaution for
safety beyond what the strength of their families and immediate connections
afforded, till they saw the necessity of more powerful protection; and then
they resorted to the nearest chieftain, from whom they might hope for temporary
security, in return for which they became in a manner necessarily the
instruments of extending their authority, and otherwise gratifying their
ambition or selfishness.

THUS by gradual advances have monarchies arisen which have aimed at universal
dominion. Hence also those monsters called conquerors who like beasts of prey
"have devoured, and broken in pieces, and stamped the residue with their feet."
Dan. vii.7.
Never was the wrath of heaven poured on the earth by the agency of more fell
destroyers. At the head of this race stands Nimrod, a first born descendant of
execrated Ham. By degrees those chiefs having gained absolute power over their
followers, prevailed to hand down the same to their children. Dominion they
considered as an inheritence; and unwary nations tacitly admitted their impious
claims, and suffered the chains of despotism to be rivetted upon them.
Hereditary power, that opprobrium of reason has laid prostrate the liberties
of the world. This first took place when the sons of Noah had spead themselves
abroad after the flood. It appeared again in Europe after the subversion of the
Roman empire by the barbarians of the North.

IN most nations, however, regal power was at first restrained by formal
conventions between the people and their sovereigns: but such advantages were
generally put into the hands of those raised to royalty, as enabled them to
burst the mounds set to guard the rights of subjects. These advantages they
have seldom neglected. More have watched to enlarge their own power, and make
themselves and their descendants absolute, than to make their people happy by
fulfilling their own solemn engagements.

THE republics which have been the most renowned are those of Greece and Rome.
These long flourished, and rose to great power and splendour. Their names are
still revered. But no sooner were the people enervated by vice and luxuty, than
they sunk under the influence of craft and intrigue, and were immersed with the
rest of the world in the gulf of regal domination.

EVERY different species of government may have some advantages peculiar to
itself: but which has, in general, produced the greatest happiness to the
subject, called forth most of the powers latent in the human mind, and to the
highest degree ennobled the nature of man, can be doubted by ignorance alone.

IT is therefore a strong expression of heaven's favor to a people when wisdom
is given them to adopt a good system of government, and establish wise and
equitable regulations. Such establishments are the source of order and
happiness.Yea they often lengthen out the tranquillity of a people, after they
are so far corrupted that general wretchedness must have ensued, had not these
regulations been adopted.

MUCH also depends on the character of those who are entrusted with the
administration. "When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but
when the wicked bear rule, the people mourn." Prove. xxxix.2.
When government is corrutupted at it is source, or by want of ability or
faithfulness those who are appointed to carry it into execution, "the
foundations of the earth are out of course." Confusion and every evil work
follow. As the providence of God is concerned in the exaltation of those who
bear rule, when the wise and virtuous are raised to places of authority, the
goodness of God toward such people appears, and demands their grateful notice.
"But woe to that land whose king is a child, and whose princes eat in the
morning."

FURTHER: civil rulers are exalted to rule for GOD. Set thee on his throne to
be king for the Lord thy God.

To rule for God is to rule according to his directions, faithfully adhering to
the regulations which has given. It was required of the ruler of God's people
of old to acquaint himself with his law, and make it the rule of his life and
government. "When he sits on the throne, he shall write him a copy of this
law out of that which is before the priests, the Levites. And it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of this law, and these slatutes to
do them; that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren; and that he turn
not aside from the commandment, to the right hand or the left." The whole
universe is under the divine control. To the supreme ruler is every created
being accountable. However any may aspire to independence, "there is higher
than they." The greatest and most powerful among men should always consider
themselves as subordinate rulers, who are exercising only delegated powers, and
exalted to rule, not for them selves, but for him whose they are, and whose the
majesty in which they shine.

BUT to do justice in any measure to our subject, it is necessary to descend a
little to particulars. Here a wide field opens before us. A very partial view
must content us.

THAT rulers are exalted to rule for God by doing judgment and justice implies,
first, an attentive care to see that just laws are enacted. Laws by which human
rights will be secured, and free course given to commutative justice. The
establishment of justice is the primary duty of those who are placed in
authority. To this duty legislators are under the greatest obligation. That
there are none who can call them to account, or compel them to do justly, can
tempt only the basest of men to do wrong. True honor scorns to oppress the
poor, or to abuse the weak and defenseless. Those whom power seduces to
injustice, and converts into oppressors, are lost to all principles of honor
and virtue.

" Vattel, Page 153.
BESIDES the virtues that are the glory of princes as well as of private
persons, says a great author, "there is a dignity and decorum that
particularly belongs to the supreme rank, and which a sovereign ought to
observe with the greatest care. He cannot neglect them without degrading
himself, and stamping a blemish on the State. Every ray that beams from the
throne ought to bear the character of purity, nobleness and grandeur. What an
idea do we conceive of a people, when we see the sovereign show in public acts
a meanness of sentiment with which a private person would think himself
dishonored? The majesty of a nation resides in it is rulers. When they are soft
to honor and probity, or adopt the principles of Machiavelian policy, their
infamy descends to the body of which they are the head. Such rulers deserve to
be disgracefully driven from their posts,

GOD requires "those who rule over men to be just ruling in his fear." Rulers
of a different character set up the standard of rebellion against God, and may
expect to be judged as those who will not have him to rule over them. "If one
man sin against another, the judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him?" I. Sam. ii.15.


NEXT to seeing that good laws are enacted, it is the rulers duty to see that
they are carried into execution. Laws become useless, when they are neglected,
and their penalties disregarded. This is often a first symptom of decay among a
people who have been blessed with a good constitution: It saps the foundations
of justice both public and private; consequently destroys peace and order. To
see that faithful men are appointed to execute the laws, and that they are duly
supported, and enabled to act effectually, is an indispensible duty in the
guardians of a State.

BUT so imperfect is every thing human, that the compleatest civil code cannot
reach to every case. Legislators are therefore often called to act judicially,
being the demier resort where the written law fails. In such cases the
character of the ruler is exchanged for that of the judge. Here in matters of
right they have no dispensing power, but are tied up to the strict rules of
equity. Though superior to the laws of man, they are bound by the law of God to
do judgment and justice. In matters which respect the public, the public weal
should be their object. Services done for the community should be rewarded at
the common expense, and useful inventions and improvements in the arts which
may benefit society, encouraged by suitable premiums. But the good ruler does
not forget, that although justice is a public, generosity is a private, virtue.
Righteous demands on the public he discharges with punctuality and honor. He
does not think himself warranted to defraud individuals, because he acts for
the public; but pensions reaching to posterity, and largesses of every kind
from the public treasury, he avoids with the scrupulous care of a guardian
faithful to his trust.

As civil rulers are set to rule for God, their example is of great importance.
Laws are commonly revered while rulers themselves obey them but seldom regarded
when their conduct is diverse. Rulers who maintain the dignity of character
which becomes their stations, have in their example an influence more happily
commanding than all the terrors of power. This renders exceedingly interesting
the part they act. Every one's influence bears proportion to his consideration
in the eyes of men. Obscure individuals stand in a good measure alone. To
themselves it is of importance that they refuse the evil and choose the good.
But different is the case of those in high stations. If they are vicious, "many
will follow their pernicious ways, and they will not perish alone in their
iniquity."

FURTHER: It is incumbent on those who are set to rule for God to be nursing
fathers to the cause of God. We are aware that it is not in the power of man to
compel any to be religious, and that civil rulers, by interposing in behalf of
religion, have sometimes injured the cause they intended to advance. This has
arisen from mistaking their duty, or taking too much upon them. Rulers have
often arrogated to themselves titles which belong to God only -- often taken on
them to decide on articles of faith. That a large share of this absurdity has
formerly been charged on clerical influence, we do not deny; but from whatever
source it proceeds, it argues great arrogance and gross ignorance of human
nature. No power, except that of light and truth, has the remotest tendency to
produce conviction. One might as rationally expect by force of argument to
chain up the ocean, or arrest the planets in their course, as to change the
views of the mind by the terror of penal laws. Never was a soul converted to
Christianity by Papal anathemas, or imperial mandates or proscriptions. In
matters of faith every one has an unalienable right to judge for himself: It
is a right of which no one can deprive another, and for the use of which man is
answerable to God alone. Each one has also a right to worship God as his
conscience directs, while he leaves others to enjoy the same liberty. Openly to
prosess his own sentiments, "live in all good conscience before God," and
maintain the same liberty for others, unawed by the reproaches of bigotry, is
the rulers duty. If the evidences of religion are not sufficient to evince it is
divine original, it deserves no support. If it cannot commend itself to the
consciences of men as worthy of all acceptance, let it fall. But the religion
of Jesus does not fear to meet all it is adversaries on the ground of reason and
evidence: Its truth is attested by a cloud of witnesses: The more they are
examined the better: It needs no arm of power to crush those who deny its
divine origin: It calls no fire from heaven to consume those who do not receive
it. They know not what spirit they are of, who think to aid it by such means:
It is worse than steadying the ark with unhallowed hands. It is like immolating
human victims on the altar of Jehovah. Let true religion only be defended from
external violence, and those raised to power whose lives adorn it, and it will
triumph over all the sophistry of earth and hell, and spread its divine
influence far and wide. Thus to defend and recommend it, is the ruler's duty.

BUT while each one judges for himself respecting the nature of religion, it
is of importance that public worship should be kept up, and it is the duty of
all, according to their ability, to contribute to its support. This is no
infringement of religious liberty, while no one attempts to intrude his creed
upon another, or calls on him to support a religious system not his own. A
comparison of communities in which these regulations have been maintained with
those in which they have been neglected is sufficient to evince their utility,
and convince even the skeptic of their political wisdom. And though God is
pleased to bless those means, and render them effectual to spiritual
advantages, it is on political principles that such regulations call for the
civil ruler's support. For order, harmony and general happiness have, from time
immemorial, been found to be their fruits.

I ONLY add here, faithfulness to God and to their constituents requires those
in authority to patronise the interests of literature. Ignorance next to vice
is baleful to liberty and happiness. Vice and ignorance often go together, and
the glory of every people falls before them. But deeply sensible are this
people of the importance of early instruction, and such has been the generous
care of their rulers, both to encourage private schools and support the
university, from which the state has long received distinguishing advantages,
that the propriety of enlarging on the subject is precluded.

FINALLY, God's end in giving a good constitution and good rulers to a people
is their establishment. "Because thy God loved Israel to establish them forever
therefore made he thee king over them."

WHEN the form of government is essentially defective, or the administration
devoid of the qualifications which constitute the good ruler, numbers and
resources are of no avail: they afford neither tranquillity within, nor security
against violence from without. Almost every age affords examples which confirm
this observation -- the present in particular. One of the kingdoms of Europe,
Poland.
to which in nature nothing was wanting to have rendered it a match for the
most powerful of its neighbors, has long been the scene of anarchy and
wretchedness from defects in its polity. It was a few years ago formally
divided among some of the powers bordering upon it, and is now, with seeble,
unavailing resistance seized by the ruthless tool of a Northern despot: its
cities laid in ashes, and its fields drenched in the best blood of its
inhabitants; because they dared to assert their undoubted rights.

THESE States, now so happy and respectable, had well nigh afforded another
instance of a gallant people ruined through the deficiency of their national
government. When congress was only entitled to apportion and ask the supplies
necessary to the common welfare, every one knows how irregular, unequal and
deficient they were found, even during the struggle for national existence. All
those evils increased after the arduous contest was ended. Public credit was
lost, honest industry discouraged, and barefaced injustice and oppression
prevailed. We remember the well meant endeavors of our faithful rulers to avert
the evils, and establish this insant empire. But all was unavailing, till the
source of our distress was removed in a new organization of the general
government.

GOOD rulers are no less necessary to the establishment of a nation, than good
rules. When weak or wicked men are exalted, the best constitution is in vain.
Debility in the head extends to the members of the body politic. Wicked,
designing rulers are still worse than weak ones. What encroachments on the
rights of a people has a single reign often produced? Weak or luxurious
princes have often enervated the arm, and destroyed the source of national
power, and yielded great and respectable States a prey to enemies they before
despised. Wicked ones often destroyed their liberties, and caused them to cry
out by reason of those who ruled over them. But good forms of government, and
wise and faithful men holding the reins, render small States happy and secure:
and, when continued for a few generations, generally raise them to national
greatness.

FEW have been permitted to choose, either the form of their government, or the
persons to exercise it. To the United States both have been refered by the
distinguishing goodness of God. Freed from foreign dominion, it was given us,
deliberately to adopt what civil constitution we pleased. In an enlightened
age, with the history of the whole political world before us, we have chosen
for ourselves. Hitherto we approve our choice. Happily the power of amendment
is retained. Whenever defects appear, they may be rectified, without violence
or tumult. With what other government is this the case? In some countries where
they make their boasts of liberty prescription is often pleaded in
justification of abuses and against amendments!

AT the pride and folly of those of old whose laws were irreversible, the
present age wonders. Yet similar traits appear in most modern constitution.
Strorg clauses to prevent improvements; by which they are bound never to grow
wiser! Or if not, custom has in this respect all the force of law! On every
emergency, or uncommon incident, the annals of their history are ransacked for
precedent; and the decisions of less enlightened, perhaps of barbarous
ancestors, give law to a thousand generations! As though wisdom had perished
with the ancients; or the moderns were forbidden by penal statutes, to correct
any of their mistakes, or interdicted of heaven, to think or act for themselves
in matters of government. Different are our views in this respect. Unfettered
by custom, or the opinion of less privileged ages, full scope is given for all
the improvements in civil policy, which the experience of former times, and the
wisdom of the present, may suggest. This advantage is more to be valued than
all the political knowledge of the East.

OUR rulers are of ourselves, and freely elected. In giving our suffrages, we
are neither awed by power, nor affected by influence. This day speaks us
possessed of privileges which all have desired, but very few enjoyed. What more
or better can we wish? Because God loved our Israel, unworthy as we are,
therefore has he bestowed these blessings upon us to establish us forever.

THESE considerations suggest to us the duty of a people so highly favored of
heaven. A people proved with mercies should make the returns of love and
obedience. "The goodness of God leads to repentance." And as much depends on
the character of rulers, it highly concerns those who are permitted in
providence to choose their own, "to provide out of all the people able men; such
as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness to be rulers over them." Exodus
xviii.21.
If a free people "call the proud happy, and set up the workers of iniquity," I
Sam. viii.7.
they begin the revolt from God, "rejecting the Lord that he should not reign
over them," and implicitly declaring that they "will be like the nations." v.^^.


IT is the great privilege of free governments, that in them neither weak nor
wicked rulers are necessary. Where hereditary power is established, the case is
different: there the fool or the man of Belial may be their king. Yea, the one
or other has generally happened. But where rulers are called to office by the
suffrages of the people, the wise and good may be exalted, and all the
blessings of good government secured.

FINALLY; the character of a free people is commonly apparent in that of their
rulers. Electors wish to promote those like themselves. Men of principle give
their votes for men of principle: those averse to its restraints, for those
whose vicious indulgencies may keep them in countenance.

THERE are times, indeed, in which, through the deceptious influence of
designing men, those of opposite principles unite in calling to office, men
whom in other circumstances, they would all despise or abhor. But time
developes characters and views. When cool reflection suceeds to party heat, or
the occasion of the moment is no more, general character is again considered,
and those advanced to power whose views are consentaneous to theirs on whom
their elevation depends.

THE occasion of this solemnity authorizes an address, first, to the chief
magistrate of this State.

SIR,

AT a period critical and interesting to the liberties of your country and of
mankind, you was called by providence into public life. Had Britain triumphed,
the cause of America had been deemed rebellion, and the assertors of her rights
had died with infamy. Not ignorant of the danger, yet trusting in him who
loves our Israel, you joined the patriots who broke the servile yoke and
raised us to rank among the nations. Then was laid the foundation of our future
greatness and felicity, and the foundation of two revolutions in Europe, both
highly important, which have already taken place, and perhaps the foundation of
more, yet in the womb of providence.

SENSIBLE that the rise and fall of empires proceed from God, the good ruler's
eye is raised to him for direction, and for a blessing on his faithful
endeavors, to serve God and his generation. We assure ourselves that your
excellency will never lose sight of republican principles, or set the example
of forsaking republican manners. To be the first servant of a free and grateful
people, you esteem more honorable, than to glitter in all the tinselled toys of
royalty, or by a nod give law to myriads of slaves. The pageantry of monarchy,
like the infants rattle, pleases little minds, and is suitable to the
capacities of most of those who, born to empire, are surrounded with flatterers
from their earliest days. Nobler objects employ the mind of him who is worthy
to rule over freemen. To govern with equity and honor, and seek the wealth of
his people, is his highest ambition and the joy of his heart.

WHILE the wise and faithful civil ruler is respected, beloved and obeyed, he
is not unmindful of the duties due to him who is over all. He is careful to
"render unto God the things that are God's;" Mat. xxii.21.
careful, by a bright example of every virtue, to recommend religion, that
others may learn of him to glorify God. Godliness promotes order and harmony,
and gives strength and honor. "Righteousnesss exalts a nation." It has been
the distinguished happiness of this State that such have been her chief rulers.

WE offer up prayer for your Excellency, that you may be enabled to acquit
yourself with honor in the discharge of every remaining duty as a dignified
christian ruler -- that when you shall have "served your generation according
to the will of God," you may retire with an approving conscience; meet an
approving judge; and receive a crown of glory that fades not away.

THE address now turns to the other branches of the legislature.

GENTLEMEN,

INTERESTING is the trust reposed in those who are called to defend the rights
and regulate the public concerns of freemen. In their wisdom, prudence and
fidelity do the multitude of their brethren confide. To them do they look up
for justice, order and tranquillity.

FROM no source have greater calamities arisen than from errors in the form,
and abuses in the administration of government. Many are the ways in which
offended heaven has scourged the wickedness of men; but in few more severely
than in monarchical establishments; in none more terribly than by "setting up
over them the basest of men," Dan. iv.17.
and yielding them a prey to those "whose tender mercies are cruel." Prove.
xii.19.


TYRANTS were foretold, under the symbolical representation of beasts of prey.
Dan. vii. 3.
They have "turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
hemlock," Amos vi.12.
not only among those under their dominion, but also in surrounding nations.
"To them it has been given to take peace from the earth, that men should kill
one another." Rev. vi.4.
What is said of the tongue is applicable to them -- "They set on fire the
course of nature, and are set on fire of hell." Jam. iii.6.
The wars, which have depopulated the world have mostly originated in regal
pride, passion, and lust of power. The end of these distresses is not yet. THAT
the latter day glory, so often foretold in scripture, is to be preceded by
great desolations, especially by blood wars, has been the expectation of those
who have attended to the prophecies: but the occasion of those wars, we
apprehend has been mistaken. That they will be of the religious kind, has
been the general opinion. But it might be easily shown from the word of truth,
that after the decline of Roman superstition, infidelity will "run and be
glorified" -- the earth filled with scoffers, and that faith will scarcely be
found upon it, "when the son of man comes!" Luke. xviii.8.
The wars then, which are to depopulate the world, must arise from some other
source. That they will be occasioned by struggles between power and liberty, is
at present, the most probable conjecture. That "the thrones are to be cast
down," Dan. vii.9.
and all birds of prey "filled with the flesh of kings" Rev. xix.17.
and their partisans and helpers, we are taught in prophecy. The same is
probably intimated, by "the fun and moon, being darkened, and the stars falling
to the earth." Mat. xxiv.29. Rev. vi.13.


THAT monarchy should contend earnestly for the powers and prerogatives it
possessed in the dark ages, when resisting a king was thought to be, in every
instance, "resisting the ordinance of God," has nothing in it surprising. And
that such are its connections and dependencies as to occasion severe and bloody
contentions, an acquaintance with the political world gives us reason to
expect: and the ways of providence at this day, seem to confirm these
expectations. For the contest is already begun. "The thrones begin to be cast
down, and birds of prey to feed on the fhesh of kings, and their adherents.
Here the struggle commenced, when these States resisted the tyranny of Britain.
And its progress is retrograde to that of despotism, which began in the East.

To those who occupied the political horizon of Europe Watson, bishop of
Landass.
"the cloud which appeared in the West soon after the conclusion of the war in
1763, was scarcely visible. It appeared like, that seen by the servant of
Elijah, no larger than a man's hand, and was despised as what could no more
disturb the repose of nations, than a drop could ruffle the ocean. But it soon
brought on a tempest which shook the British empire to its center. And lo! the
heavens are now black with clouds and wind. The whole eastern hemisphere is
darkened. A storm gathered which will probably continue, "till the stars fall
from heaven and the powers of heaven are shaken" -- till mighty revolutions are
accomplished -- regal pride and power every where laid in the dust! God grant,
that "the tribulations of those days may be shortened " But so vast and
extensive are the changes to be made that they bid fair to continue for ages.




THESE destroyers have nevertheless, had their penegyrists to blazon their
fame. But smoking kingdoms and desolated realms have witnessed their more than
brutal enormities. The groans of bereaved parents, the cries of helpless
orphans, the shrieks of ravished matrons and virgins, and the wailings of
oppressed millions who have had no helper, have ascended to heaven and held
them up as objects of horror and execration. Had the nations retained their
liberties, formed laws for themselves, and suffered none to rule over them who
were not of their own election, chosen for short terms, all these evils had
been prevented.

IN free states, public trusts are honorable, they are the supposed badges of
ability and virtue. The case is different in hereditary governments. In them
the lowest servant is often wiser and better than he who is lord of all. The
meanest officer of a free people deserves more respect, than is due to the
prince who struts in purple, and swells beneath a diadem. Dignity of soul is
requisite in those honored with public confidence. Weak or trifling characters
are exposed by elevation. "Folly set in great dignity" appears but the more
contemptible.

To those who rule well honor and obedience are due; and they are seldom denied
to the judicious ruler, who makes it his concern to answer the reasonable
expectations of his constituents. They, in general, look to him as a father,
and respect him as a benefactor. Some uneasy men there are in every state, but
the body of the people do not often complain without reason, of those who rule
over them. They commonly honor and confide in those who have virtue and courage
to act honestly, steadily pursuing the public weal, unmoved by party applause
or censure.

DUTIES due to God call also for the attention of those in authority. They are
exalted to rule for him. He requires them to defend religion by their laws, and
recommend it by their example. True religion is excellent in itself, however
the great may affect it. But the multitude are much influenced in their opinion
of it, by the respect it receives, from those in high stations. These may do
much to recommend it, and spread its salutary effects. In so doing they honor
themselves, and God will honor them. Godliness secures the smiles of indulgent
providence to rulers and subjects. The righteous are the salt of the earth, who
preserve the world from the putrefactions of vice, give health and strength to
the body politic, and draw down the blessing from above upon it.

RULERs are in a sense, federal heads to those under their government. The
people derive from them a relative holiness or guilt. David's piety blessed his
family and people for many generations. Manasseh's sin God would not pardon,
but punished with sore calamities upon Israel, even after that prince lay
mouldering in the dust. Those in authority who remember that they sit on God's
throne, and are exalted to rule for him, will be careful to advance his honor
and interest. Such have been, and we trust will be, the rulers of this people.
Should this cease to be their character, then would "the ways of Zion mourn"
Should "a scoffer, walking after his own lusts," or an infidel, "denying the
Lord that bought him," unawares creep in among them, mischievous would be his
influence, like that of an intruder of old among the sons of God. Job. 1.6.
Regard to religion and literature have hitherto done no less honor to the
legislature of this State, than their zeal to maintain our civil rights.

OUR eyes, gentlemen, are now turned on you. We expect from you like
faithfulness to God and to your constituents. We trust that you will honor
yourselves, and prolong our happiness, by your wisdom, prudence and fidelity --
that neither your private interests, nor those of separate districts, will
affect the public councils -- that no party cabals will divide this virtuous
state representation -- and that particular, will not supercede general laws,
except in cases very extraordinary.

MAY you have wisdom equal to the important trust reposed in you; be faithful
in the discharge of every duty public and private; and when you shall have
finished your work, may you find mercy with him, at whose bar you must stand in
common with your brethren.

MY FELLOW SERVANTS IN THE GOSPEL MINISTRY.

WHILE good rulers strengthen our hands, it behooves us to return the
benevolence, and "put our people in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey magistrates and be ready to every good work." Tit. iii.1.
The irreligion which has disgraced all European kingdom, amidst her struggles
for liberty, is for our admonition.

Have we no reason to apprehend that it may prevail among us? Should this be
the case, persons of different character from most of our present rulers may be
raised to places of honor and trust. May merciful heaven avert the impending
evil. May we labor and not saint, in defense of the belt religion and in the
cause of the belt master, whatever conflicts may be before us -- encouraging
ourselves in his promise: "Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth." Rev. iii.10.


FELLOW CITIZENS of numerous, and very respectable audience.

HAPPILY has God made us to differ from our brethren of other nations. Let us
for a moment reflect upon it.

FRANCE long enslaved, has lately broken her bands and now asserts her rights.
What wonders does the spirit of liberty produce? while under a monarchy, aided
by a family compact, she was spoiled and kept under by a northern neighbor. But
upon her assuming a republican form, she has singly baffled the councils, and
with her soldiers of a day, vanquished the forces of all the surrounding
nations.

HER late adoption of a mild and just system has contributed to lessen her
internal convulsion and danger. While past atrocities are to be deplored, much
is to be attributed to the external force that surrounded her, and the attempts
to seduce her citizens. Though her enemies are weakened by repeated defeats,
they yet continue to break her rest and prevent her enjoying the blessings of
liberty in tranquillity.

THE Dutch united provinces have now the prospect of happiness. Wisdom and
moderation have marked every part of their public conduct, since the tyrants
who oppressed them have been driven away. But their felicity is not yet
secured. Calamitous must be their situation while their country continues the
theater on which contending nations are struggling for the mastery.

BRITAIN has long made her boasts of liberty. WHAT is the foundation of this
boasted liberty? Magna Charta. What is this Magna Charta? A grant of certain
privileges, made to the nation by one king John, a most contemptible character.
Is not the devine right of this same John to the plenitude of power claimed by
despots conceded in the very acceptance of this grant? But how was this
ennobling boon obtained from the said John? If by force, these boasted
privileges are the fruit of rebellion and robbery. If by prayers and humble
entreaties, acquitted of guilt it becomes a beggarly distinction. Should
American rulers prosfer like grant to her free born sons, they would spurn from
office such assuming chiefs.
If she enjoysit may she long enjoy it by us unenvied. Let her glory in the
strength of her constitution. -- If strong by nature, it has a consumption
preying on its vitals, and already wears a sickly countenance. At this day,
what is her government, but intrigue and influence? Long after Roman liberty
was lost, the forms of their ancient government were kept up, and the simple
vulgar thought themselves free. Little different is the present State of our
British brethren.

Their commons are the only part of their legislature so much as nominally
chosen by the people. These they consider as the bulwark of their liberty. How
and by whom are they now chosen? They are but a mockery of representation. The
forms however, of their free government are continued, and the nation pleased
with the name of liberty. Connected with that kingdom by a thousand ties, she
might have dragged us down to servitude, had not her cruel policy torn these
ties asunder, and left her to sink alone. While we execrate her views, and
shudder to recollect the dangers we have escaped, let us shout the praises of
HIM "Who does great things and unsearchable, and mavelous things without
number." Job v.9.


POLAND whose arms fromerly repelled SOBIESKI, king of Poland, in 1683,
defeated the Turks, with great slaughter, and obliged them to raise the siege
of Vienna; thereby saving the metropolis and probably the Germanic empire
itself, which is now leagued with two other powers to divide among themselves
that unhappy kingdom. In that kingdom the genuine nature of arbitrary power now
appears. There America may see, what she had long since felt, had humane
Britain triumphed in the year 1775. In India still greater cruelties have been
practiced by Englishmen: and all attempts to bring those monsters to justice
have been defeated by the fascinating influence of gold. Gold extorted from the
defenseless, regardless of the tears. Yea, if a Bishop of St. Asaph.
prelate of their own, is to be credited, regardless of the dying groans of
murdered millions!
the all conquering Turk, weakened by internal unprincipled, ambitious
neighbors, and is now barbarously seized by one of them, and a despotism,
probably erected on the ruins of her intended liberties.

THE vast residue of the East with few exceptions, groans under the iron yoke
of arbitrary sway. When we turn a thought on those miserable millions, does not
the tear of pity steal down our cheek? But viewed as nations, is not all this
wretchedness voluntary? Did they will the downfall of tyranny, would it not
fall to rise no more? If "they plainly say we love our masters, and will not go
out free," we must leave them to hug their chains -- to lick the hand that
risies all their comforts, and is often raised to shed their blood. We must
leave them to adore the idol their folly has set up -- the Diana of arbitrary
power, "whom all Asia and the world worship." May America, which is said to
"degenerate animal nature, and be little man," Busson.
forever refuse to bow to the golden image of royalty, and think herself happy
in being free. Such are her present views.

PERMIT me, therefore, to call up your gratitude to the author of all good, by
observing, agreeably to our present apprehensions, that "the lines are fallen
to us in pleasant places, and we have a goodly heritage. Psalm. xvi.6.
God has not dealt so with any nation." cxlvii.20.
No people equally privileged is to be found on earth. Heaven's distinguishing
goodness, beams upon us from every quarter.

WE are blessed with a country productive not only of the necessaries, but
sweets of life. The variety of productions is greater in this, than in almost
any other land. What was said of Canaan, will apply to these States. "It is a
land of hills and valleys, and drinks water of the rain of heaven: a land
which thy God cares for; the eyes of the Lord thy God are upon it, from the
beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year." Deus. xi.11, 12.
But the crown of all is freedom. Our possessions are our own. No proud master
can command our persons, or violate our property. Nor is it the least of our
advantages, that we are so far removed from those who could do us essential
injury. It was part of Israel's blessing, that they "should dwell alone, and
not be reckoned among the nations." Numb. xxiii.9.
The same was our security, and the means of our deliverance from the mad rage
of Britain. God grant that the ocean may forever guard us against the violence,
and separate us from the vices, follies and politics of Europe.

BOTH in our national and state capacities we are blessed with the happiest
constitutions, together with the power of making alterations, as our change of
circumstances may require. If any chosen to rule over us are found unfaithful
or unskilful, they may soon be removed, and others advanced to fill their
places. Here no one claims a divine right to do wrong. Nor is it pretended,
that there are any who can do no wrong. According to the maxims of a certain
European kingdom, the king can do no wrong and never dies. We should suppose,
that Prayer, "O king live forever," Dan. vi.6.
was there heard and answered. A very proper prayer, where kings can make laws,
which never need to altered.
Here none claim authority who are not invested with it by the suffrages of
their brethren; to whom they confess themselves accountable for their conduct
in administration. That rulers are ordained for the people, and not the people
made for them, is universally conceded.

THIS does not derogate from the honor of those who rule well. They are
deserving of double honor. To them it is given to do more for the benefit of
mankind, than to most others; and to be useful is the greatest honor -- To do
good is God-like.

IT highly concerns us to be careful whom we raise to power, and to be watchful
of their conduct. The representatives of the united Netherlands, who freed that
people from the yoke of Spain, became long since, their High Mightinesses,
independent of the people, and for sometime. with an hereditary Steadholder at
their head, till he was lately driven away by the victorious arms of the French
republic.

SPAIN now one of the most despotic monarchies in Europe, was formerly a land
of liberty. The following is the oath of allegiance taken, during the sixteenth
century, by the inhabitants of Aragon, at the absession of their kings to the
throne. " We who are each of us as good, and who are altogether whose powerful
than you, promise obedience to your government if you maintain our rights
andbut if not, not. Conformably to this oath, they established it as a
"fundamental article in their constitution, that if the king should violate
their privileges, it was lawful for the people to disclaim him as their
sovereign, and elect another in his place. In Castile, the other principal
kingdom in Spain, the crown was elective, the royal prerogative extremely
limited, and the same spirit maintained, as in Aragon.

Robertson's History of Charles V. Vol. II page, 157.


No symptom, threatening to our rights yet appears, but care and watchfulness
only can secure their continuance. The eastern continent, that world of slaves,
was once inhabited by freemen. The general character and views of rulers are
matters of the utmost importance. The wise, the good, the virtuous, men who
fear God and love peace, whose benevolent minds wish liberty and happiness to
the whole human race, should be carefully sought out, and elected to office.
When free states choose weak or wicked men to rule over them, they expose
themselves to the evils attendant on hereditary power. When the former are
elected, the ends of government are frustrated: when the latter, they often
fasten those evils upon them, and bind them with cords which are not easily
broken. Men of lax principles, men of no principles, and men of vicious manners
are unfit to be trusted with the concerns of the public. They who are allowedly
unfaithful to God will not be faithful to men. The ties of honor are weak,
where the fear of God and the ties of conscience are lost. To offer
unprincipled men the oath of God, is trifling with religion and affronting the
majesty of heaven. "With such chains can no man bind them."

BEWARE the ambitious, who indecently court prommtion, who cannot contentedly
wait, till those who bid them, unsolicited, say to them, "friends go up
higher;" but seek, by undue measures, to foist themselves into the chief seats
-- Who artfully raise popular prejudices, and every one catch at every vulgar
mistake, saying to every one, "see thy matters are good and right;" 2 Samuel xv.8.
their opinions veering with every wind. Men who are fit to be entrusted with
public offices, who are worthy of public confidence, are men of discernment,
and men of stability. Such, if called into public life, will steadily pursue
that line of conduct, which to themselves appears most conducive to the public
good. They are incapable of sacrificing their own judgments to popular clamors,
raised by the low intrigues of designing men. If their measures offend, they
retire with dignity into private life; and leave the world to estimate their
value, by a comparison of their administration with that of their successors.

THAT the vile practice of electioneering, in all its forms, should be forever
excluded, is a matter of the last importance. It has degraded every free state
into which it has found admittance, and deeply wounded or destroyed their
liberties. Should it creep in among us, it would doubtless draw after it like
fatal effects. No principle can restrain the venal wretch who in any manner
buys an office, from prostituting the fame to his private emolument. Blessed be
God, such is not the character of our rulers. Should they become such, our
happy constitution would avail us little. From the dignity of freemen, we
should sink into servitude. But when electors are wise and prudent, improper
persons seldom make their way to power. If they chance to rise, they commonly
soon fall again, and sink into deserved contempt.

WHILE we are careful to elect wise and virtuous rulers, we may safely confide
in them. And to the united wisdom of our assembled legislature should every
matter of public concern be refered. In our retirements we have not those means
of information which they enjoy. The particular members whom we elect are sent
to participate in that information, and act under the influence of it.
Unreasonable therefore and affrontive is the practice of binding their hands by
instructions, which reduce them to the post boy's insignificance.

WOULD we continue happy and respectable, we must render to all their dues --
to God -- to civil rulers -- to all men. To this leads that religion which is
from above. The doctrine that weakens the ties of virtue, saying "to those who
despise God, ye shall have peace, and to those who walk in the imagination of
their own heart, no evil shall come upon you," having a contrary tendency, is
from beneath, and leads down to ruin.

WHILE we feel ourselves interested in the peace and happiness of society and
the preservation of our rights, let us not forget, that still higher and more
valuable interests demand our principal attention. This is but our entrance on
existence. The whole depends on the manner in which we here act our parts. We
act under an omniscient eye. Our temper and conduct, yea our views and desires,
are registered in heaven, and will one day be brought into judgment.

MAY such considerations always abide with us, and may we live continually
under a deep sense of their reality. Nothing besides has an equal tendency to
render us blessings in our generation, and train us up for eternal blessedness.

AMEN.

